12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 1/438
PREFACE
This Village Code of the Village of Oak Brook, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including Ordinance G-1148, passed April 23, 2019.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this Village Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A REVISION AND CODIFICATION
OF THE GENERAL CODE OF THE
VILLAGE OF OAK BROOK, IL
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF OAK BROOK, DU PAGE AND COOK COUNTIES,
ILLINOIS as follows:
Section 1: That the following Titles 1 to 14, both inclusive, are hereby ordained, approved and adopted as the General Ordinances of the Village of Oak
Brook. These Titles and any Titles subsequently ordained by this Board from time to time shall constitute the official "Village Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Oak Brook".
Section 2: That Chapters 1 to 14, both inclusive, and Appendices A ("Zoning Ordinance"), B ("Subdivision Regulations"), of the Code of Ordinances of
the Village of Oak Brook of 1977, as amended from time to time, are hereby repealed. Appendices A ("Zoning Ordinance"), B ("Subdivision Regulations")
and C ("Traffic Regulations") have been recodified as Titles 13, 14 and 7, respectively, in the official Village Code of Ordinances.
Section 3: That Appendix E ("Rules and Regulations for the Fire Department") and F ("Rules and Regulations for the Police Department") of the Code
of Ordinances of the Village of Oak Brook of 1977, shall remain in full force and effect. Henceforth each of these appendices shall be available in
pamphlet form in the respective department. Appendix D, ("Personnel Rules and Regulations") of the Code of Ordinances of the Village of Oak Brook of
1977, as amended, was repealed on or about August 10, 1999 by Ordinance G-639 when the Village of Oak Brook Personnel Manual, a separate
handbook, was adopted.
Section 4: That the repeal provided for in Section 2 of this ordinance shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred, or any contract or right established accruing before the effective date of this ordinance. The repeal provided for in Section 2 shall affect only
those ordinances contained in the 1977 Code of Ordinances as amended. All ordinances of a special nature, such as bond issues, contracts,
conveyances, annexation, street vacations, appropriation and levees, salary and wages, franchises, buildings, zoning relief for specific properties,
imposition of taxes, and other ordinances having been adopted independent of the 1977 Code shall remain in full force and effect.
Section 5: That all ordinances of a general nature included in this official Village Code of Ordinances shall be considered as a continuation ofsaid
ordinance provision, and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the President and Board of Trustees shall not serve to cause
any interruption in the continuous effectiveness of ordinances included in said official Village Code.
Section 6: That from and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the Village Code of Ordinances of the Village of Oak Brook containing the
compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes made to said ordinances, shall be accepted in all courts without question as
the official code and law of the Village as enacted by the President and Board of Trustees.
Section 7: That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section 8: That the Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to publish this ordinance and the official Village Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Oak Brook in pamphlet/book form in the manner provided by law.
PASSED THIS 12th day of September, 2000.
Ayes: Trustees Butler, Craig, Kenny and McInerney
Nays: None
Absent: Trustees Caleel and Savino
Abstain: None
APPROVED THIS 12th day of September, 2000.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 2/438
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
1-1-1: DESIGNATION OF OFFICIAL CODE AND NAME:
The ordinances embraced within this Village Code shall constitute and be designated as the official VILLAGE CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF OAK BROOK,
ILLINOIS, and may be so cited. (1977 Code § 1-1)
1-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Village Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Village Code, may be numbered in accordance with
the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein, or in the case of repealed titles, chapters, sections and subsections or any part
thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the
subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until
such time that this Village Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the Village Board.
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in
substantially the following language: "That section of the Village Code of the Village of Oak Brook, Illinois, is hereby amended to read as follows: . . . .".
The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired.
In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Village Code of the Village of
Oak Brook, Illinois, is hereby amended by adding a section (or title, article or chapter) to be numbered as follows, , which said section shall read as
follows:. . .". The new section may then be set out in full as desired.
When the Village Board desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code, which the
Village Board desires to incorporate into the Code, a section in substantially the following language may be made a part of the ordinance:
"Section : It is the intention of the Board of Trustees and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the
Village Code of the Village of Oak Brook, Illinois, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention."
All sections, articles, chapters, titles or provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number or chapter
number, as the case may be. (1977 Code § 1-6)
1-1-3: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person in the Village to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages,
or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village of Oak Brook to be
misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this Section shall be punished as provided in the general penalty in Section 1-3-1 of this Code. (1977 Code
§ 1-7)
1-1-4: EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES:
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance
shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal,
for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. (1977 Code § 1-4)
1-1-5: SEVERABILITY:
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of the court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any
of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. (1977 Code § 1-5)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
1-2-1: OFFICIAL VILLAGE NAME:
The name VILLAGE OF OAK BROOK is hereby adopted as the official name of the Village. (Ord. G-113, 12-9-1969)
1-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 3/438
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless the content clearly indicates otherwise:
BOARD OF TRUSTEES: Whenever the words "Board of Trustees", "Village Board" or "Board" are used, they shall be construed to mean the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Oak Brook, Illinois.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had
shall not be counted.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The Village President and Board of Trustees.
CORPORATE LIMITS: Whenever in this Code an act is prohibited, declared unlawful, required to be performed, directly or by implication, such references
shall imply "within the corporate limits of the Village of Oak Brook".
COUNTY: The County of DuPage, Illinois. In addition, such words shall include Cook County, Illinois, where applicable.
GENDER: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
NUMBER: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
OATH: Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted foran oath, and in such cases, the
words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
OFFICER OR OFFICE: Reference to any office or officer of the Village, State or County, includes any person authorized by law to perform the duties of
such office or officer.
OR, AND: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Includes and is applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every species of property except real property.
PRESIDENT: The village president of the village of Oak Brook, Illinois.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
TENSE: Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past.
VILLAGE: Whenever the word "Village" is used it shall be construed as if the words "of Oak Brook, Illinois" followed it and shall extend to and include its
several officers, agents and employees. (1977 Code § 1-2; Ord. G-671, 2-13-2001)
1-2-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1977 Code § 1-3)
Chapter 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-3-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
A. Penalty; Application: The violation of, or failure to comply with any provision of this Code shall constitute an offense against the Village, and where no
specific penalty is provided therefor, shall subject the offender, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not to
exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
B. Parental Responsibility: The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor defendant who resides with such parent or legal guardian shall be
liable for any fine or condition of restitution or reparation imposed by the court upon a minor hereunder; provided, that the minor has not paid such fine
or made restitution or reparation within the time ordered by the court, and further provided that such parent or legal guardian has been served with a
notice to appear in the original cause as provided by law.
C. Payment Enforced: The payment of fines and costs of prosecution may be enforced summarily against the property of the delinquent.
D. Nuisance Abatement: Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance of the Village shall
be deemed a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement by the Village.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 4/438
E. Separate Offense: Each and every act, action or thing done in violation of the provisions of this Code, or ordinance of the Village, shall be construed,
deemed and taken as a separate and distinct violation of such provisions of this Code, and in every event that a violation of this Code, or any of the
provisions hereof, shall continue, each day of such continuance shall be deemed, construed and taken as a separate and distinct violation of the
provisions of this Code that such condition so allowed to continue shall violate.
F. Supervision: In addition to, or in lieu of, any fine or penalty which may be imposed for violation of an ordinance of the Village, a disposition of
supervision may be entered by the court upon a plea of guilty or a stipulation by the defendant of the facts supporting the charge or a finding of guilty.
Pursuant to such disposition of supervision the court shall defer entering any judgment on the charges until the conclusion of the supervision.
At the conclusion of the period of supervision, if the court determines that the defendant has successfully complied with all of the conditions of
supervision, the court shall discharge the defendant and enter a judgment dismissing the charges.
"Supervision" means a disposition of conditional and revocable release without probationary supervision, but under such conditions and reporting
requirements as are imposed by the court, at the successful conclusion of which disposition the defendant is discharged and a judgment dismissing
the charges is entered. (Ord. G-776, 3-22-2005; Ord. G-782, 6-14-2005; Ord. G-1027, 7-8-2014; Ord. G-1127, 3-27-2018)
1-3-2: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
Whenever any officer or employee of the Village is required or authorized by any State law, the provisions of this Code, any ordinance or resolution, or
rules and regulations or orders issued thereunder, in order to carry out his duties thereunder, to enter any premises or vehicle for the purpose of making
an inspection thereof or of anything therein contained or for the purpose of carrying out his duties, such officer or employee shall have the right to enter
any such premises or vehicle at any reasonable time in pursuance of such duties; provided, that such entry and inspection shall be made in a lawful
manner. (Ord. G-776, 3-22-2005)
Chapter 4
ELECTED VILLAGE OFFICIALS
1-4-1: COMPENSATION:
A. Village President: Any person elected after April 1, 1999, and serving in the office of president of the village shall receive as compensation for services
as president the sum of ten thousand four hundred dollars ($10,400.00) per year, payable biweekly.
B. Village Trustees: All persons elected subsequent to April 1, 1995, and serving in the office of village trustee shall receive as compensation for their
services as such trustee the sum of forty dollars ($40.00) per meeting for each meeting of the board attended by such person.
C. Village Clerk: Any person elected subsequent to April 1, 1999, and serving in the office of village clerk shall receive as compensation for such services
as village clerk the sum of ten thousand four hundred dollars ($10,400.00) per year, payable biweekly. (Ord. G-19, 12-13-1960; Ord. G-285, 3-24-
1981; Ord. G-505, 3-23-1993; Ord. G-537, 8-9-1994; Ord. G-626, 10-27-1998; Ord. G-671, 2-13-2001)
1-4-2: COMMENCEMENT OF TERMS:
The terms of the newly elected officers in any regular municipal election shall commence by their inauguration at the first regular or special meeting of the
village board in the month of May after the village's receipt, from the appropriate election authorities of DuPage and Cook Counties, of the official election
results of the regular municipal election at which the officers were elected. Existing elected officers shall continue to serve their terms until such time as
the newly elected officers are inaugurated and commence their terms. (Ord. G-286, 3-24-1981; Ord. G-834, 4-24-2007)
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE PRESIDENT
1-4A-1: ELECTION, TERM:
The Village President shall be elected for a term of four (4) years, and shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified, as provided by statute.
(2000 Code)
1-4A-2: BOND:
Before taking office, the Village President shall qualify for a fidelity bond in an amount not less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) or such other sum
established by State statute. (2000 Code)
1-4A-3: GENERAL DUTIES:
A. General Duties: The President shall perform all the duties which are prescribed by law, including ordinances, and shall take care that the laws and
ordinances are faithfully executed. The President, from time to time, may, and annually shall, give the corporate authorities information concerning the
affairs of the municipality and may recommend for their consideration measures the President believes expedient.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 5/438
B. Removal Of Appointed Officers: Except where otherwise provided by statute, the President may remove any officer appointed by the President, on any
written charge, whenever the President is of the opinion that the interests of the municipality demand removal. The President shall report the reasons
for the removal to the corporate authorities at a meeting to be held not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days after the removal. If the President
fails or refuses to report to the corporate authorities the reasons for the removal, or if the corporate authorities by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all members
authorized by law to be elected disapprove of the removal, the officer thereupon shall be restored to the office from which the officer was removed.
The vote shall be by yeas and nays, which shall be entered upon the journal of the corporate authorities. Upon restoration, the officer shall give a new
bond and take a new oath of office. No officer shall be removed a second time for the same offense.
C. Release Of Prisoners: The President may release any person imprisoned for violation of a municipal ordinance and shall report the release, together
with the reasons for the release, to the corporate authorities at their first meeting after the release.
D. Examination Of Records: The President at all times may examine and inspect the books, records and papers of any agent, employee or officer of the
municipality.
E. Calling Out Militia: Subject to the authority of the Governor as commander-in-chief of the militia, the President may call out the militia to aid in
suppressing riots and other disorderly conduct or to aid in carrying into effect any law or ordinance.
F. Signatures On Instruments: The President may designate, in writing, another person to affix the signature of the President to any written instrument or
instruments required to be signed by the President. The President shall send written notice of this designation to the corporate authorities, stating the
name of the person who has been selected and what instrument or instruments the person will have authority to sign. A written signature of the
President executed by the designated person, with the signature of the designated person underneath, shall be attached to the notice. The notice, with
the signatures attached, shall be recorded in the journal of the corporate authorities and then filed with the Village Clerk. When the signature of the
President is placed on a written instrument at the direction of the President in the specified manner, the instrument or instruments, in all respects, shall
be as binding on the municipality as if signed by the President in person. (Ord. G-537, 8-9-1994)
1-4A-4: PRESIDENT PRO TEM:
A. If the President is temporarily absent because of an incapacity to perform official duties, but the incapacity does not create a vacancy in the office, the
corporate authorities shall elect one of their members to act as President Pro Tem. The President Pro Tem, during this absence or disability, shall
perform the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the President, but shall not be entitled to vote both as President Pro Tem and as Trustee.
B. In the absence of the President, acting President or President Pro Tem, the corporate authorities may elect one of their members to act as a temporary
chairperson. The temporary chairperson shall have only the powers of a presiding officer and a right to vote only in the capacity as Trustee on any
ordinance, resolution or motion. (Ord. G-537, 8-9-1994)
ARTICLE B. VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
1-4B-1: ELECTION, TERM:
The Board of Trustees of the Village shall consist of six (6) members who shall be elected to office as provided by statute. The Trustees shall serve four
(4) year terms, which shall be staggered as provided by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-25-5. (2000 Code)
1-4B-2: COMPOSITION; POWERS:
The Village Board of Trustees shall consist of the President and Trustees and, except as otherwise provided by statute, shall exercise the same powers
and perform the same duties as city council in cities. It shall pass ordinances, resolutions and motions in the same manner as a city council. The Village
President may exercise the same veto power and powers in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-40-30, and with like effect, as the mayor of a city. The
Trustees may pass motions, resolutions and ordinances over the President's veto in like manner as the aldermen of a city council. At the request of three
(3) Trustees, items may be placed on a regular Board agenda, providing the Village Manager or his/her designee is notified: a) by twelve o'clock (12:00)
noon on the Tuesday immediately preceding the regular Board meeting of any item(s) for which action is sought at that Board meeting by motion,
resolution, or ordinance; or b) by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the Wednesday immediately preceding the regular Board meeting of any item(s) for
which Board discussion only is sought. The President shall preside at all meetings of the Board. (Ord. G-1103, 5-23-2017)
1-4B-3: MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings: The second and fourth Tuesday of each and every month be and are hereby declared and established as the official meeting dates
for the Board, with the exceptions as follows: There will be no regular meetings scheduled on the fourth Tuesday of the months of June, August and
December. All regular meetings of the Board shall be called to order at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., or at such time thereafter as a quorum shall be
present. The annual notice of meetings pursuant to section 2.02 of the Open Meetings Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/2.02, shall list the regular
meetings of the Board and any commissions and committees of the Village and shall be published in January annually, and include the dates, times
and locations of those regular meetings.
B. Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by a written notice from the President or from any three (3) Trustees (e-mail or fax request to the
Village Manager is acceptable but telephone notice is not proper notice). Public notice, including the agenda of the special meeting, shall be given at
least forty eight (48) hours before such special meeting by posting the notice at Village Hall and furnishing the agenda to registered news media.
Special meetings of the Board may be held at any time with consent of all members thereof. Special meetings of the Board may be held only at Village
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 6/438
Hall, unless an alternate location is specified and posted consistent with the Open Meetings Act. No discussion or action may be taken on nonagenda
items at a special meeting.
C. Quorum: A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum to do business; excepting, however, that a lesser number may adjourn from time to time.
D. Adjournment: Any meeting of the Board, regular or otherwise, may be adjourned from time to time by vote of the majority of those present and no
further notice of such adjournment shall be required.
E. Rescheduled Meetings: In order to reschedule a regular meeting, the following procedure must be followed: The topic must be on the agenda; a motion
must be made and passed by the Board, commission or committee to reschedule a regular meeting by changing the date or time thereof; public notice
including the agenda of the rescheduled meeting shall be given at least forty eight (48) hours before such meeting by posting that notice at the Village
Hall and furnishing the agenda to the registered news media.
Discussion is permitted, but no action may be taken on nonagenda items at a rescheduled regular meeting.
F. Reconvened Meetings: In order to reconvene a regular meeting, the following procedure must be followed: A motion must be made and passed by the
board, commission or committee in its meeting to reconvene that meeting to a later date or time. No notice of a reconvened meeting need be given if
the original meeting was open to the public and it is to be reconvened within twenty four (24) hours or if an announcement of the time and place of the
reconvened meeting was made at the original meeting and there is no change in the agenda.
G. Continued Meetings: A motion must be made and passed by the board, commission or committee at its meeting to continue that meeting to a later
date or time. (Ord. G-1, 5-1-1958; Ord. G-53, 4-14-1964; Ord. G-260, 2-26-1980; Ord. G-313, 1-12-1982; Ord. G-646, 10-26-1999; Ord. G-777, 4-12-
2005; Ord. G-926, 5-25-2010)
1-4B-4: RULES OF PROCEDURE:
"Robert's Rules Of Order" shall govern the proceedings of the board of trustees where applicable and when not in conflict with statutes or ordinances;
provided, however that the board of trustees may adopt rules of order revising, repealing, amending or supplementing in whole or in part "Robert's Rules
Of Order". In addition, any rules adopted by the board of trustees may be suspended by a majority vote of the members present.
A. Attendance And Teleconference Voting: Rules of conduct for attendance at board of trustee meetings via electronic means as follows:
1. A trustee may attend a regular or special meeting without being physically present if physical attendance is prevented by:
a. Personal illness or disability;
b. Absence from the village for personal employment purposes or for village business;
c. Family or other emergency, which emergency shall be stated on the record and be part of the minutes of that meeting;
2. A village trustee wishing to attend a regular or special meeting of the board of trustees by electronic means must notify the village clerk via
electronic mail or facsimile not less than forty eight (48) hours before the meeting. If for an emergency meeting, notice shall be given as early as
possible;
3. The village president will announce the name(s) of any trustees attending by electronic means at the beginning of the meeting;
4. If the village president or other presiding officer attends the meeting through the use of electronic technology, he or she shall vacate the chair and a
presiding officer as elected by the board of trustees who is physically present shall preside;
5. No more than two (2) trustees may attend a regular or special meeting by electronic means for any one meeting. Participation through electronic
means shall be recognized in the order the request to the village clerk is received;
6. A quorum of the board of trustees must be physically present for any public meeting;
7. Trustees participating by electronic means shall attend the entire meeting and shall preface their comments and votes by first stating their last
name;
8. When any of the trustees attend a meeting by electronic technology, all votes shall be by roll call;
9. Any trustee shall be considered present wherein the trustee is present by teleconference or other electronic means wherein voices are received
from any location, provided that the nonphysical presence in excess of three (3) times per fiscal year shall render such trustee absent for purposes
of these rules. (Ord. G-1, 5-1-1958; Ord. G-465, 5-14-1991; Ord. G-779, 4-12-2005)
1-4B-5: CONSENT AGENDA:
The agenda of each regular meeting of the board of trustees may include a consent agenda. A consent agenda shall include those items not requiring
separate individual discussion. All items listed on such consent agenda will be enacted by one roll call vote with no separate discussion of those items. If
any board member requests separate consideration of any consent agenda item, that item shall be removed from the consent agenda for separate action
at some other place on the agenda. (Ord. G-19, 12-13-1960; Ord. G-465, 5-14-1991)
1-4B-6: RECORDING OF CLOSED SESSIONS:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 7/438
A. A verbatim record shall be kept of all meetings of the trustees of the village of Oak Brook ("corporate authorities") and of all meetings of any other
boards, commissions or other subsidiary "public body" of the village of Oak Brook (as defined by the Illinois open meetings act1) which are closed to
the public. The verbatim record shall be in the form of an audio or video recording. In addition, minutes shall be kept of all closed meetings in the
manner required by the Illinois open meetings act. Minutes of closed meetings shall be placed before the corporate authorities or the subsidiary body,
as the case may be, for approval as to form and content as soon as practicable following the closed meeting. The village clerk, or his/her designee,
shall securely maintain, in the Butler Government Center, the verbatim recordings and minutes of all closed sessions of the corporate authorities and
all subsidiary public bodies of the village.
B. At the beginning of each closed session, those present shall identify themselves by voice for the audio recording. If the meeting is videotaped, at the
beginning of the meeting, those present shall individually appear on camera and identify themselves by voice. The presiding officer shall also
announce the times the meeting commences and ends at appropriate points on the recording.
C. Semiannually, at the second regular board meeting of the corporate authorities, in January and July, the agenda shall include the following item:
"Review of the minutes of all closed meetings that have not yet been released for public review and determination of which, if any, may then be
released". Minutes shall not be released unless the corporate authorities of the village of Oak Brook find that it is no longer necessary to keep them
confidential to protect the public interest or to protect the privacy of an individual, and no verbatim record shall be released. As to any minutes or
portions thereof not released, the corporate authorities of the village of Oak Brook shall find that the "need for confidentiality still exists" as to those
minutes or portions thereof. The corporate authorities may require the village attorney's opinion regarding the release or nonrelease of the respective
minutes. Minutes of closed meetings shall be kept indefinitely.
D. The board may consider the destruction of the verbatim record of any particular closed meeting at any regular meeting. The board shall consider
whether to authorize destruction of the verbatim record of a particular closed meeting as part of its consent agenda, which shall include the following
item for consideration, as an omnibus vote: "Authorization for destruction of the verbatim record of the closed meeting held on (date), as no less than
eighteen (18) months have passed and minutes have been approved for such meeting". A favorable vote shall be deemed to authorize the village
clerk to destroy the verbatim record of such closed meeting in a suitable manner. (Ord. G-739, 1-13-2004; Ord. G-830, 4-10-2007)
ARTICLE C. VILLAGE CLERK
1-4C-1: ELECTION; TERM; VACANCY:
The Village Clerk shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term and until a successor is elected and qualified, as provided by statute. If the office of
Village Clerk shall become vacant for any reason, the President and Board of Trustees shall appoint a successor, as provided by statute. (Ord. G-537, 8-
9-1994)
1-4C-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
A. No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Village Clerk unless that person is a qualified elector of the municipality and has resided therein at least
one year next preceding the person's election or appointment.
B. No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Village Clerk who is a defaulter to the municipality, in arrears in the payment of any tax or other
indebtedness due to the municipality, has been convicted in Illinois State courts of malfeasance in office, bribery or other corrupt crimes. The Village
Clerk shall hold no other Village office during such person's term as Village Clerk. (Ord. G-537, 8-9-1994)
1-4C-3: OATH AND BOND:
A. Oath Of Office: Before entering upon the duties of this office, the Village Clerk shall take and subscribe the oath of office as prescribed by statute.
B. Bond: Before taking office, the Village Clerk shall qualify for a fidelity bond in an amount not less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) or such other
sum established by State statute. (Ord. G-537, 8-9-1994; 2000 Code)
1-4C-4: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Village Clerk shall:
A. Signature: Seal and attest all contracts of the Village and all licenses, permits and such other documents as shall require this formality.
B. Documents And Records:
1. Documents: Be the custodian of all which are not assigned to the custody of some other officer.
2. Records: In addition to the record of ordinances and other records which the Village Clerk is required by statute to keep, the Village Clerk shall keep
a register of all licenses and permits issued and the payments thereon; a record showing all of the officers of the Village; and such other records as
may be required by the Board of Trustees. Deeds, the original of all annexation plats, plats of subdivision, easements, vacated properties, titles and
such other records, and all official contracts and documents, shall be maintained and kept by the Village Clerk in the Village archives.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 8/438
3. Indexes: The Village Clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and records so that ready access thereto and use thereof may
be had.
4. Meetings And Minutes: The Village Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Village Board and keep a full record of its proceedings in the journal which
shall be preserved by the Clerk.
C. Village Seal: Be the custodian of the Village Seal and shall affix its impression on documents whenever this is required.
D. Conduct Of Elections: The Village Clerk shall keep a record of the election or appointment of all officers of the Village and the record shall exhibit the
name of the officer, to what office elected or appointed, the date or declaration of election, the date of his commission and the date of death,
resignation, removal from office or expiration of term of office. The Village Clerk shall, within five (5) days after the result of any election is declared or
appointment is made, notify all persons elected or appointed. (Ord. G-537, 8-9-1994)
1-4C-5: DEPUTY CLERK:
A. Appointment: There is hereby created in and for the Village the office of Deputy Clerk who shall have the power and duty to execute all documents
required by any law to be executed by the Village Clerk and to affix the seal of the Village Clerk thereto whenever required. The appointment of such
Deputy Clerk shall be made by the Village Clerk, and the Deputy Clerk shall serve at the pleasure of the Village Clerk.
B. Signature On Documents: In signing any such document theDeputy Clerk shall sign the name of the Village Clerk followed with the word "by" and the
Deputy Clerk's own name and the words "Deputy Clerk".
C. Duties: Such duties shall be exercised only in the absence of the Village Clerk from the Village Clerk's office and only when written direction has been
given by the Village Clerk to such Deputy to exercise such power, or when the President and Board have determined by resolution that the Village
Clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform such functions. (Ord. G-537, 8-9-1994)
Chapter 5
APPOINTED VILLAGE OFFICIALS
1-5-1: DUTIES, FEES AND BONDS:
The president and board of trustees may prescribe the duties of the officers appointed under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-30-5, and the amount to
be charged for services rendered by those officers, and may require them to execute whatever bonds are prescribed by statute or ordinance. (Ord. G-537,
8-9-1994)
1-5-2: PERSONNEL REGULATIONS:
All employees of the village shall be governed by:
A. Personnel rules and regulations;
B. Fire department regulations, as applicable;
C. Police department regulations, as applicable; and
D. Salary administration pay plan. (Ord. G-537, 8-9-1994)
1-5-3: LIMIT ON TEMPORARY APPOINTMENTS:
A temporary appointment of any village official by the president which has not been approved by the village board of trustees shall be limited to a term of
thirty (30) days. The president may not temporarily appoint the same person to the same village office more than twice in one fiscal year. (Ord. G-762, 10-
12-2004)
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE MANAGER
1-5A-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of village manager, an executive office of the village. (Ord. S-236, 7-27-1971)
1-5A-2: APPOINTMENT AND BOND:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 9/438
A. Appointment; Responsibilities: The manager shall be appointed by the president, with the consent of the board, and shall be the direct representative
of the corporate authorities in the transaction of all village business and in all matters concerning the citizens of the village and shall have such specific
duties as are assigned to him, from time to time, by the said corporate authorities.
B. Bond1: Before taking office, the village manager shall qualify for a fidelity bond in an amount not less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), or such
other sum established by state statute. (Ord. S-236, 7-27-1971; 2000 Code)
1-5A-3: GENERAL DUTIES:
A. Supervise Departments: It shall be the duty and responsibility of the village manager to supervise and coordinate the work of all the departments of the
village government and to report directly to the president and board.
B. Hiring, Discharge Of Employees: The village manager shall have the responsibility for the hiring and discharge of all village employees (other than
those under the board of fire and police commissioners or other "tenure of office" laws) except those department heads appointed by the village
president with the consent of the board, in which case he shall recommend the hiring and discharge of said department heads to the president and
board.
C. Public Improvements; Public Authority Matters; Village Real Estate: As representative of the corporate authorities of the village, the village manager
shall have the power to direct or to stop any local improvements or public works in the village if direction is required or if the work is being carried out
in an improper manner. The village manager is to receive all complaints, suggestions, requests, applications and petitions and other correspondence
or communications directed to the corporate authorities and, whenever possible, is directed to take action immediately to adjust matters which do not
require official action of the said corporate authorities. The village manager is responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of the village hall and all
village owned real estate. (Ord. S-236, 7-27-1971; 2000 Code; Ord. G-754, 8-10-2004; Ord. G-784, 6-28-2005)
1-5A-4: PURCHASING AUTHORITY:
A. All purchase orders and contract for supplies, materials or equipment, or for contractual services, including printing and publication, and all work or
other public improvement contracts involving the expenditure of not more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) shall be authorized by the village
manager.
B. All purchases, orders or contracts for supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services, and all work or other public improvement contracts which
are not to be paid for by special assessment or special taxation, involving the expenditure of more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) shall be
let or awarded in the manner provided in section 1-7-4 of this title. (Ord. G-56, 6-8-1956; Ord. G-246, 6-12-1979; Ord. G-318, 2-23-1982; Ord. G-440,
11-28-1989; Ord. G-524, 11-23-1993; Ord. G-754, 8-10-2004; Ord. G-768, 12-14-2004; Ord. G-787, 7-26-2005; Ord. G-927, 6-8-2010)
1-5A-5: ACTING, INTERIM OR TEMPORARY MANAGER:
A. Notwithstanding section 1-5A-3 of this article, no acting, interim, or temporary village manager or person exercising such duties and authorities shall
have any authority to hire, discharge, reassign, or discipline any village employee or to make any "temporary" appointments, exclusive of seasonal
employees, without the prior approval of the board of trustees at a regular or special meeting.
B. Notwithstanding section 1-5A-4 of this article, no acting, interim, or temporary village manager or person exercising such duties and authorities shall
have any authority to authorize any purchase orders or contracts for supplies, materials or equipment or for contractual services or any public
improvement contracts involving the expenditure of more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) without the prior approval of the board of trustees at a
regular or special meeting.
C. Consistent with the Illinois municipal code and the village municipal code, no acting, interim, or temporary village manager, or person exercising such
duties and authorities, shall have any authority to modify the organizational structure, job descriptions, or budget authorizations of the village as
previously approved by the board of trustees, without the prior approval of the board of trustees at a regular or special meeting. (Ord. G-838, 7-10-
2007)
ARTICLE B. VILLAGE ATTORNEY AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT
1-5B-1: OFFICE AND DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of Village Attorney, in and for the Village. A Legal Department for the Village, consisting of the Village Attorney,
appointed by the Village President with the consent of the Board, and such additional staff as may be appointed, from time to time, by the Village Manager
as directed by the Board of Trustees, is hereby established. (Ord. G-240, 11-28-1978; 2000 Code)
1-5B-2: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The Village Attorney shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 10/438
A. Advise Board Of Trustees: Advise the Village President and Board of Trustees or any Village officer on all legal questions arising in the conduct of
Village business, when requested by the Village President, Board of Trustees or Village Manager.
B. Prepare Ordinances: Prepare or revise ordinances, rules and regulations, when so requested by the Board of Trustees.
C. Give Opinions: Give opinions upon any legal matter or question submitted to the Legal Department by the Village President, the Board of Trustees or
by the Village Manager.
D. Attend Meetings: Attend all Board of Trustees' meetings in their entirety for the purpose of giving members of the Board any legal advice requested;
and attend such meetings of statutory boards and commissions as may be directed by the Village President, Board of Trustees or by the Village
Manager.
E. Prepare Legal Instruments: Prepare for execution, or approve as to form, all contracts and instruments to which the Village is a party; and approve as
to form all bonds required to be submitted to the Village.
F. Prosecute Offenders And Defend Officials: As directed by the Village Manager and Board of Trustees, prepare all charges and complaints against and
appear in the appropriate court inthe prosecution of persons charged with the violation of a Village ordinance or any regulations adopted under
authority of the State statutes, or with the commission of a misdemeanor as declared by State statute or by virtue of its authority.
G. Prepare Reports: Prepare reports to the Village Manager, Village President and Board of Trustees on pending litigation, setting forth the status of all
pending litigation in which the Village has an interest.
H. Responsible For Legal Services Incidental To Board Of Trustees' Action: Have charge of legal services auxiliary to action by the Board of Trustees as
directed by the Board of Trustees.
I. Keep Records: Keep a complete record of all litigation in which the Village had or has an interest, setting forth the names of the parties, the court before
which the matter was instituted, the nature of the case, the disposition of the case or its condition, if pending, including copies of all pleadings; and
keep a complete record of all written opinions furnished by the Legal Department as well as all certificates or abstracts of title furnished by the Legal
Department to the Village or any department or official thereof. (Ord. G-240, 11-28-1978; 2000 Code)
ARTICLE C. VILLAGE TREASURER AND FINANCE DIRECTOR
1-5C-1: VILLAGE TREASURER:
A. Office Created; Term: There is hereby created the office Village Treasurer whose term shall be established by the Village President and Board of
Trustees.
B. Bond1: Before entering upon his duties, the Village Treasurer shall first file with the Village Clerk a bond with surety approved by the Village Board in
an amount of money equal to not less than three (3) times the latest Federal census population or any subsequent figure used for motor fuel tax
purposes.
C. Compensation: The salary of the Village Treasurer shall be, from time to time, determined by the Village President and Board.
D. General Duties: In addition to the duties imposed by statute upon the Village Treasurer, it shall be his duty to adopt such bookkeeping forms and office
methods as may be, from time to time, prescribed by the Village Board. (Ord. G-6, 7-14-1959; Ord. G-253, 7-24-1979; 2000 Code)
1-5C-2: FINANCE DIRECTOR:
A. Department Head: The Finance Director shall be head of the Department of Finance and shall be ex officio Village Comptroller.
B. Duties: In addition to the duties required by State law, the Finance Director shall have the following duties, functions and responsibilities:
1. General:
Preparation of budget and tax levy ordinances and supervision of expenditures;
General accounting;
Preparation of financial reports and statements;
Administrative analysis;
Preparation and maintenance of inventory of real and personal property of the Village.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 11/438
2. Special Assessments: The Director of Finance shall keep an amount of each special assessment and each installment thereof under its general
description and number. All monies received on any special assessment and installment thereof shall be held by the Director of Finance as a special
fund to be applied to the payment of the improvement for which the assessment was made, and such money shall be used for no other purpose
whatsoever except as may have been provided by the ordinance authorizing the improvement.
3. Additional Duties: The Finance Director shall have all other duties, powers, functions and responsibilities whether similar to or dissimilar from those
above specifically mentioned, which, by existing ordinances are expressed as given to the Village Director. The Finance Director, in performance of
his duties, shall be subject to the supervision, control and direction of the Village Manager. The Finance Director shall perform such other services,
within or without the Department of Finance, as may be required by the Village Manager or by direction of the Board of Trustees. (Ord. G-525, 11-
23-1993; 2000 Code)
ARTICLE D. VILLAGE ENGINEER
1-5D-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created and established the office of village engineer who shall be appointed by the village manager. (Ord. G-1070, 1-12-2016)
1-5D-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall be appointed to the office of village engineer unless such person is registered under the provisions of the Illinois professional engineer
practice act1. (Ord. G-1070, 1-12-2016)
1-5D-3: POSITION AND DUTIES:
The village engineer is an exempt position, reporting directly to the director of community development and is under the authority of the village manager.
The village engineer is responsible for all duties and activities assigned to the village engineer and the stormwater administrator in this code and such
other duties and activities assigned by the director of community development and village manager. (Ord. G-1070, 1-12-2016)
ARTICLE E. PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR
1-5E-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created and established the office of Public Works Director. The Public Works Director shall be appointed by the President, by and with
the consent of the Board. (Ord. G-638, 7-13-1999)
1-5E-2: POSITION AND DUTIES:
The Public Works Director is an exempt position, reporting directly to the Village Manager and responsible for the administration and direction of the
Public Works Department. The Public Works Director shall coordinate all functions of the Public Works Department and shall formulate and prescribe
work methods and procedures to be followed by all personnel of the Department. (Ord. G-638, 7-13-1999)
Chapter 6
BUDGET LAW/BUDGET OFFICER
1-6-1: BUDGET LAW ADOPTED:
The Village adopts the Municipal Budget Act1, providing for an annual municipal budget in lieu of the passage of an annual appropriation ordinance, in
accordance with the provisions contained in this Chapter. (Ord. G-3, 8-12-1958; Ord. G-500, 1-26-1993; Ord. G-540, 8-9-1994)
1-6-2: FISCAL YEAR:
An initial fiscal reporting period shall commence on May 1, 1993, and close on December 31, 1993. Thereafter, the fiscal year of the Village shall
commence on January 1 of each year and close on December 31 of each year. (Ord. G-3, 8-12-1958; Ord. G-500, 1-26-1993; Ord. G-540, 8-9-1994)
1-6-3: BUDGET OFFICER2:
There is hereby created the office of Budget Officer who shall be appointed by the Village President, with the approval of the corporate authorities, and
shall take the oath and post the bond as required in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-10-25 and 5/3.1-10-30. Such Budget Officer shall serve at the
pleasure of the Village President, and shall have the powers and duties set forth in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.2 and 5/8-2-9.3, as the same may
be amended from time to time. (Ord. G-3, 8-12-1958; Ord. G-500, 1-26-1993; Ord. G-540, 8-9-1994)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 12/438
1-6-4: ANNUAL BUDGET:
A. Comply With State Law: The passage of the annual budget, any revisions thereof and all other matters relating thereto shall comply with the provisions
of the Municipal Budget Act.
B. Adoption Of Budget: The annual budget shall be adopted bythe corporate authorities before May 1, 1993, and thereafter before the beginning of the
fiscal year to which it applies. Passage of the annual budget shall be in lieu of passage of the appropriation ordinance heretofore annually enacted.
The annual budget shall be published in the manner provided in subsection 1-6-5D of this Chapter. (Ord. G-3, 8-12-1958; Ord. G-500, 1-26-1993; Ord.
G-540, 8-9-1994)
1-6-5: BUDGET PROCEDURES:
A. Compilation And Contents Of Budget: On or before December 1 of each year the Budget Officer, in conjunction with the Village Manager, shall submit
to the corporate authorities an annual municipal budget, such budget to contain estimates of revenues available to the municipality for the fiscal year
for which the budget is drafted, together with recommended expenditures for the municipality and all of the municipality's departments, commissions
and boards. Revenue estimates and expenditure recommendations shall be presented in a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal
management practice and the Municipal Budget Act. Each budget shall contain actual or estimated revenues and expenditures for the two (2) years
immediately preceding the fiscal year for which the budget is prepared. Each budget shall show the specific fund from which each anticipated
expenditure shall be made.
B. Funds For Contingency Purposes: The annual budget may contain money set aside for contingency purposes not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the
total budget.
C. Revisions To Budget And Delegation Of Authority: The corporate authorities may delegate authority to heads of municipal departments, boards or
commissions to delete, add to or change items previously budgeted to the department, board or commission, subject to such limitation or requirement
for prior approval by the Budget Officer as the corporate authorities, upon a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the corporate authorities then holding office, may
establish. By a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the corporate authorities then holding office, the annual budget may be revised by deleting,
adding to, changing or creating subclasses within the object classes and object classes themselves. No revision of the budget shall be made
increasing the budget in the event funds are not available to effectuate the purpose of the revision.
D. Public Hearing, Notice And Inspection Of Budget: At least one public hearing shall be held by the corporate authorities on the tentative annual budget
prior to final action by the corporate authorities. Notice of this hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper having a general circulation in the
Village at least ten (10) days prior to the time of the public hearing. Copies of the tentative annual budget shall be made available for public inspection
in printed or typewritten form in the office of the Village Clerk for at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. After said hearing, the tentativebudget may
be further revised and passed without further notice, inspection or hearing. (Ord. G-3, 8-12-1958; Ord. G-500, 1-26-1993; Ord. G-540, 8-9-1994)
Chapter 7
PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS
1-7-1: SCOPE OF CHAPTER; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to purchases of, or contracts for, any commodities, professional services, contractual services and
construction by persons other than village employees. This chapter shall not apply to any work or materials provided by village employees, included in
any intergovernmental agreement, as otherwise provided for in this code, or as otherwise directed by the village board. The provisions of this chapter
may be altered or waived by the village at any time and shall in no way create or expand any rights in any supplier, bidder, contractor or other person
nor shall failure to comply or adhere to these provisions create any liability on the part of the village, its officers or employees.
B. The village manager may establish reasonable rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter governing the purchasing and
contracting practices of the village. These rules may include procedures for soliciting, processing, awarding and rejecting bids, proposals,
qualifications and quotation procedures.
C. Arbitrarily splitting purchases or contracts, for the purpose of avoiding any cost limits set forth herein, shall not be permitted.
D. The village board shall have the authority to reject parts of bids, or all bids for any one or more commodities, services or construction included in a
proposed contract, or to waive any technical defect in a bid, when the public interest will be served thereby.
E. No purchase or contract for commodities, services or construction shall be made in violation of the state statutes governing pecuniary interest in public
contracts nor in violation of any provisions of the Illinois criminal code or the Illinois human rights act1.
F. No person shall expend money on behalf of or in any way pledge the credit, or obligate the village, contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
G. The village shall not accept the bid of a bidder who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other monies due the village.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 13/438
H. Nothing herein shall abrogate the emergency powers of the village manager.
I. Certain items which by their nature do not lend themselves to competitive purchasing process are exempt from the purchasing regulations in this
chapter. The village manager shall have the authority to exempt such items, as appropriate. (2000 Code)
1-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
BID: A sealed, written offer from a vendor, contractor or supplier of professional or contractual services, to provide commodities, services or construction
at a set price in response to, and under terms as designated in, detailed specifications prepared by or on behalf of the village as a part of an open,
competitive process.
CHANGE ORDER: A change in a contract term other than as specifically provided for in the contract, which authorizes or necessitates a change in the
cost of a contract or the time of completion and which was not reasonably foreseeable at the time the contract was entered into, was not within the
contemplation of the original contract or is in the best interests of the village.
COMMODITIES: All supplies, goods, materials and equipment except such items as are incidental to any professional service, contractual service or
construction.
CONSTRUCTION: Any work including, but not necessarily limited to, the erection or installation of buildings, streets, sewers and water mains as well as
major maintenance, renovation, addition or repair thereto.
CONSULTING SERVICES: Persons or firms having education and experience which uniquely qualifies them to perform some specialized service and
who are considered to have special knowledge or abilities in their field of expertise not otherwise generally available. Such services are of an advisory
and limited nature relating to a specific area of municipal government.
COST: The total amount of money to be expended or committed to purchase any item or items or for any particular service or construction.
MANAGER: The village manager or the village manager's designee.
PROPOSAL: A sealed, written offer from a vendor, contractor or supplier of professional or contractual services, to provide commodities, services or
construction at a set price or prices in response to a request for proposals by or on behalf of the village. Proposals shall not be considered part of the
bidding process but rather shall be considered offers to contract and may, at the discretion of the village, be subject to further negotiations, modifications
and rejections until the proposal has been accepted by the village.
QUOTATION: A verbal or written offer from a vendor, contractor or other supplier of professional or contractual services, to provide commodities, services
or construction at a set price under terms as designated in the offer.
RESPONSIBLE BIDDER: A bidder who satisfies the standards set forth in subsection 1-7-4E of this chapter and has the capacity in all respects to
perform the contract requirements.
RESPONSIVE BIDDER: A bidder whose bid does not vary from the specifications and terms set out in the invitation for bids.
SERVICES: Work performed by a vendor, other than construction or the supplying of commodities, including such activities as maintenance, repair and
cleaning of equipment and facilities.
SOLE SOURCE CONTRACT: A contract for commodities, services or construction which, due to the nature or limited availability of the item involved,
does not lend itself to competitive bidding or a request for proposals. (2000 Code; Ord. G-766, 11-9-2004)
1-7-3: COMMODITIES, SERVICES AND CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS UP TO AND INCLUDING TWENTY THOUSAND
DOLLARS:
The village manager shall have the authority, up to and including twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), to purchase commodities and enter into service
and construction contracts on behalf of the village, as set forth herein. Such purchases and contracts shall be based upon the lowest responsive and
responsible bid or quotation in the manner designated by the village manager, taking into consideration the specific standards set forth in subsection 1-7-
4E of this chapter and other criteria specific to the purchase. (Ord. G-983, 9-25-2012)
1-7-4: COMMODITIES, SERVICES AND CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS EXCEEDING TWENTY THOUSAND DOLLARS:
A. Formal Contract Procedure: All construction or other public improvements and all purchases, orders or contracts for supplies, commodities, equipment
or services, except as otherwise provided herein, when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), shall be
purchased from the lowest responsive and responsible bidder or proposer after due notice inviting bids or proposals, unless the village waives the
competitive bidding or request for proposal process by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the village trustees then holding office.
B. Public Notice: Public notice of a bid/proposal request shall be published at least ten (10) days in advance of the date announced for the receiving of
bids/proposals on the village website. Additional announcements may also be placed in recognized newspapers, trade journals and other publications.
The public notice shall describe the character of the proposed contract or agreement in sufficient detail to enable the bidders/proposers thereon to
know what their obligations will be, either in the advertisement itself, or by reference to detailed bid/request for proposal packages on file at the time of
the public notice. Such advertisement shall also state the date, time and place assigned for the opening of bids/proposals, and no bids/proposals shall
be received at any time subsequent to the time indicated in the announcement. The village manager shall inform all parties that have received
bid/proposal packages of any specification changes or bid/proposal opening extensions by written addendum thereof via mail or fax transmission as
appropriate.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 14/438
C. Bid Security: Unless otherwise required by law, a cashier's check, a certified check or a bid bond issued by a surety company which is listed and
approved by the U.S. department of the treasury, in an amount of ten percent (10%) of the contract may be required of each bidder by the village
manager. The bid security shall be returned to the unsuccessful bidders within such time as specified in the bid package. A successful bidder shall
forfeit its bid security upon failure on its part to enter into a contract within fifteen (15) days after the award. In its sole discretion, the village may return
the bid security when it is determined that such successful bidder's failure to enter a contract did not cause any damage to the village. The village shall
retain the right to hold such successful bidder liable for any excess damage or costs incurred by reason of the failure to execute contracts over and
above the bid security retained by the village.
D. Bids/Proposal Opening: Competitive sealed bids/proposals shall be opened in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated
in the public notice. The amount of each bid and name of each bidder shall be publicly read for competitive sealed bids. The name of each proposer
shall be publicly read for competitive sealed proposals. All information contained within the bids/proposals is the property of the village, and as such is
not subject to public inspection until such time as the village board awards a contract, rejects all bids/proposals or abandons the project.
E. Award Of Contract: Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder/proposer on the basis of the bid/proposal that is in the
best interests of the village to accept. As a part of the evaluation process, and in addition to price, the village manager shall evaluate the
responsiveness and responsibility of each bidder/proposer. To be judged responsible, a bidder/proposer must have the following capabilities in all
respects to fully perform the contract requirements and will be judged against the following standards, at a minimum:
1. Ability, capacity and skill to fulfill the contract as specified.
2. Ability to supply the commodities, provide the services or complete the construction promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or
interference.
3. Character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency.
4. Quality of performance on previous contracts.
5. Previous and existing compliance with laws and ordinances relating to the contract.
6. Sufficiency of financial resources.
7. Quality, availability and adaptability of the commodities, services or construction, in relation to the village's requirements.
8. Ability to provide future maintenance and service under the contract.
9. Number and scope of conditions attached to the bid/proposal.
10. Record of payments for taxes, licenses or other monies due the village.
F. Insurance And Indemnification: All contractors performing construction shall be required to indemnify the village and to carry such insurance as
specified in chapter 8 of this title. Various activities that place the village at a greater or different risk may require the contractor to carry different types
and/or amounts of insurance, as determined by the village manager or his designee.
G. Contract Bond: Contractors performing construction activities, the value of which exceeds twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), shall provide the
village with a performance and payment bond. Certain other nonconstruction contractors, in cases where the village might be put at risk, may also be
required to submit a contract bond to the village, as determined by the village manager. Contract bonds shall be issued by a surety company which is
listed and approved by the U.S. department of the treasury, and which shall guarantee the performance of the work by the contractor, the payment at
the prevailing rate of hourly wages and the payment for all labor, materials, apparatus, fixtures and machinery necessary to complete the project.
When other than motor fuel tax funds, federal aid funds or other funds received from the state are used, the village may allow bidders to provide a
nondiminishing irrevocable bank letter of credit, in lieu of the bond on contracts under one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), provided that any
such bank letter of credit shall contain all of the provisions required for bonds as set forth in section 1 of the public construction bond act2. (2000 Code;
Ord. G-673, 2-13-2001; Ord. G-927, 6-8-2010; Ord. G-966, 2-28-2012; Ord. G-983, 9-25-2012; Ord. G-1049, 5-26-2015)
1-7-5: CHANGE ORDERS:
Except as otherwise set forth in any particular contract, the following provisions shall govern change orders. The village manager may approve change
orders which would cause a cost change of up to, and including, twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or would alter the project completion date by thirty
(30) days or less. The village board shall review all change orders that would cause a cost change of more than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or
would alter the project completion date by more than thirty (30) days. Any such change order shall be accompanied by a finding by the village board that:
A. The circumstances necessitating the change order were not reasonably foreseeable at the time the contract was signed; or
B. The change is germane to the original contract as signed; or
C. The change is in the best interests of the village. (Ord. G-983, 9-25-2012)
1-7-6: PROFESSIONAL SERVICES:
A. Contracts for the services of architects, engineers and land surveyors shall not be subject to the competitive bidding/proposal requirements of this
chapter, and shall be awarded in accordance with the qualifications based selection (QBS) procedure as authorized by state law3. This procedure is
not required when the total cost of services is anticipated to be less than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 15/438
B. Contracts for other professionals, including attorneys, doctors, real estate appraisers and others whose codes of conduct prohibit or discourage
involvement in normal bidding procedures, may be entered into by the village without observing the bidding or proposal procedures prescribed for the
awarding of formal contracts.
C. Contracts or purchase orders for consulting services that are necessary in the day to day operation of the village shall be approved by the village board
if the value of the contract is greater than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) either for a one time consultation or for services that are cumulatively
charged to the village during any fiscal year. (2000 Code; Ord. G-766, 11-9-2004; Ord. G-927, 6-8-2010; Ord. G-983, 9-25-2012)
1-7-7: SOLE SOURCE CONTRACTS:
Contracts in an amount exceeding twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), which by their nature are not adapted to award by competitive bidding or
competitive proposals, such as contracts for commodities, services or construction that are available from only a single source, may be exempted from
the competitive bidding and competitive proposal requirements of this chapter, and may be awarded by the village board. (Ord. G-983, 9-25-2012)
1-7-8: EMERGENCY CONTRACTS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, when there exists an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the village manager may
make, or authorize others to make, emergency procurements in an amount exceeding twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for commodities, services or
construction necessary to resolve the subject emergency affecting the public health, safety or welfare. Such emergency procurements shall be made with
such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular
vendor(s) shall be made by the village manager and included in the purchasing file. As soon as practicable, a record of each emergency procurement
shall be made and shall set forth the vendor's name, the amount and type of the contract and a listing of the items procured under the contract. The
village board shall ratify each such emergency procurement. (Ord. G-983, 9-25-2012)
1-7-9: SURPLUS PROPERTY:
All municipal officers, employees and agents are prohibited from purchasing surplus supplies of the village. (2000 Code)
1-7-10: COOPERATIVE PURCHASING:
The village shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the village would be
served thereby. (Ord. G-673, 2-13-2001)
Chapter 8
INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR CONTRACTORS, PERMITTEES
1-8-1: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Each contractor performing any work pursuant to a contract with the Village and each permittee working under a permit as required pursuant to the
provisions of Section 8-1-3 of this Code (hereinafter referred to as the "insured") shall be required to carry such insurance as specified herein. Such
contractor and permittee shall procure and maintain for the duration of the contract or permit insurance against claims for injuries to persons or damages
to property which may arise from or in connection with the performance of the work under the contract or permit, either by the contractor, permittee or their
agents, representatives, employees or subcontractors. (Ord. G-431, 7-11-1989)
1-8-2: MINIMUM LEVELS OF INSURANCE:
A contractor or permittee shall maintain general liability insurance with limits no less than: two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) combined single limit per
occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage on an occurrence policy form; provided that, when the estimated cost of the work in
question does not exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), the required limit shall be not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). The
Village may waive the requirement based on an analysis of the risk and additional cost resulting from the requirement when the estimated cost of the work
in question does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). (Ord. G-431, 7-11-1989; 2000 Code)
1-8-3: DEDUCTIBLES AND SELF-INSURED RETENTIONS:
Any deductibles or self-insured retentions must be declared to and approved by the Village. At the option of the Village, either the contractor or permittee
shall reduce or eliminate such deductible or self-insured retention as respects the Village, its officers, officials, employees and volunteers; orthe contractor
or permittee shall procure a bond guaranteeing payment of losses and related investigations, claim administration and defense expenses to the extent of
such deductible or self-insured retention. (Ord. G-431, 7-11-1989; 2000 Code)
1-8-4: OTHER INSURANCE PROVISIONS:
The policies shall contain, or be endorsed to contain, the following provisions:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 16/438
A. General Liability And Automobile Liability Coverages:
1. The Village, its officers, officials, employees and volunteers are to be covered as insureds as respects: liability arising out of activities performed by
or on behalf of the contractor or permittee; premises owned, occupied or used by the contractor or permittee; or automobiles owned, leased, hired or
borrowed by the contractor or permittee. The coverage shall contain no special limitations on the scope of protection afforded to the Village, its
officers, officials, employees or volunteers.
2. The contractor's or permittee's insurance coverage shall be primary coverage with respect to the additional insured status of the Village, its officers,
officials, employees and volunteers. Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the Village, its officers, officials, employees or volunteers shall
be in excess of the contractor's or permittee's insurance and shall not contribute with it.
3. Any failure to comply with the reporting provisions of the policies shall not affect coverage provided to the Village, its officers, officials, employees or
volunteers.
4. The contractor's or permittee's insurance shall apply separately to each covered party against whom claim is made or suit is brought except with
respect to the limits of the contractor's or permittee's liability.
B. Workers' Compensation And Employers' Liability Coverage: The policy shall waive all rights of subrogation against the Village, its officers, officials,
employees and volunteers for losses arising from work performed by the contractor or permittee for the Village.
C. All Coverages: Each insurance policy required by this clause shall be endorsed to state that coverage shall not be suspended, voided, cancelled by
either party, reduced in coverage or in limits except after thirty (30) days' prior written notice by certified mail has been given to the Village. Each
insurance policy shall name the Village, its officials and employees as additional insureds.
D. Acceptability Of Contractors Or Permittees: Insurance is tobe placed with contractors or permittees with a Best's rating of no less than A:VII. (Ord. G-
431, 7-11-1989)
1-8-5: VERIFICATION OF COVERAGE:
Each contractor or permittee shall furnish the Village with certificates of insurance and with original endorsements effecting coverage required by this
provision. The certificates and endorsements for each insurance policy are to be signed by a person authorized by that contractor or permittee to bind
coverage on its behalf. The certificates and endorsements are to be on forms approved by the Village and shall be subject to approval by the Village
Attorney before work commences. The Village reserves the right to require complete, certified copies of all required insurance policies at any time. (Ord.
G-431, 7-11-1989)
1-8-6: SUBCONTRACTORS:
Each contractor or permittee shall include all subcontractors as insureds under its policies or shall furnish separate certificates and endorsements for
each subcontractor. All coverages for subcontractors shall be subject to all of the requirements stated herein. (Ord. G-431, 7-11-1989)
1-8-7: INDEMNITY HOLD HARMLESS:
To the fullest extent permitted by law, the permittee and/or contractors hereby agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the Village, its officials,
agents and employees, against all injuries, deaths, loss, damages, claims, patent claims, suits, liabilities, judgments, cost and expenses, which may in
anywise accrue against the Village, its officials, agents and employees, arising in whole or in part or in consequence of the performance of this work by
the contractor or permittee, its employees or subcontractors, or which may in anywise result therefore, except that arising out of the sole legal cause of
the Village, its agents or employees, the contractor or permittee shall, at its own expense, appear, defend and pay all charges of attorneys and all costs
and other expenses arising therefore or incurred in connection therewith; and, if any judgment shall be rendered against the Village, its officials, agents
and employees, in any such action, the contractor or permittee shall, at its own expense, satisfy and discharge the same. Contractor and permittee
expressly understand and agree that any performance bond or insurance policies required by a contract, or otherwise provided by the contractor or
permittee, shall in no way limit the responsibility to indemnify, keep and save harmless and defend the Village, its officials, agents and employees, as
herein provided. (2000 Code)
1-8-8: ADDITIONAL INSURANCE:
Should a specific project, activity, agreement, contract or special event be allowed that may result in greater liability exposure to the Village, then the
appropriate required levels of insurance coverage may be increased at the discretion of the Village. (2000 Code)
Chapter 9
RESERVED
(Ord. G-968, 3-27-2012)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 17/438
Chapter 10
ETHICS
1-10-1: APPLICABILITY AND PURPOSE:
A. This chapter applies to all full time and part time employees, and to all elected and appointed officers of the village, including appointed members of
village boards, commissions and committees established by Illinois statutes or this code.
B. It is essential to effective democratic government that public officials and employees be independent, honest, and impartial in the conduct of their
duties, that all governmental decisions be made on the merits following fair and open processes and in compliance with state statutes and this code,
that public office and employment not be used for private gain or favoritism, and that citizens have confidence in the integrity of their government. To
that end, all village officials and employees must serve the village in a fiduciary capacity, must not use their office or position for personal gain and
must not bestow special consideration upon any person merely because of that person's relationship to the official or employee.
C. It is the policy and purpose of this chapter to protect the public interest and the integrity of the village by establishing appropriate ethical standards for
the conduct of village officers and employees in foreseeable circumstances and situations. However, it is recognized that no code of conduct can
address all ethical issues that may arise. Accordingly, in case of doubt, all village officers and employees are to seek the advice of the village's ethics
advisor and to apply inherent standards of morality, honesty and integrity. (Ord. G-862, 6-10-2008)
1-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given these definitions:
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers orpetitions for nomination or election to an elected office or who has been appointed to fill a
vacancy in nomination and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code1.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of the election code2.
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the village, whether on a full time or part time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the
direction and control of the village with regard to the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity, and includes members of village boards and commissions appointed by the corporate authorities of the village.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund or other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or the county clerk under section 9-3 of the election code3, but only with regard to those activities that
require filing with the state board of elections or the county clerk.
VILLAGE: The village of Oak Brook. (Ord. G-862, 6-10-2008)
1-10-3: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be given these definitions:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination, election or appointment of any
individual to any federal, state or local public office or office in a political organization or the selection, nomination or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: 1) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative or administrative action; 2)
relating to collective bargaining; or 3) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 3 of the Illinois public labor relations act4.
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time
requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation
periods, personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees
whose hours are not fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer or employee is on premises under the control of the
village and any other time when the officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in
excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: 1) compensation for employment; 2) service credits towards pension
benefits; and 3) health insurance benefits paid for by the village.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: 1) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative or administrative action; 2) relating to collective bargaining; or
3) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 18/438
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: 1. Preparing for, organizing or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration or
other political event.
2. Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase of, selling, distributing or receiving payment for any candidate or political
organization for tickets for any political fundraiser, political meeting or other political event.
3. Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
4. Planning, conducting or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
5. Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection witha
campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
6. Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
7. Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in an
effort to get voters to the polls.
8. Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
9. Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
10. Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
11. Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate for
elective office or for or against any referendum question.
12. Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question.
13. Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
14. Serving as a delegate, alternate or proxy to a political party convention.
15. Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election.
B. Use Of Compensated Time, Village Property Or Resources: No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any
"compensated time", as defined herein. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the village in connection with any
prohibited political activity.
C. Delegation: No officer or employee shall intentionally require any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as part of that
officer's or employee's duties, 2) as a condition of employment, promotion or job assignment, or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays,
vacation orpersonal time off).
D. Participation Not Required: No officer or employee shall be required to participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or
employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a promotion, job assignment, salary adjustment, bonus,
compensatory time off, continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in
consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited political activity.
E. Voluntary Activities: Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official
duties or activities that are undertaken by an officer or an employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this chapter.
F. Employment Nondiscrimination: No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment, or 2) in a position
the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal standards for a merit system of personnel
administration applicable to grant-in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment, promotion, job assignment, or tenure solely because he
or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a political party or of a political organization or club. (Ord. G-862, 6-10-2008)
1-10-4: PROHIBITED GIFTS:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section and section 1-10-5 of this chapter, the following terms shall be given these definitions:
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, recreation opportunity, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary
value including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government
employment or the official position of an officer or employee.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
1. Is seeking official action: a) by an officer; or b) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
2. Does business or seeks to do business: a) with the village or the officer; or b) with an employee or with the officer or another employee directing
that employee;
3. Conducts activities regulated: a) by the officer; or b) by an employee or by the officer oranother employee directing that employee;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 19/438
4. Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee; or
5. Has a contractual relationship with the village of any nature whatsoever.
B. Gifts From Prohibited Sources: Except as permitted by section 1-10-5 of this chapter, no officer or employee and no spouse of or immediate family
member living with any officer or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients") shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any
"prohibited source", as defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or this section. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a
gift that violates this section.
C. Gifts From Familiar Sources: Notwithstanding the exceptions permitted by section 1-10-5 of this chapter, no employee shall solicit a gift of any kind,
amount or value from any resident, vendor, business or any person with whom the employee deals in the course of his or her village duties. (Ord. G-
862, 6-10-2008)
1-10-5: EXCEPTIONS:
Subsection 1-10-4B of this chapter is not applicable to the following:
A. Available To General Public: Opportunities, benefits and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public.
B. Fair Market Value: Anything for which the officer or employee or his or her spouse or immediate family member pays the fair market value.
C. Lawful Contributions, Fundraising Events: Any: 1) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code; or 2) activities associated with a
fundraising event in support of a political organization or candidate.
D. Educational: Educational materials and missions.
E. Business Travel Expenses: Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
F. Gifts From Relatives: A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law,
son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister
and includingthe father, mother, grandfather or grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
G. Personal Friendship Based Gifts: Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe
that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate
family member and not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient
shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: 1) the history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and
the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; 2) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the
individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and 3) whether to the actual
knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or employees or their
spouses or immediate family members.
H. Benefits Resulting From Outside Business Or Employment Activities: Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation and other benefits resulting from
outside business or employment activities (or outside activities that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if the benefits
have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in
similar circumstances.
I. Intragovernmental And Intergovernmental Gifts: For the purpose of this chapter, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee
from another officer or employee and "intergovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
J. Transfers At Death: Bequests, inheritances and other transfers at death.
K. Items From Prohibited Sources; Limit: Any item or items from all prohibited sources during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and, with respect to food or refreshments, not to exceed seventy five dollars ($75.00) in any single day, provided
that the food or refreshments are: 1) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared; or 2) catered. For the purposes of this
section, "catered" means food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means.
L. Events Hosted By Businesses Or Organizations: Food or refreshments served in conjunction with ground breakings, open houses, grand openings and
other similar events hosted by businesses or organizations to which invitations have been extended to a majority of the corporate authorities in
whichevent this exemption shall extend to all officers and employees who are also invited.
M. Seminars: Food or refreshments served in conjunction with governmental, professional or training seminars.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 20/438
N. Civic Events: Food or refreshments served in conjunction with chamber of commerce meetings, village homeowners' association meetings or other
civic events at which the officer or employee has been invited to participate or speak.
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and independent of each other. (Ord. G-862, 6-10-2008)
1-10-6: DISPOSITION OF GIFTS:
An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living with the officer or employee does not violate this chapter if the recipient
promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate
charity that is exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered or
succeeded. (Ord. G-862, 6-10-2008)
1-10-7: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be given these definitions:
FAMILY RELATIONSHIP: Any relationship of spouse, parent, child or sibling or any personal relationship that would prevent an officer or employee
from acting with impartiality.
INTEREST: Any economic interest or relationship, whether by ownership, trust, purchase, sale, lease, contract, option, investment, employment,
gift, fee or otherwise; whether present, promised or reasonably expected; whether direct or indirect, including interests as consultant, representative or
other person receiving (or who may be receiving) remuneration, either directly or indirectly, as a result of a transaction; whether in the person itself or
in a parent or subsidiary corporation, or in another subsidiary of the same parent; whether such interest is held directly or indirectly by the officer or
employee, the spouse or minor child of such officer or employee, or any other person with a family relationship with such officer or employee owning or
sharing the same household as the officer or employee. Interest shall not include: 1) interest in a mutual fund or managed account; 2) an ownership
interest of less than five percent (5%) in any business entity; or 3) an interest of general applicability affecting others in similar situations.
RECUSE: To refrain from participation in any official discussion or deliberation regarding a transaction and abstainfrom any vote on such
transaction.
TRANSACTION: Any matter, including, without limitation, contracts, work or business with the village, the sale or purchase of real estate by the
village and any requests for zoning, development or subdivision approvals, including, without limitation, rezonings, variations and special use permits,
pending before the village, with respect to which an officer or employee performs an official act or action.
B. Personal Interest Transactions: No officer or employee shall participate in any official action with respect to a transaction: 1) in which the officer or
employee has an interest, or a family relationship with a person having an interest, or 2) where such participation would constitute a conflict of interest
under the statutes or common law of the state of Illinois.
C. Recusal: Any officer or employee shall recuse himself or herself in connection with any transaction that comes before such officer or employee in the
course of his or her official duties, whenever such officer or employee has actual knowledge that he or she has: 1) any interest in the transaction; 2)
any family relationship with a person having an interest in such transaction; or 3) any interest in an applicant appearing before the officer or employee
in an official capacity, even if the officer or employee does not have an interest in the transaction itself.
D. Notification: Upon becoming aware of any conflict of interest as described in subsection B or C of this section, any officer or employee shall promptly
notify the appropriate authority of such conflict and the officer's or employee's recusal from any official action with respect to the transaction, as
follows:
1. Employees shall notify the director of the department and the village manager;
2. The village manager shall notify the village president and the board of trustees;
3. Members of boards and commissions shall notify the chairperson of such board or commission;
4. Chairpersons of boards and commissions shall notify the village manager, village president and the board of trustees;
5. The village president shall notify the village manager and the board of trustees.
6. Any village trustee shall notify the village president, village manager and the other members of the board of trustees.
E. Nonappearance: No officer required to recuse himself or herself in connection with a transaction shall appear before the board or commission of which
he or she is a member with respect to such transaction.
F. Nonparticipation; Nondisclosure: Any officer who has actual knowledge that he or she, individually or through a family relationship, has an interest in a
transaction pending before a board or commission other than the board or commission on which the officer serves as a member either: 1) shall not
appear or participate in any way or manner in any village proceeding relating to such transaction; or 2) shall disclose such interest on the record prior
to participating in any proceeding before a village board or commission. (Ord. G-862, 6-10-2008)
1-10-8: STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC INTEREST:
All officers and employees required to file a statement of economic interest pursuant to 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 420/4A-101 shall file a copy of that
statement with the ethics advisor by May 1 of each year. Every officer and employee not required to file a statement of economic interest shall, by May 1
of each year, file a statement of economic interest with the ethics advisor on a form to be provided by the village. (Ord. G-862, 6-10-2008)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 21/438
1-10-9: OTHER PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
A. In addition to the other activities prohibited by this chapter, all officers and employees are prohibited from violating any of the following sections of the
village's personnel policy manual which are incorporated herein by reference as though fully set forth herein:
1. Sexual harassment _ section 7.01.
2. Antiretaliation _ section 7.01A.
3. Outside employment _ section 7.09A.
4. Antinepotism _ section 7.09B.
B. No employee shall knowingly participate in the decision to award any village contract to a person or entity, or its parent or subsidiary, that currently
employs or compensates, or that employed, or compensated for services, the employee, or spouse or immediate family member living with such
employee, during the year immediately preceding the employee's commencement of employment with the village.
C. No former employee shall, for the one year period immediately following the termination of office or employment with the village, represent any person
or entity in connection with any contract or other engagement of any kind with the village, without the written approval of the board of trustees.
D. No officer or employee shall disclose any confidential information to any person other than another officer or employee. For purposes of this section,
"confidential information" meansany nonpublic information including information exempt from disclosure pursuant to the open meetings act, 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq., the freedom of information act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/1 et seq., or any other similar federal law or
information exempt from disclosure pursuant to a court order. (Ord. G-862, 6-10-2008)
1-10-10: ETHICS ADVISOR:
A. The village manager or the village manager's designee shall serve as the ethics advisor. In situations involving questions or complaints about the
village manager or assistant village manager, the village attorney shall serve as the ethics advisor.
B. The ethics advisor shall perform the following duties:
1. Provide guidance to officers and employees concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the provisions of this chapter and state ethics
laws.
2. Investigate complaints about possible violations of this chapter.
3. Refer any violations that cannot be resolved at the village level to the DuPage County state's attorney for appropriate action.
4. Such other duties as may be delegated by the board of trustees.
C. All complaints regarding a violation of this chapter shall be submitted to the ethics advisor in writing. Within thirty (30) days of receiving a complaint, the
ethics advisor shall provide a written response to the complainant, provided that the ethics advisor shall not disclose any information exempt or
prohibited from disclosure by state or federal law. (Ord. G-862, 6-10-2008)
1-10-11: PENALTIES:
A. Any employee who violates any provision of this chapter may be subject to disciplinary action, including termination.
B. Any appointed officer who violates any provision of this chapter may be subject to removal from office.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be fined in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each and every
violation shall be considered to be a separate and distinct event.
D. All prosecutions for violation of this chapter shall be in the circuit court for the 18th judicial circuit. (Ord. G-862, 6-10-2008)
Footnote 1: 10 ILCS 5/1-3.
Footnote 2: 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.
Footnote 3: 10 ILCS 5/9-3.
Footnote 4: 5 ILCS 315/3.
Chapter 11
OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT (OEM)
1-11-1: SHORT TITLE:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 22/438
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF OAK BROOK,
ILLINOIS. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed:
COORDINATOR: The Coordinator of the Oak Brook OEM, appointed as provided by this Chapter, who has the duty to coordinate the emergency
management program of the Village.
DISASTER: An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property from any natural or technological cause, including,
but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, tornado, wind, storm, hazardous materials spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert
danger or damage, epidemic, blight, air contamination, extended periods of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, critical shortages of
essential fuels and energy, riot, explosion or hostile military or paramilitary action.
DISASTER TRAINING EXERCISE: A planned event designed specifically to simulate an actual disaster which will provide emergency operations training
for emergency response personnel. Actual response by EMA volunteers to local emergency situations not qualifying as "disasters", as defined in this
Section, is considered a disaster training exercise; provided, however, that performance of the usual and customary functions of a political subdivision
(e.g., police, fire or emergency medical services) is not included within this definition of a disaster training exercise.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT: The efforts of the Village of Oak Brook to develop, plan, analyze, conduct, provide and maintain programs for disaster
mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery.
EMERGENCY OPERATING PLAN: The written plan of the Village of Oak Brook describing the organization, mission and functions of the government and
supporting services for responding to and recovering from disasters.
EMERGENCY SERVICES: The coordination of such functions by the Village of Oak Brook, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, as may be necessary or proper to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury and damage resulting from any natural or technological
causes. These functions include, but are not limited to, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning
services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense, evacuation of persons from stricken or threatened areas,
emergency-assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian protection, together
with all other activities necessary or incidental to protecting life and property.
MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM: The utilization of personnel to be dispatched by the Governor, or, if he so authorizes, by the Director of the Illinois Emergency
Management Agency to supplement the State and political subdivisions for emergency management programs in response to a disaster.
OAK BROOK OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT (OEM): The agency established by this Chapter within the Village municipal government
responsible for implementation of the overall emergency management program of the Village and with private organizations, other local political
subdivisions, special taxing districts, the State and Federal governments under the direction and control of the Village President and administration and
operation of the Emergency Management Coordinator as appointed.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION: Any county, city, village or incorporated town, or township if the township is in a county having a population of more than two
million (2,000,000).
PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER: The Village President or, in his absence or disability, the interim successor pursuant to Chapter 12 of this Title and
Resolution 95-ESD-R-641, and as hereinafter amended.
VOLUNTEER: Any sworn individual or recognized and approved group, corporation, agency or other entity contributing service, equipment or facilities to
the Oak Brook Emergency Management Agency without remuneration. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-11-3: POLICY AND PROCEDURES:
A. Because of the possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and destructiveness resulting from the explosion in this or in a
neighboring municipality of atomic (devices) or other means, or by foreign invasion, or by civil disturbance, or by means of sabotage or other disloyal
actions within, or from fire, flood, earthquake, tornado or other natural or technological causes, and in order to provide a means by which the Village
may effectively respond, preserving the lives and property of its citizens and protecting the public peace, health and safety in the event of such a
disaster, it is found and declared necessary to:
1. Create an Oak Brook office of Emergency Management (OEM).
2. Confer upon the Village President the extraordinary powers provided herein.
3. Ensure that each Village department plan prior to an emergency in order to: a) minimize the effects of the disaster; b) enable timely and efficient
response during the disaster and post-disaster periods; and c) identify and mitigate future potential hazards.
4. Offer to and receive mutual aid from other political subdivisions and public entities with respect to the carrying out of an emergency management
program.
B. It is further declared to be the purpose of this Chapter and the policy of the Village that emergency management shall be based upon a comprehensive
document that shall designate emergency management organization, responsibilities, procedures and personnel including agents, employees and
officials of the Village, and those of other public and private entities who have emergency management responsibilities and capabilities. (Ord. G-552,
2-28-1995)
1-11-4: LIMITATIONS:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 23/438
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to:
A. Interfere with the course or conduct of a labor dispute,except that actions otherwise authorized by this Chapter or other laws may be taken when
necessary to mitigate imminent or existing danger to public health or safety.
B. Interfere with dissemination of news or comment of public affairs; but any communications facility or organization (including but not limited to radio and
television stations, wire services and newspapers) may be requested to transmit or print public service messages furnishing information or instructions
in connection with a disaster.
C. Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces, firefighting forces, units of the Armed Forces of the United States or of any personnel thereof,
when on active duty; but State, local and interjurisdictional emergency operation plans shall place reliance upon forces available for performance of
functions related to emergency management.
D. Limit, modify or abridge the authority of the Village President and the Board of Trustees to exercise any other powers vested in them under the
constitution, statutes or common law of this State, independent of or in conjunction with any provisions of this Chapter or prohibit any contract or
association pursuant to article VII, section 10 of the Illinois Constitution. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-11-5: APPOINTMENTS AND ORGANIZATION:
A. The Village President is hereby authorized and directed to create an Oak Brook OEM, utilizing to the fullest extent the existing agencies within the
Village. The Village Manager, by virtue of his office, shall be appointed Emergency Management Coordinator of the Village by the Village President
and be responsible for emergency management organization, administration and operations under the control and direction of the Village President,
and shall possess or acquire at least the minimum training requirements as established by the accrediting agency of the Village emergency
management program. The Village President shall also designate three (3) emergency interim successors to the Emergency Management Coordinator
as provided for in Chapter 12 of this Title.
B. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall appoint an Assistant Emergency Management Coordinator, whose duty it shall be to implement and
conduct the administration and operation of the Village OEM, under control and direction of the Coordinator. The Assistant Coordinator shall possess
at least the minimum training requirements as established by the accrediting agency of the Village OEM, and shall work to enhance and improve his
emergency management knowledge and skills through educational opportunities offered or approved by recognized emergency management
agencies.
C. The organization shall further consist of the following:
1. In addition to the Village President, Coordinator and Assistant Coordinator, the emergency management staff shall include the Assistant Village
Manager, Fire Chief, Police Chief, Public Works Director, Village Engineer, Village Clerk and Finance Director, or their respective designees. Such
assistants and other employees as are deemed necessary for the proper function of the OEM shall be considered part of the emergency
management staff during the time they are so designated by the Coordinator.
2. The employees, equipment and facilities of all Village departments, boards, institutions and commissions shall participate in the emergency services
activity. Duties assigned to a Village department shall be the same or similar to the normal duties of the department.
3. Sworn volunteers or volunteers of other designated agencies whose service has been accepted by the Village may perform functions which include,
but are not limited to, clerical assistance, temporary shelter operations, transportation, participation in traffic and crowd control, communications, first
aid, severe weather tracking and spotting, search parties, public relations/education activities, training, training exercises with emergency and
nonemergency assistance to other agencies and jurisdictions outside Village limits and such emergency management agency functions as shall be
prescribed in and by the State Emergency Management Agency plan and program prepared by the Governor, and such others, rules and
regulations as may be promulgated by the Governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required
pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality, special taxing district or quasi-municipality entered into when
deemed to be in the best interest of the Village, or as provided by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act of 19921, as now and hereinafter
as amended.
4. Any person designated by the Oak Brook OEM may also be designated as a member of a mobile support team created by the State Coordinator of
the State Emergency Management Agency as provided by law. Any Village employee serving as a member of a mobile support team shall receive
compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to such employment while serving in such capacity. Any member of a
mobile support team who is not a Village employee, while serving, shall receive from the State such compensation as provided by law. (Ord. G-552,
2-28-1995)
1-11-6: DUTIES OF OAK BROOK OEM:
A. The Oak Brook OEM shall be the lead agency in the development, maintenance and revision of Village emergencyoperating plan.
B. In the development of the Village emergency operating plan, the OEM shall interrelate with business, labor, industry, special taxing districts, other
governmental agencies, civic and volunteer organizations and community leaders.
C. The Oak Brook OEM shall:
1. Provide general direction and control in the response to a disaster as it exists within the Village;
2. Determine requirements of the Village for food, clothing, shelter and other necessities in the event of an emergency;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 24/438
3. Annually review the Village emergency operating plan and recommend to the Village President revisions pursuant to County, State and Federal
rules and guidelines;
4. Satisfy the requirements of, and submit the required documents for accreditation of the OEM of the Village on a regular and continual basis, to the
appropriate agency as currently directed by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency;
5. Prepare and distribute to all appropriate officials, a complete copy of the Village emergency operating plan which contains a clear and complete
statement of the emergency responsibilities of all local departments and officials and of the disaster chain of command;
6. Establish and maintain a register of government and private response resources available for use in a disaster;
7. Make available an earthquake awareness program, a tornado awareness program and other hazard specific programs, and be able to provide
earthquake, tornado and other specific and general hazard preparedness literature to individuals, schools, community groups, newspapers and local
radio and TV and civic organizations;
8. Disseminate warnings, advisories and other related emergency information regarding any threats to any part of the Village, based on information
from recognized agencies and local authorities, and in accordance with the provisions of the Village emergency operating plan;
9. Prepare for issuance by the Village President, declarations, proclamations and regulations as may be necessary or appropriate in coping with
disasters;
10. Cooperate with the Federal, State and County governments and any public or private agency or entity in achieving any purpose of this Chapter
and in promoting and implementing programs for disaster prevention, preparation, response and recovery;
11. Establish and maintain an emergency operating center (EOC), designate an alternate EOC and designate other appropriate space for an
emergency management office within an appropriate Village structure;
12. Provide, maintain and supplement a warning system which is capable of reaching to all occupancies of the Village;
13. Coordinate the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment personnel and facilities of the Village for emergency service purposes;
14. Do all other things necessary, incidental or appropriate for the implementation of this Chapter. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-11-7: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT POWERS:
A. The Village President shall have the general direction and control of the Oak Brook OEM and shall be responsible for the carrying out of the provisions
of this Section.
B. The Village President shall annually notify the Illinois Emergency Management Agency of the manner in which the Village is carrying out its emergency
management responsibilities. This shall be done through the annual accreditation process whereby the Village President shall submit a copy of the
Village emergency operating plan with a letter, executed not more than sixty (60) days prior, stating approval of the plan, signed by the Village
President, to the designated accrediting agency.
C. In performing his duties under this Section, the Village President is authorized to cooperate with State and Federal governments and with other
municipalities and political subdivisions in all matters pertaining to emergency management operations defined in this Section.
D. In performing his duties under this Section, the Village President is further authorized:
1. To make, amend and rescind all lawful necessary orders, rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this Section within the limits of the
authority conferred upon him.
2. To cause to be prepared a comprehensive emergency operating plan for the Village, which plan shall be integrated into and coordinated with
emergency management plans and programs of the Federal and State governments and other political subdivisions whenever possible and which
plan may include:
a. Mitigation of injury and damage caused by disaster;
b. Prompt and effective response to disaster;
c. Emergency relief;
d. Identification of areas particularly vulnerable to disasters;
e. Recommendations for zoning, building and other land-use controls, safety measures for securing permanent structures and other mitigation
measures designed to eliminate or reduce disasters or their impact;
f. Assistance to local officials in designing local emergency action plans;
g. Authorization and procedures for the erection or other construction of temporary works designed to mitigate danger, damage or loss from flood or
other disaster;
h. Preparation and distribution to the appropriate municipal officials of a municipal catalog of Federal, State and private assistance programs;
i. Organization of municipal manpower and chains of command;
j. Coordination of Federal, State and local emergency management activities;
k. Other necessary matters.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 25/438
3. In accordance with the EOP and out of funds appropriated for such purposes, to requisition and procure supplies, medicines, materials and
equipment to institute training programs and public information programs, and to take all other preparatory steps including the partial or full
mobilization of emergency management agencies in advance of actual disaster to insure the furnishing of adequately trained and equipped forces
for disaster response and recovery.
4. Out of funds appropriated for such purposes, to make such studies and surveys of the industries, resources and facilities in this Village as may be
necessary to ascertain the capabilities of the Village for emergency management phases of mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery and to
plan for the most efficient emergency use thereof.
5. Upon information and recommendation of the Village emergency management staff, to declare a state of disaster, and execute the required disaster
declaration document at such time as reasonably possible, in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-11-11 of this Chapter.
6. To exercise the emergency power and authority necessary to fulfill his general powers and duties as defined by law. The judgment of the Village
President shall be the sole criteria necessary to invoke emergency powers provided by this Chapter. The Board of Trustees may convene to perform
its legislative and administrative powers as the situation demands, and shallreceive reports relative to the emergency service activities. Nothing in
this Chapter shall be construed as bridging or curtailing the powers or restrictions of the Village President and/or Board of Trustees as defined by
law.
E. The Board of Trustees may, on recommendation of the Village Manager, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the Village in a
position to combat effectively any disaster, and to protect the public health and safety, protect property and provide emergency assistance to victims in
the case of such disaster. In the event of any disaster, the Village Manager is authorized, on behalf of the Village, to procure such services, supplies,
equipment or materials, as may be necessary for such purposes in view of exigency, without formalities normally prescribed by law. If the Board of
Trustees meets at the time of such disaster, the Village Manager shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by the Village Board. (Ord.
G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-11-8: FINANCING:
A. Funds to prepare for and meet disaster shall be made available out of the Village's general corporate fund.
B. It is the Board's intent that the first recourse shall be to funds regularly allocated to the OEM or as otherwise specifically designated. If the Village
President finds that demands placed upon these funds in coping with a particular disaster are unreasonably great, he may make application for funds
from the State Disaster Relief Fund. If monies available from the Fund are insufficient, and if the Village President finds that other sources of money to
cope with the disaster are not available or are insufficient, he shall issue a call for an immediate session of the Board of Trustees for the purpose of
enacting ordinances as the Board of Trustees may deem necessary to transfer and expend monies appropriated for other purposes, or borrow monies
from the United States government or other public or private sources. If less than a quorum of the members of the Board of Trustees is capable of
convening in session to enact such ordinances for the transfer, expenditure or load of such monies, the Village President is authorized to carry out
these decisions until such time as a quorum of the Board of Trustees can convene.
C. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to limit the Village President's authority to apply for, administer and expend grants, gifts or
payments in aid of disaster mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery.
D. The Board of Trustees may make appropriations for emergency management operations in the manner provided by law for making appropriations for
the ordinary expenses of the Village. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-11-9: OEM PERSONNEL INJURY OR DEATH COMPENSATION:
A. Oak Brook OEM personnel who, while engaged in a disaster or disaster training exercise, suffer disease, injury or death shall, for the purposes of
benefits under the Worker's Compensation Act or Worker's Occupational Diseases Act only, be deemed to be employees of the State, if: 1) the
claimant is duly qualified and enrolled (sworn in) as a volunteer of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency or an emergency management agency
accredited by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency; and 2) if the claimant was participating in an actual "disaster", as defined in Section 1-11-2
of this Chapter, or the exercise participated in was specifically and expressly approved by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency. The Illinois
Emergency Management Agency shall use the same criteria for approving an exercise and utilizing State volunteers as required for any political
subdivision. The computation of benefits payable under either of these Acts shall be based on the income commensurate with comparable State
employees doing the same work or income from the person's regular employment, whichever is greater.
B. If any person who is entitled to receive benefits through the application of this Section receives in connection with the disease, injury or death giving
rise to such entitlement, benefits under an act of Congress or Federal program, benefits payable under this Section shall be reduced to the extent of
the benefits received under that other Act or program. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-11-10: TRAINING EXERCISE NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES:
A. Prior to conducting a disaster training exercise, the Village President and the Coordinator shall provide the area media with written notification of the
disaster training exercise. Such notification shall indicate that information relating to the disaster training exercise shall not be released to the public
until the commencement of the exercise. The notification shall also contain a request that the notice be so posted that all relevant media personnel are
advised of the disaster training exercise before it begins.
B. During the conduct of such disaster training exercise, all messages, two-way radio communications, briefings, status reports, news releases and other
oral or written communications shall begin and end with the following statement: "This is an exercise message". (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-11-11: LOCAL DISASTER DECLARATIONS:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 26/438
A. A local disaster may be declared only by the Village President, or his interim emergency successor; it shall not be continued or renewed for a period in
excess of seven (7) daysexcept by or with the consent of the Board of Trustees. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local
disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the Village Clerk.
B. The effect of a declaration of a local disaster is to activate the emergency operating plan of the Village and to authorize the furnishing of aid and
assistance thereunder.
C. A local disaster emergency may not be declared by an official (fire chief, police chief, etc.) from another jurisdiction who is operating in the Village
under a mutual aid agreement.
D. During a local disaster emergency, the Village President may suspend the provisions of any Village ordinance prescribing procedures for the conduct
of Village business, or the orders, rules and regulations of any Village agency, if strict compliance with the provisions thereof would in any way prevent,
hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency, as authorized by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act of 1992; provided,
that after the Board of Trustees meets at such time, the Village President shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by the Board of
Trustees.
E. Whenever the Village President determines, after an investigation, that a dangerous situation or potentially dangerous situation exists which could
cause death to individuals or serious injury to property or the health and welfare of the public, the Village President may declare that a state of
emergency exists. The extraordinary powers may not be exercised until a state of emergency exists and shall provide that the Village President may
not exercise such extraordinary power and authority except after signing under oath a statement finding that such standards have been met, setting
forth facts to substantiate such findings, describing the nature of the emergency and declaring that a state of emergency exists. This statement shall
be filed with the Village Clerk as soon as practical. A state of emergency shall expire not later than the adjournment of the first regular meeting of the
corporate authorities after the state of emergency is declared. A subsequent state of emergency may be declared if necessary. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-
1995)
1-11-12: TESTING OF DISASTER WARNING DEVICES:
A. The testing of outdoor warning sirens shall be held only on the first Tuesday of each month at ten thirty o'clock (10:30) A.M. or during disaster training
exercises that are specifically and expressly approved in advance by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency.
B. The testing of the Oak Brook community early warning system (CEWS) and any other Village based warning systems shall beconducted the first
Tuesday of each month at ten thirty o'clock (10:30) A.M., or as otherwise needed to assure proper operation of the system. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-11-13: MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS:
The Coordinator of the OEM may, in collaboration with other political subdivisions, public agencies and special taxing districts within its immediate vicinity
(bounding the Village of Oak Brook and/or within a reasonable travel distance) develop or cause to be developed mutual aid agreements with other
political subdivisions, public agencies and special taxing districts within this State for reciprocal disaster response and recovery assistance in case a
disaster is too great to be dealt with unassisted. Such mutual aid shall not, however, be effective unless and until approved by each of such political
subdivisions, public agencies or special taxing districts. Such arrangements shall be consistent with the State and local emergency operations plan and
State and local emergency management program and in the event of such a disaster it shall be the duty of each emergency management agency to
render assistance in accordance with the provisions of such mutual aid agreements. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-11-14: COMMUNICATIONS:
The Oak Brook OEM shall ascertain what means exist for rapid and efficient communications in times of disaster. The agency shall consider the
desirability of supplementing these communications resources or of integrating them into a comprehensive system or network. In studying the character
and feasibility of any system or its several parts, the agency shall evaluate the possibility of multi-purpose use thereof for general and local government
purposes. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-11-15: IMMUNITY:
Neither the Village, nor, except in cases of wilful misconduct, the Village President, the Village Manager or the officers, employees, volunteers or
representatives engaged in any emergency management response or recovery activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with this Chapter
or any rule or regulations promulgated pursuant to this Chapter is liable for the death of or any injury to persons, or damage to property, as a result of
such activity. This Section does not, however, affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under this Chapter
under the Worker's Compensation Act or the Worker's Occupational Disease Act, or under any pension law, and this Section does not affect the right of
any such person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-11-16: PROFESSIONS, TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS:
If such "disaster", as is defined in Section 1-11-2 of this Chapter, occurs in Oak Brook and the services of persons who are competent to practice any
profession, trade or occupation are required to cope with the disaster and it appears that the number of persons licensed or registered in Oak Brook to
practice such profession, trade or occupation may be insufficient for such purpose, then any persons who are licensed elsewhere to practice such
profession, trade or occupation may, if a member of another political subdivision rendering aid in Oak Brook pursuant to agreement with that political
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 27/438
subdivision and upon the request of the Village, or if otherwise requested to do so by the Village President or the Board of Trustees, during the time the
disaster continues, practice such profession, trade or occupation in Oak Brook without being licensed or registered in the Village. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-11-17: AUTHORITY OVER GIFTS, GRANTS OR LOANS:
Whenever the Federal government or any agency thereof or whenever any person shall offer to the Village services, equipment, supplies, materials or
funds by way of gift or grant for purposes of emergency management, the Village, acting through the Village President or through the Board of Trustees,
may authorize an agent of the Village to receive such services, equipment, materials or funds on behalf of the Village. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-11-18: ORDERS, RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. The Village President shall file a copy of every rule, regulation or order and any amendment thereof made pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter in
the office of the Village Clerk. Upon the declaration of a disaster by the Village President as is described in Section 1-11-11 of this Chapter, the
provision relating to the effective date of any rule, regulation, order or amendment issued pursuant to this Chapter and during the state of disaster is
abrogated, and such rules, regulation, order or amendment shall become effective immediately upon being filed with the Village Clerk.
B. The Oak Brook OEM established pursuant to this Chapter, and the Coordinator thereof, shall execute and enforce such orders, rules and regulations
as may be made by the Governor of the State under the authority of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act of 1992 to maintain the
accreditation with the agency so designated by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency.
C. The Oak Brook OEM shall have available for inspection at its office and at the Village Clerk's office all orders, rulesand regulations made by the
Governor or under the Governor's authority and furnished to the Village by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-11-19: UTILIZATION OF EXISTING AGENCY, FACILITIES AND PERSONNEL:
In carrying out the provisions of this Chapter, the Village President and the Coordinator of the Oak Brook OEM are directed to utilize to the fullest all
personnel, equipment, supplies and facilities of the Village in their preparations for disaster mitigation. All officers and personnel of the various Village
divisions and departments are directed, as practicable, to assist with this mitigation process. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-11-20: OEM PERSONNEL OATH:
Each person, whether compensated or noncompensated, who is appointed to serve in any capacity in the Oak Brook OEM shall, before entering upon his
duties, take an oath, in writing, before a registered notary public in this Village, which oath shall be filed with the Coordinator of the Oak Brook OEM and
which oath shall be substantially as follows:
I, ________________________________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and
private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I
will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor
have I been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or this State by
force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Village of Oak Brook, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political
party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or this State by force or violence.
(Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
Chapter 12
CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT
1-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless their context clearly requires otherwise:
DISASTER: An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property from any natural or technological cause, including,
but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, tornado, wind, storm, hazardous materials spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert
danger or damage, epidemic, blight, air contamination, extended periods of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, critical shortages of
essential fuels and energy, riot, explosion or hostile military or paramilitary action.
EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR: A person designated pursuant to this Chapter for possible temporary succession to the powers and duties, but
not the office, of a Village officer in the event that such officer or any duly authorized deputy is unavailable to exercise the powers and discharge the
duties of the office.
UNAVAILABLE: Shall mean either that a vacancy in office exists and there is no deputy authorized to exercise all of the powers and discharge the duties
of the office, or that the lawful incumbent of the office (including any deputy exercising the powers and discharging the duties of an office because of a
vacancy) and his duly authorized deputy are absent or unable, for physical, mental or legal reasons, to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of
the office. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 28/438
1-12-2: INTERIM SUCCESSORS:
A. Elective Officers: Within thirty (30) days after first entering upon the duties of his office, the Village President, Village Trustees and the Village Clerk
shall designate such number of emergency interim successors to his office andspecify their rank in order of succession so that there will be not less
than three (3) nor more than seven (7) emergency interim successors for the office.
B. Appointive Officers: Each member of the emergency management staff, as provided in subsection 1-11-5C1 of this Title shall designate such number of
emergency interim successors by name, title or function and specify their rank in order of succession so that there will be not less than three (3) nor
more than seven (7) emergency interim successors for each member.
C. Review Of Designations: Each elective and appointive officer specified in subsections A and B of this Section, shall review and, as necessary, promptly
revise the designations of emergency interim successors to ensure that at all times there are at least three (3) such qualified emergency interim
successors for each position specified.
D. Qualifications: No person shall be designated to serve as an emergency interim successor unless he may under the constitution and statutes of this
State, this Code or other ordinances of this Village, hold the office of the person to whose powers and duties he is designated to succeed, but no
provision of any ordinance prohibiting an officer or employee of this Village from holding another office shall be applicable to any emergency interim
successor.
E. Status Of Emergency Interim Successor: A person designated as an emergency interim successor holds that designation at the pleasure of the
designator. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-12-3: ASSUMPTION OF POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICER BY EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR:
If, in the event of a disaster, any officer named in subsections 1-12-2A and B of this Chapter is unavailable, his emergency interim successor highest in
rank in order of succession who is not unavailable shall, except for the power and duty to appoint emergency interim successors, exercise the powers and
discharge the duties of such officer. An emergency interim successor shall exercise these powers and discharge these duties only until such time as the
lawful incumbent officer or an emergency interim successor higher in rank in order of succession exercises, or resumes the exercise of, the powers and
discharge of the duties of the office, or until, where an actual vacancy exists, a successor is appointed to fill such vacancy or is elected and qualified as
provided by law. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-12-4: RECORDING AND PUBLICATION:
The name, address and rank in order of succession of each duly authorized deputy shall be filed with the Village Clerk andeach designation, replacement
or change in order of succession of any emergency interim successor shall become effective when the designator files with the Village Clerk the
successor's name, address and rank in order of succession. The Village Clerk shall keep on file all such data regarding duly authorized deputies and
emergency interim successors and it shall be open to public inspection. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-12-5: FORMALITIES OF TAKING OFFICE:
At the time of their designation, emergency interim successors shall take such oath and do such other things, if any, as may be required to qualify them to
exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office to which they may succeed. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
1-12-6: QUORUM AND VOTE REQUIREMENTS:
In the event of a disaster:
A. Quorum requirements for the Board shall be suspended; and
B. Where the affirmative vote of a specified proportion of members for approval of an ordinance, resolution or other action would otherwise be required,
the same proportion of those voting thereon shall be sufficient. (Ord. G-552, 2-28-1995)
Chapter 13
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
1-13-1: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by reference the comprehensive plan of the Village of Oak Brook, dated June 1990, together with plates 1 through 10
incorporated therein. (Ord. S-188, 6-26-1969; Ord. S-296, 1-22-1974; Ord. G-458, 12-11-1990)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 29/438
Chapter 14
FEES
1-14-1: FEES ESTABLISHED:
The following fees are hereby established and shall be payable upon submission of an application, except as otherwise specifically noted herein, for the
following:
A. Application for amendment under the $750.00
zoning ordinance
In addition to the above fees, all applicants shall reimburse the village for the publication cost of the public notice within thirty (30) days of the date the
village seeks reimbursement for such charges.
B. Application for special use permit:
Zoning ordinance $750.00
In addition to the above fees, all applicants shall reimburse the village for the publication cost of the public notice and shall reimburse the village for
any outside consulting review charges within thirty (30) days of the date the village seeks reimbursement for such charges.
C. Application for variation under the zoning $750.00
ordinance or the storm water regulations
In addition to the above fees, all applicants shall reimburse the village for the publication cost of the public notice and shall reimburse the village for
any outside consulting review charges within thirty (30) days of the date the village seeks reimbursement for such charges.
D. Application for appeal under the zoning $300.00
ordinance or the storm water regulations
In addition to the above fees, all applicants shall reimburse the village for any outside consulting review charges within thirty (30) days of the date the
village seeks reimbursement for such charges.
E. Application for subdivision:
1. Preliminary plat, per lot $ 50.00
Minimum fee 750.00
2. Final plat 750.00
3. Plans and specifications: The following fees for the review of engineering plans and specifications shall be paid to the village at the time the
documents are submitted for review:
Estimated Cost Of
Construction Of
Land Improvements
Basic Minimum Fee
(As A Percentage
Of Estimated Cost)
Less than $10,000.00 $275.00
$10,001.00 to $20,000.00 3.00%
$20,001.00 to $50,000.00 2.50%
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 2.25%
$100,001.00 and over 2.00%
In addition to the above fees, all applicants shall reimburse the village for any outside consulting review charges within thirty (30) days of the date
the village seeks reimbursement for such charges.
4. Engineering inspection: At the time the subdivision plat is presented for final approval, a fee for inspection of the improvement shall be paid to the
village in the amount indicated by the following table:
Estimated Cost Of
Construction Of
Land Improvements
Fee
(As A Percentage
Of Estimated Cost)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 30/438
Less than $10,000.00 $250.00
$10,001.00 to $20,000.00 2.25%
$20,001.00 to $50,000.00 2.00%
$50,001.00 and over 1.50%
The above fees shall be for the periodic inspection of the improvements. In addition to the above fees, all applicants shall reimburse the village for
any outside consulting inspection charges within thirty (30) days of the date the village seeks reimbursement for such charges.
5. Resubmissions: Upon resubmission of any final plat which has not been recorded because of noncompliance with the provisions of section 14-4-8
of this code, the fees enumerated under subsections E2, E3 and E4 of this section shall be paid, notwithstanding any prior payment.
F.
Application for amendment or variation to the subdivision regulations $750.00
In addition to the above fees, all applicants shall reimburse the village for the publication cost of the public notice within thirty (30) days of the
date the village seeks reimbursement for such charges.
G.
Application for certificate of appropriateness in the historic Graue Mill Gateway area. $
500.00
H.
Application for time extension: preliminary and final subdivision plat, special use, and variation. 125.00
I.
Application for planned developments under the zoning ordinance:
1.
New planned development or major change to an existing planned development base fee: 1,500.00
Plus for each waiver or variation to this code 500.00
Plus all applicable third party costs and recoverable expenses.
2.
Minor change to an approved planned development 750.00
Plus for each waiver or variation to this code 500.00
Plus all applicable third party costs and recoverable expenses.
3.
Initial escrow deposit:
From which anticipated third party costs and recoverable expenses are to be drawn. No interest shall be payable on any
such escrow account.
500.00
(Ord. G-706, 11-26-2002; Ord. G-925, 5-25-2010)
1-14-2: WAIVER OF FEES:
Notwithstanding any other provision in this code, the fees established within this chapter, and plan review and inspection fees as required in this or other
sections of this code, shall be waived and not required, except for outside consulting charges, for:
A. Any municipal corporation;
B. Any homeowners' association organized as a not for profit corporation;
C. Any public utility performing work in public ways or on public easements, whose franchise agreement states that it shall not pay said fees for
performing work in the public ways or on public easements; and
D. Any telecommunications retailer that is currently paying a telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee to the village.
Any charitable organization, as defined in an act to regulate solicitation and collection of funds for charitable purposes, may request a waiver of fees
established within this chapter, and plan review and inspection fees as required in this or other sections of this code, except for outside consulting
charges. Upon such requests, the corporate authorities of the village of Oak Brook may, in their discretion, waive any such fees or charges by motion.
(Ord. G-1015, 11-26-2013)
Chapter 15
CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 31/438
1-15-1: PURPOSE:
The stated purpose of this chapter is to provide for the fair and efficient enforcement of village ordinances as may be allowed by law and directed by
ordinance, through an administrative adjudication of violations of such village ordinances and establishing a schedule of fines and penalties, and authority
and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties. (Ord. G-944, 3-8-2011)
1-15-2: CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
A. There is hereby established a code hearing department and system for violations of traffic regulations, parking regulations, and other ordinance
violations as specifically set forth in this chapter, the function of which is to expedite the adjudication of certain code and ordinance violations
described herein in the manner set out in state statute and this chapter.
B. The adoption of this chapter does not preclude the village from using other lawful methods to enforce provisions of its code and ordinances. (Ord. G-
944, 3-8-2011)
1-15-3: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION:
The Oak Brook code hearing department shall be composed of a hearing officer, a code enforcement administrator and hearing room security personnel,
with the power and authority as hereinafter set forth:
A. Hearing Officer:
1. The hearing officer shall preside over all adjudicatory hearings and shall have the following powers and duties:
a. Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is relevant to the existence of the code violation;
b. Issuing subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant testimony at the hearing, upon the request of the parties or their
representatives;
c. Preserving and authenticating the record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
d. Issuing and signing a written finding, decision and order stating whether a code violation exists; and
e. Imposing penalties consistent with applicable code provisions and assessing costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation, except
however, that in no event shall the hearing officer have authority to impose a penalty of incarceration or any other penalty in excess of that
allowed by law.
2. Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings, the hearing officer shall have successfully completed a formal training program which
includes the following:
a. Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings which the hearing officer shall conduct;
b. Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they will adjudicate;
c. Observation of administrative hearings; and
d. Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuing final orders.
In addition, a Hearing Officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State for at least three (3) years.
B. Office Of The Ordinance Enforcement Administrator: The Ordinance Enforcement Administrator is authorized and directed to:
1. Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of Village ordinance violations as may be permitted by law and directed by
ordinance.
2. Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required under this chapter or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this
chapter.
3. Input of violation notice information.
4. Establish court dates and notice dates.
5. Record fines and payments.
6. Issue payment receipts.
7. Issue succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final determination of liability.
8. Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final determination of liability.
9. Certify copies of final determinations of an ordinance violation adjudicated pursuant to this chapter, and any reports verifying the final determination
of any violation liability which was issued in accordance with this chapter, and the laws of the State.
10. Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection agencies and pursuit of all postjudgment remedies available by law. (Ord. G-944, 3-8-
2011)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 32/438
1-15-4: VIOLATIONS SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION:
Violations of this Code subject to administrative adjudication under this chapter shall be:
A. Those set forth in subsection 4-1-23F1 of this Code, "unlawful possession and consumption by persons underage";
B. Those set forth in sections 6-1-1 through 6-1-18 of this Code;
C. Those set forth in sections 6-2-1 through 6-2-8 of this Code;
D. Those set forth in sections 6-3-1 through 6-3-7 of this Code;
E. Those set forth in sections 7-1-100 through 7-1-1431 of this Code, including the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/1 et seq., that are adopted into this Code by reference, for which a court appearance is not required pursuant to Illinois Supreme Court rule 551, are
not classified as traffic violations governing the movement of vehicles, and are not reportable offenses under section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-204;
F. Those set forth in title 4, chapter 2, "Taxicabs", of this Code;
G. Those set forth in title 4, chapter 10, "Limousines", of this Code;
H. Those set forth in title 4, chapter 4, article A, "Commercial Solicitation", of this Code;
I. Those set forth in title 4, chapter 4, article B, "Noncommercial Solicitation", of this Code; and
J. Those set forth in title 4, chapter 6, "Tobacco And Alternative Nicotine Products", of this Code. (Ord. G-963, 2-14-2012; Ord. G-998, 4-23-2013; Ord. G-
1000, 5-28-2013; Ord. G-1072, 2-9-2016; Ord. G-1127, 3-27-2018)
1-15-5: PROCEDURE:
The system of administrative adjudication of any Village ordinance violation authorized to be adjudicated hereunder, shall be in accordance with the
following procedures:
A. Violation notice of any ordinance violation shall be issued by the persons authorized under this Code and shall contain information and shall be
certified and constitute prima facie evidence of the violation cited as hereinafter set forth.
B. Police officers and community service officers, as well as other specifically authorized individuals, shall have the authority to issue violation notices.
C. Any individual authorized hereby to issue violation notices and who detects an ordinance violation is authorized to issue notice of violation thereof and
shall make service thereof as is hereinafter set forth.
D. The violation notice shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following information:
1. The name of the party violating the ordinance.
2. The date, time, and place of the violation.
3. The particular ordinance violated.
4. The names of the witnesses to the alleged violation.
5. The signature and identification number of the person issuing the notice.
6. The date, time, and place of the administrative hearing in which the alleged violation may be contested on its merits.
E. Service of any violation notice shall be made by the person issuing such notice by:
1. Hand delivering a notice of violation of any ordinance violation to the alleged violator;
2. Handing the notice to the responsible person or leaving the notice with a person twelve (12) years of age or older at the residence of the
responsible person; or
3. Mailing the notice by first class mail to the person responsible for the ordinance violation.
F. The correctness of facts contained in any violation notice shall be verified by the person issuing said notice by:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 33/438
1. Signing his/her name to the notice at the time of issuance; or
2. In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a single certificate, to be kept by the ordinance enforcement administrator,
attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under his/her control.
G. An original or facsimile of the violation notice shall be retained by the ordinance enforcement administrator and kept as a record in the ordinary course
of business of the village.
H. Any violation notice issued, signed, and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie
evidence of the correctness of the facts alleged in the violation notice. (Ord. G-944, 3-8-2011)
1-15-6: SUBPOENAS:
At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses to appear and give
testimony at the hearing. (Ord. G-944, 3-8-2011)
1-15-7: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
An administrative hearing to adjudicate any alleged ordinance violation on its merits shall be held at the date, time and place as set forth by the ordinance
enforcement administrator and in the violation notice. All administrative hearings shall be recorded and shall culminate in a determination of liability or
nonliability, made by the hearing officer, who shall consider facts and/or testimony without the application of the formal or technical rules of evidence.
Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonable prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
The hearing officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and penalties in accordance with section 1-15-10 of this chapter. Persons
appearing to contest the alleged violation on its merits may be represented by counsel at their own expense. The burden of proof shall be on the alleged
offender to refute the prima facie case set forth in the verified notice of violation.
If on the date set for the hearing the defendant or his or her attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the defendant in default and shall
proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation. (Ord. G-944, 3-8-2011)
1-15-8: FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER:
At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to whether or not
a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as findings, decision and order. The findings, decision and order
shall include: a) the hearing officer's findings of fact; b) a decision of whether or not a code violation exists based upon the findings of fact; and c) an order
that states the sanction or dismisses the case if a violation is not proven. A monetary sanction for a violation under this chapter shall not exceed the
amount provided for in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.2 in its current form and as amended from time to time. A copy of the findings, decision, and
order shall be served on the form and as amended from time to time. A copy of findings, decision and order shall be served on the defendant within five
(5) days after it is issued. Service shall be in the same manner as described in subsection 1-15-5E of this chapter. Payment of any penalty or fine and the
disposition of fine money shall be in the same manner as set forth in this chapter, unless the corporate authorities provide otherwise. (Ord. G-944, 3-8-
2011)
1-15-9: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any final decision of a hearing officer that a code violation does or does not exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review under
the Illinois administrative review law. The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review in the circuit court of the county in
which the village is located. (Ord. G-944, 3-8-2011)
1-15-10: JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER:
A. Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure
to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the administrative review law shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as such, may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
B. After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the code
violation, the village may command a proceeding in the circuit court of the county in which the village is located for purpose of obtaining a judgment of
findings, decision and order. Nothing in this section shall prevent the village from consolidating multiple findings, decisions and orders against a person
in such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action, the village shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision and order, which shall be
accompanied by a certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision and order, was issued in accordance with this chapter and
the applicable provisions of this code. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided that the total amount of
fines, other sanctions, and costs imposed by the findings, decision, and order does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the
court is satisfied that the findings, decision and order was entered in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the applicable provisions of
this code and that the defendant had an opportunity for a hearing under this chapter and for judicial review as provided in this chapter:
1. The court shall render judgment in favor of the village and against the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order, plus
costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money;
2. The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that are requested by the village to enforce the order of the hearing officer to correct a
code violation. (Ord. G-944, 3-8-2011)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 34/438
1-15-11: HEARING PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
This chapter does not preclude the village from using other methods to enforce the provisions of this code. (Ord. G-944, 3-8-2011)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
PLAN COMMISSION
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERS:
There is hereby established for the village a plan commission consisting of a chairperson and six (6) other members to be appointed by the village
president subject to confirmation by the board of trustees. (Ord. G-104, 5-27-1969; 2000 Code)
2-1-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The powers of the plan commission are as follows:
A. To prepare and recommend to the village president and board a comprehensive plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of the
village. Such plan may be developed in whole or in separate geographical or functional parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the official
comprehensive plan, or part thereof, of the village. This plan may include reasonable requirements with reference to streets, alleys, public grounds
and other improvements hereinafter specified. The plan, as recommended by the plan commission and as thereafter adopted by ordinance, may be
made applicable, by the terms thereof, to land situated within the corporate limits and contiguous territory not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles
beyond the corporate limits and not included in any municipality. The plan commission may implement such plan by recommending such ordinances:
1. Establish reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for resubdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in
respect to public improvements as herein defined;
2. Establish reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public
service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes,
stormwater drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment; and
3. May designate land suitable for annexation to the village and the recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation.
B. To recommend changes, from time to time, in the official comprehensive plan1.
C. To review all annexation petitions submitted to the village pursuant to section 7-1-8 of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-1-8
("7-1-8 annexation"), in accordance with the following standards and procedures:
1. The owner or owners of territory that is not within the corporate limits of the village but that is contiguous to the corporate limits of the village may
submit a written petition for annexation of such territory into the village. The annexation petition must comply with the requirements of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/7-1-8. Any 7-1-8 annexation petition submitted to the village shall be referred to the plan commission for review prior to
consideration by the board of trustees.
2. The plan commission shall consider the petition and make a recommendation to the village president and board of trustees as to whether the
territory identified in the petition should be annexed into the village.
3. No 7-1-8 annexation shall be approved except in conjunction with the village board's approval of an annexation agreement. Any such annexation
agreement shall be considered by the village board pursuant to the procedures and voting requirements set forth in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-15.1.
4. If the village board votes to deny a 7-1-8 annexation, the village board shall not consider a substantially similar 7-1-8 annexation petition for the
annexation of the same territory for a period of two (2) years following the denial.
5. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this subsection, the village board of trustees, by a simple majority vote, may waive any or all of the
requirements in subsections C1, C2, C3, and C4 of this subsection for any 7-1-8 annexation that seeks annexation of vacant property or property
that is used solely for commercial purposes. (Ord. G-104, 5-27-1969; Ord. G-995, 3-26-2013)
2-1-3: RULES OF PROCEDURE:
"Robert's Rules Of Order" shall govern the proceedings of the plan commission where applicable and when not in conflict with statutes or ordinances;
provided, however that the plan commission may adopt rules of order revising, repealing, amending or supplementing in whole or in part "Robert's Rules
Of Order". In addition, any rules adopted by the plan commission may be suspended by a majority vote of the members present.
A. Attendance And Teleconference Voting: Rules of conduct for attendance at plan commission meetings via electronic means are as follows:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 35/438
1. A commissioner may attend a regular or special meeting without being physically present if physical attendance is prevented by:
a. Personal illness or disability;
b. Absence from the village for personal employment purposes or for village business;
c. Family or other emergency, which emergency shall be stated on the record and be part of the minutes of that meeting;
2. A commissioner wishing to attend a regular or special meeting of the plan commission by electronic means must notify the secretary to the plan
commission via electronic mail or facsimile not less than forty eight (48) hours before the meeting. If for an emergency meeting, notice shall be given
as early as possible;
3. The chairman will announce the name(s) of any commissioners attending by electronic means at the beginning of the meeting;
4. If the chairman or other presiding officer attends the meeting through the use of electronic technology, he or she shall vacate the chair and a
presiding officer as elected by the plan commission who is physically present shall preside;
5. No more than two (2) commissioners may attend a regular or special meeting by electronic means for any one meeting. Participation through
electronic means shall be recognized in the order the request to the secretary is received;
6. A quorum of the plan commission must be physically present for any public meeting;
7. Commissioners participating by electronic means shall attend the entire meeting and shall preface their comments and votes by first stating their
last name;
8. When any of the commissioners attend a meeting by electronic technology, all votes shall be by roll call;
9. Any commissioner shall be considered present wherein the commissioner is present by teleconference or other electronic means wherein voices
are received from any location, provided that the nonphysical presence in excess of three (3) times per fiscal year shall render such commissioner
absent for purposes of these rules. (Ord. G-779, 4-12-2005)
Chapter 2
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
2-2-1: BOARD CREATED; COMPOSITION:
Pursuant to the provisions of State law1, there is hereby created in and for the Village a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners consisting of three (3)
members, whose terms of office shall commence on June 1 of the year of appointment and shall continue for three (3) years and until their respective
successors are appointed and have qualified except as to the first appointments of such Board, in which case one of said members shall be appointed to
the end of the municipal year of appointment, one to the end of the municipal year next ensuing, and one until the end of the municipal year second next
ensuing; provided, however, that each member so appointed shall serve until his successor is appointed and has qualified. (Ord. G-70, 5-9-1967)
2-2-2: APPOINTMENTS:
A. Appointments: Members of such Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be appointed by the Village President, with the consent of the Board of
Trustees. No such appointment shall be made by any Village President within thirty (30) days before the expiration of his term of office.
B. Oath And Bond: The members of the Board shall be considered officers of the Village and shall file an oath and a fidelity bond in such amount as the
Village President and Board of Trustees may from time to time require.
C. Qualifications: No person holding an office under a municipality, shall be a member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners or the secretary
thereof. The acceptance of any such office by a member of the Board or the secretary thereof shall be treated as a resignation of his office. No person
shall be appointed as a member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners who is related, either by blood or marriage, up to the degree of first
cousins, to any elected official of the Village.
D. Political Affiliations: No more than two (2) members of the Board shall belong to the same political party existing at the time of said appointment. If only
one or no political party exists in the Village at the time of such appointments, then State or national political party affiliations shall be considered in
making such appointments. Party affiliations shall be determined by affidavit of the person appointed as a member of the Board. (Ord. G-70, 5-9-1967;
2000 Code)
2-2-3: REMOVAL OF BOARD MEMBERS:
Members shall not be subject to removal except for cause upon written charges and after an opportunity to be heard within thirty (30) days in his own
defense before a regular meeting of the corporate authorities. A majority vote of the corporate authorities shall be required to remove any such member
from office. (Ord. G-70, 5-9-1967; 2000 Code)
2-2-4: SECRETARY:
The Board may employ a secretary, or may designate one of its own members to act as secretary, provided that no salary shall be paid to said secretary
unless specifically authorized by the Village President and Board of Trustees. The secretary shall:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 36/438
A. Keep the minutes of the Board's proceedings;
B. Be the custodian of all records pertaining to the business of the Board;
C. Keep a record of all examinations held;
D. Perform all other duties that the Board prescribes; and
E. Be custodian of the seal of the Board if one is adopted, and the Board is hereby authorized to adopt an official seal and to prescribe the form thereof by
resolution of the Board. (Ord. G-70, 5-9-1967)
2-2-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Appointive Powers: The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall appoint all officers and members of the Fire and Police Departments of the
Village except the chiefs of the respective Departments and the deputy chief of the Police Department.
B. Department Rules:
1. The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall make rules and may, from time to time, make changes in such rules:
a. To carry out the purposes of this Chapter and the statutes of the State; and
b. For appointments and removals of police officers and firefighters in accordance with the provisions thereof.
2. All such rules and changes therein shall be printed immediately for distribution. The Board shall give notice:
a. Of the places where the printed rules may be obtained; and
b. Of the date, not less than ten (10) days subsequent to the time of publication, when the rules or changes therein shall go into operation.
This notice shall be published in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the Village, there being no newspaper published
within the Village.
3. The rules adopted by the Board shall apply only to the conduct of examinations for original appointments or promotions and to the conduct of
hearings on charges brought against a member of the Police or Fire Department. No such rules shall be made by the Board to govern the operation
of the Police or Fire Department or the conduct of its members unless the Village President and Board of Trustees shall specifically authorize the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners to make such rules and approve the same. (Ord. G-70, 5-9-1967)
Chapter 3
ELECTRICAL COMMISSION
2-3-1: COMMISSION CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created for the Village an Electrical Commission which shall consist of six (6) members as follows: the Electrical Inspector shall be a
member and the ex officio chairperson of the Commission; of the other five (5) members, one shall be an electrical contractor, one a journeyman
electrician, one a representative of an inspection bureau maintained by the fire underwriters, if such a representative resides in the Village, and if no such
representative resides in the Village, then the Chief of the Fire Department, one a representative of an electrical supply company, and one a registered
professional engineer. If there is no person residing within the Village who is qualified under any one of these descriptions, the Village President may
appoint some other person to fill that position.
All members of the Electrical Commission shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. (Ord. G-18,
12-13-1960; Ord. G-607, 2-24-1998)
2-3-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Electrical Commission shall recommend:
A. Safe and practical standards and specifications for the installation, alteration, and use of electrical equipment designed to meet the necessities and
conditions of the particular locality;
B. Reasonable rules and regulations governing the issuance of permits by the Electrical Inspection Department; and
C. Reasonable fees to be paid for the inspection by the Inspection Department of all electrical equipment installed or altered within the municipality.
The standards, specifications, rules, regulations and fees so recommended shall not become effective until adopted by ordinance by the corporate
authorities of the Village. All fees so adopted shall be paid into the Village treasury. (Ord. G-18, 12-13-1960)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 37/438
Chapter 4
LIBRARY COMMISSION1
2-4-1: COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERS:
The board of trustees shall appoint a library commission of not less than three (3) or more than seven (7) members who shall hold office for terms of three
(3) years. (Ord. G-694, 2-26-2002)
2-4-2: TERM:
Terms shall be established so that no more than three (3) members' terms expire in any single year. (Ord. G-694, 2-26-2002)
2-4-3: COMPENSATION:
Members of the commission shall receive no compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of
their duties. (Ord. G-694, 2-26-2002)
2-4-4: DUTIES:
The commission shall advise and make recommendations to the board of trustees regarding the operations of the library and shall have such other
powers and duties as the village board may establish by ordinance. (Ord. G-694, 2-26-2002)
Chapter 5
HOTEL, CONVENTION AND VISITORS COMMITTEE
2-5-1: COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a Hotel, Convention and Visitors Committee. The Hotel, Convention and Visitors Committee shall be subordinate to the
Village President and Board of Trustees. (Ord. G-452, 9-25-1990)
2-5-2: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENTS:
A. Appointment: The Village President shall appoint eleven (11) persons to serve as members of the committee, subject to the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees. The committee shall consist of seven (7) persons who operate or manage a hotel or motel within the corporate limits of the Village,
one representative of Oakbrook Center, two (2) residents-at-large of the Village, and the Director of the Greater Oak Brook Chamber of Commerce.
B. Term: The term of each committee member shall be for one year or until their successors are appointed or confirmed. Appointments shall be made on
a yearly basis from March 1 of one year through February of the following year. (Ord. G-452, 9-25-1990; Ord. G-467, 5-28-1991; Ord. G-702, 8-13-
2002; Ord. G-858, 5-13-2008; Ord. G-990, 1-22-2013; Ord. G-1043, 1-27-2015; Ord. G-1052, 7-14-2015; Ord. G-1113, 10-10-2017)
2-5-3: OFFICERS; MEETINGS:
A. Organization: There shall be a Chairperson of the committee elected by the committee members from its membership. The committee shall also elect
one of its members to serve as Secretary, who shall keep a record of all resolutions, proceedings and actions of the committee.
B. Meetings: Six (6) committee members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of its business. A majority vote of committee members shall
constitute approval of business before it. Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson or by no less than three (3) members of the committee.
All meetings of the committee shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Open Meetings Act1. (Ord. G-452, 9-25-1990; Ord. G-702, 8-13-
2002; Ord. G-858, 5-13-2008; Ord. G-990, 1-22-2013; Ord. G-1043, 1-27-2015; Ord. G-1052, 7-14-2015)
2-5-4: AUTHORITY:
The Hotel, Convention and Visitors Committee shall be a committee of the Village Board and shall have no independent authority but shall serve strictly
as a recommendatory body and with only these powers expressly delegated to it. The committee may expend no monies except as expressly approved in
the Village's budget and appropriation ordinance and only upon prior approval by the Corporate Authorities. (Ord. G-452, 9-25-1990)
Chapter 6
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE TAX BOARD
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 38/438
2-6-1: BOARD CREATED; MEMBERSHIP:
The village of Oak Brook foreign fire insurance tax board is hereby created to consist of four (4) members. Four (4) officers shall comprise the board and
shall be elected from all employees of the village of Oak Brook fire department and shall have full voting privileges on any matter before such board. The
officers shall be a president, vice president, treasurer and secretary.
The offices of the board shall be filled by election by the employees of the fire department. In addition to the officers as provided above, the fire chief or
his designee shall be an ex officio member, unless otherwise elected to the board at an election held in accordance with the provisions of this section. As
an ex officio member, the fire chief shall not have any voting privileges, but shall have the right to participate in all open or closed session discussions
regarding the management of foreign fire insurance tax funds, preparation of long-range financial plans and annual budgets, or any other matter within the
scope of the powers and duties of the board and notice of any regular or special meeting in the same manner given to any voting member. (Ord. G-680,
8-14-2001)
2-6-2: DEFINITION:
The term "employee", as used in this chapter, shall mean any full-time sworn firefighter, paid on-call firefighter or other member or officer of the village of
Oak Brook fire department, including the fire chief and all promoted positions. (Ord. G-680, 8-14-2001)
2-6-3: TERMS:
The initial and successor elections of the board shall be held prior to May 1, 1997, and May 1 in odd-numbered years thereafter. Officers shall take office
on May 1 and shall serve up to and including April 30 two (2) years later. The terms for all officers shall be two (2) years. The initialelection shall be held in
accordance with guidelines and procedures established by the village attorney; and, thereafter, the board shall adopt all necessary rules and regulations
governing the nomination and election of such officers for subsequent elections. (Ord. G-680, 8-14-2001)
2-6-4: FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE TAX FUND:
A village of Oak Brook fire department foreign fire insurance tax fund is hereby created and all revenue received by the village from the foreign fire
insurance tax shall be deposited in the fund and shall be held and expended according to the following procedures:
A. All funds paid to the village treasurer pursuant to division 10 "Foreign Fire Insurance Company Fees" of article 11 of the Illinois municipal code1 shall
be set apart and shall be appropriated annually by the corporate authorities to the board.
B. The treasurer of the board shall receive the appropriated money and shall pay out the money upon the order of the board for the maintenance, use and
benefit of the department.
C. By July 31 of each year, the officers of the board shall approve a five (5) year projection and a preliminary budget for the subsequent calendar year for
the expenditure of the funds received pursuant to the foreign fire insurance tax. The officers of the board shall, no later than September 30, adopt a
final budget for the collection and expenditure of the foreign fire insurance tax for the subsequent calendar year, to be approved by ordinance by the
village president and board of trustees in conjunction with the annual municipal budget, in order to comply with the statutory mandate of a prior
appropriation for all expenditures. The final budget may be amended at any time by a majority vote of the officers of the board with the concurrence of
the village president and board of trustees consistent with established practice. Expenditures shall be made only for items specifically described in the
final budget as originally adopted or subsequently amended.
D. Any expenditure made from the fund shall be made in accordance with village rules, regulations, practices and ordinances, as may be amended from
time to time, which govern the procurement of goods and services.
E. No expenditure shall be made from the fund without approval of the board.
F. The board treasurer shall give a bond to the village president and board of trustees in an amount equal to three (3) times the amount of foreign fire
insurance tax revenue toensure the faithful performance of the board treasurer of his duties imposed by law and by board rules and regulations. Fees
for said bond shall be paid from the funds collected from the foreign fire insurance tax.
G. The board treasurer shall be responsible for paying the service charge levied by the Illinois municipal league for the collection of the foreign fire
insurance tax from the proceeds of the foreign fire insurance tax, provided such fee is chargeable by state law; and provided that the service charge
has not already been retained by the Illinois municipal league prior to disbursement of the tax. (Ord. G-680, 8-14-2001)
2-6-5: MEETINGS:
In accordance with the open meetings act, the board shall establish a regular time and place for its meetings. The president shall preside at the meetings.
The secretary shall keep a record of all resolutions, proceedings and actions of the board, and these records shall be open to the public. Three (3)
members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of its business. The affirmative vote of three (3) members of the board shall constitute
approval of business before it. Special meetings, with appropriate notice, may be called by the president or by no less than three (3) members of the
board. Any person shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any matter before the board. (Ord. G-680, 8-14-2001)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 39/438
2-6-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The board may promulgate written rules and regulations governing board matters so long as such rules and regulations are not inconsistent with any
applicable law. All rules and regulations shall be posted in each fire station, the Oak Brook village hall and a copy provided to the village clerk. The board
secretary shall maintain a record of all board rules and regulations, which shall be available for public inspection.
At no time shall the actions of the board or its officers interfere with the rights of the fire chief, the composition of the Oak Brook fire department, the Oak
Brook board of fire and police commissioners, or in any way impede the ordinary operation of the Oak Brook fire department. (Ord. G-680, 8-14-2001)
Chapter 7
SAFETY PATHWAY COMMITTEE
(Rep. by Ord. G-813, 10-10-2006)
Chapter 8
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
2-8-1: CREATION:
A. Present Board; Membership; Terms: The present zoning board of appeals for the village heretofore established in accordance with the applicable state
statutes is hereby confirmed and ratified and shall consist of seven (7) members. The successor to each member shall serve for a term of five (5)
years.
B. Appointments: All appointments to the zoning board of appeals shall be made by the village president, subject to the approval of the board of trustees.
One of the members so appointed shall be named as chairperson at the time of appointment. The village president, subject to approval by the board of
trustees, shall have the power to remove, after a public hearing, any member of the zoning board of appeals for cause. Vacancies shall be filled as
soon as possible for the unexpired term of any member whose place has become vacant. In the event that the office of chairperson is vacated for any
reason, the village president shall, as soon as practicable, appoint, at his option, either one of the remaining members on the board, or any member
who is appointed to fill such vacancy on the board as the new chairperson. Such appointment shall be subject to the approval of the board of trustees
at its next scheduled meeting. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; 2000 Code)
2-8-2: MEETINGS:
A. All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. All
testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in the zoning provisions of the village1 shall be given under oath. The chairperson, or in his
absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
B. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public, at which time every interested person has the right to be heard or to be represented by a duly
authorized agent or attorney.
C. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showingthe vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that
fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions. In every case where a variation is considered, the board shall include in
its official report findings of fact specifying the reason or reasons for recommending the grant or denial of the variation. Every rule, regulation, every
amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the board shall be filed in the office of the village clerk and
shall be of public record.
D. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the zoning board of appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the director of community development or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter which it is authorized by this code to
render a final decision. The board shall make no recommendation except in a specific case and after public hearing.
E. The zoning board of appeals is hereby designated as the proper commission or committee to publish notices as required by statute and the zoning
ordinance pertaining to proposed amendments to said ordinance and to make a written report and recommendation to the board of trustees on any
such proposed amendment. (Ord. G-116, 4-14-1970; 2000 Code)
2-8-3: RULES OF PROCEDURE:
"Robert's Rules Of Order" shall govern the proceedings of the zoning board of appeals where applicable and when not in conflict with statutes or
ordinances; provided, however that the zoning board of appeals may adopt rules of order revising, repealing, amending or supplementing in whole or in
part "Robert's Rules Of Order". In addition, any rules adopted by the zoning board of appeals may be suspended by a majority vote of the members
present.
A. Attendance And Teleconference Voting: Rules of conduct for attendance at zoning board of appeals meetings via electronic means as follows:
1. A board member may attend a regular or special meeting without being physically present if physical attendance is prevented by:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 40/438
a. Personal illness or disability;
b. Absence from the village for personal employment purposes or for village business;
c. Family or other emergency, which emergency shall be stated on the record and be part of the minutes of that meeting;
2. A board member wishing to attend a regular or special meeting of the zoning board of appeals by electronic meansmust notify the secretary to the
zoning board of appeals via electronic mail or facsimile not less than forty eight (48) hours before the meeting. If for an emergency meeting, notice
shall be given as early as possible;
3. The chairman will announce the name(s) of any board members attending by electronic means at the beginning of the meeting;
4. If the chairman or other presiding officer attends the meeting through the use of electronic technology, he or she shall vacate the chair and a
presiding officer as elected by the zoning board of appeals who is physically present shall preside;
5. No more than two (2) board members may attend a regular or special meeting by electronic means for any one meeting. Participation through
electronic means shall be recognized in the order the request to the secretary is received;
6. A quorum of the zoning board of appeals must be physically present for any public meeting;
7. Board members participating by electronic means shall attend the entire meeting and shall preface their comments and votes by first stating their
last name;
8. When any of the board members attend a meeting by electronic technology, all votes shall be by roll call;
9. Any board member shall be considered present wherein the board member is present by teleconference or other electronic means wherein voices
are received from any location, provided that the nonphysical presence in excess of three (3) times per fiscal year shall render such board member
absent for purposes of these rules. (Ord. G-779, 4-12-2005)
Chapter 9
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
2-9-1: CREATION OF COMMISSION:
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the planned development commission of the village of Oak Brook ("planned development
commission"). (Ord. G-891, 7-14-2009)
2-9-2: JURISDICTION AND PURPOSE:
The intent and purpose of the planned development commission is to assist the village board in making decisions and establishing policies regarding
planned developments within the village. The planned development commission shall have the following specific powers and duties:
A. To conduct public hearings and make recommendations to the village board on applications for planned developments and amendments or alterations
to approved planned developments.
B. To consult and cooperate with the village board and other village commissions and departments on matters related to planned developments within the
village.
C. To periodically review, and to make recommendations as the commission may deem necessary regarding amendments to, the provisions of this
chapter and the provisions of the zoning code related to planned developments.
D. To consider and make recommendations on other matters related to planned developments as may be referred from time to time by the village board
to the commission. (Ord. G-891, 7-14-2009)
2-9-3: COMPOSITION OF COMMISSION:
A. General Appointment And Membership Criteria: The commission shall consist of seven (7) members. Each member on the commission shall be
selected from the then current members of the Oak Brook plan commission and the Oak Brook zoning board of appeals. The chairperson of the
zoning board of appeals shall be one of the zoning board of appeals members on the commission. The chairperson of the plan commission shall be
one of the plan commission members on the commission. Each member shall be appointed by the village president, with the advice and consent of
the board of trustees. Each member of the commission shall serve without compensation.
B. Composition Of Commission; Chairperson; Terms:
1. Chairperson; Vice Chairperson: The chairperson of the commission shall always be the individual then serving as the chairperson of the body that
holds three (3) seats on the commission. The vice chairperson of the commission shall always be the individual then serving as the chairperson of
the body that holds four (4) seats on the commission.
2. Initial Composition: The initial composition of the commission shall consist of four (4) plan commission members and three (3) zoning board of
appeals members.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 41/438
3. Term: The term of each member of the commission shall be two (2) years, commencing on May 1 and ending on April 30 of the second year, or until
such times as a successor has been duly appointed, confirmed, and qualified. There shall be no restriction on the reappointment of a member to
one or more successive terms, subject to the advice and consent of the board of trustees for each reappointment. In making appointments to the
commission after the initial and subsequent two (2) year terms, the president shall attempt to reduce the amount of turnover on the commission in
order to ensure that the commission is able to continue to function without loss of expertise and experience and without interruption or delay on
matters that may be before it.
4. Rotating Majorities, Chairpersons, And Vice Chairpersons: The body from which the majority of commission members are drawn, and the body from
which the chairperson and vice chairperson are selected, shall alternate every two (2) years. Accordingly, during the first two (2) year terms (in
which the plan commission has 4 members and the zoning board of appeals has 3 members), the chairperson of the commission shall be the
chairperson of the zoning board of appeals and the vice chairperson shall be the chairperson of the plan commission. Following the initial two (2)
year terms, one appointment from the plan commission will be eliminated and one appointment from the zoning board of appeals will be added, so
that for the second two (2) year terms the composition of the commission shall consist of four (4) zoning board of appeals members and three (3)
plan commission members, with the chairperson of the plan commission serving as chairperson of the commission and the chairperson of the
zoning board of appeals serving as vice chairperson. This rotation between a zoning board of appeals majority and a plan commission majority, and
the corresponding rotation of the chairperson and vice chairperson, shall take place every two (2) years.
C. Removal And Vacancy: Any member of the commission that ceases to be a member of either the plan commission or the zoning board of appeals shall
automatically cease to be a member of the commission without any action required by the president or the board of trustees. The village board shall
have the power to remove any commission member for cause. Any vacancy that may occur shall be filled for the balance of the unexpired term by
appointment by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The replacement appointment shall be made from the ranks
of the zoning board of appeals or the plan commission, as the case may be, necessary to maintain the then current commission makeup between the
zoning board of appeals and the plan commission.
D. Commission Secretary: The village manager shall designate a village staff member or other authorized representative of the village to serve as
secretary to the commission. The commission secretary shall attend and keep minutes of all commission meetings and hearings, and shall maintain
the permanent records of all commission meetings, hearings, and proceedings and all correspondence of, and submittals to, the commission. (Ord. G-
891, 7-14-2009)
2-9-4: MEETINGS AND PROCEDURES:
A. Meetings: All meetings of the commission shall be held in compliance with the Illinois open meetings act. Except as modified by any bylaws or other
rules approved by the commission, "Robert's Rules Of Order", revised, shall govern the proceedings of all the meetings of the commission.
B. Chairperson Presides: The chairperson shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the commission. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice
chairperson shall assume the duties and responsibilities of the chairperson. In the absence of the chairperson and vice chairperson, a temporary
chairperson shall be selected by the commission by motion and simple majority vote and shall assume the duties and responsibilities of the
chairperson.
C. Bylaws Or Rules Of Procedures: The commission may adopt bylaws or rules of procedures to govern and regulate its business and procedures, as it
deems necessary; provided, however, that any such bylaws or rules shall, at a minimum: 1) be consistent with the applicable provisions of the Illinois
municipal code and this code, 2) require a majority vote of all voting members of the commission for adoption and amendment of the bylaws or rules of
procedure, and 3) be subject to review and approval by the village attorney.
D. Quorum And Necessary Vote: The commission shall conduct no business except at a properly called and held meeting at which a quorum is present. A
quorum of the commission shall consist of four (4) members. Except with regard to recommendations on planned developments (on which the
required vote is as provided in title 13, chapter 15 of this code) and for adoption and amendment of the bylaws or rules of procedure (on which a
majority vote of all commission members is required), a majority vote of commission members present at any meeting shall be necessary for the
commission to act on any matter before the commission.
E. Meeting Schedule: Commission meetings shall be held at regularly scheduled dates, times, and locations to be established and published by the
commission pursuant to the Illinois open meetings act. Special meetings may be called only by: 1) the chairperson, 2) any three (3) members of the
commission, or 3) the village board of trustees.
F. Records: The commission's records shall be available and open for public inspection pursuant to, and except as otherwise provided by, the Illinois
freedom of information act or other applicable law.
G. Sworn Testimony: All testimony at any public hearing of the commission shall be given under oath or affirmation.
H. Disqualification From Voting: No member of the commission shall vote, or participate in the consideration or debate, on: 1) any matter directly involving
any property in which the commission member has a legal or beneficial ownership interest; 2) any matter where the commission member's interest
would violate section 3.1-55-10 of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-55-10, or any other applicable law; or 3) any matter
on which the member of the commission is prohibited from voting or participating pursuant to section 1-10-7 of this code. (Ord. G-891, 7-14-2009)
Chapter 10
CITIZENS EXECUTIVE COUNCIL
2-10-1: COUNCIL ESTABLISHED:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 42/438
There is hereby established the citizens executive council (council). The council shall be advisory in nature to the village president and board of trustees.
(Ord. G-912, 12-8-2009)
2-10-2: MEMBERS APPOINTMENT:
The council shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The
village manager shall assign one staff member to the council who shall be responsible for the minutes and reports of the council. (Ord. G-912, 12-8-2009)
2-10-3: TERMS OF OFFICE:
At the time of the original appointments to the council three (3) members shall be appointed to a term of two (2) years and two (2) members shall be
appointed to a term of one year. Thereafter all members shall be appointed to a term of two (2) years. (Ord. G-912, 12-8-2009)
2-10-4: ORGANIZATION:
The council shall elect a chairman, vice chairman and secretary from its membership at its first organizational meeting, such officers to serve for terms of
one year. Any vacancies in such offices shall be filled by the council for the balance of any unexpired terms. (Ord. G-912, 12-8-2009)
2-10-5: MEETINGS:
The council shall meet as often as is necessary to carry out its obligations. Any three (3) members of the council may, in writing, call a special meeting for
a specific purpose and the chairman shall call such meeting for such purposes, in accordance with such request. (Ord. G-912, 12-8-2009)
2-10-6: FUNCTIONS:
The council shall offer advice and recommendations to the village president and to the board of trustees to improve the community and village operations
and shall advise the president and board of trustees on issues referred to them by the village president or the board of trustees. (Ord. G-912, 12-8-2009)
Chapter 11
COMMUNITY ENHANCEMENT COMMITTEE
2-11-1: COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established the village's community enhancement committee. The community enhancement committee shall be advisory in nature to the
village president and board of trustees. (Ord. G-1080, 7-12-2016)
2-11-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the community enhancement committee shall be to provide advice and recommendations to the village president and board of trustees
concerning:
A. Priorities for implementing the village's streetscape plan and appropriate changes to the plan;
B. Priorities for implementing the village's commercial revitalization plan and appropriate changes to the plan;
C. Other policies and procedures that will improve the village's streetscape plan, the village's commercial revitalization plan, and the village's economic
development program; and
D. Other issues referred to the community enhancement committee by the village president and board of trustees. (Ord. G-1080, 7-12-2016)
2-11-3: MEMBERSHIP:
The community enhancement committee shall consist of the following sixteen (16) members: the Oakbrook Center general manager; the chairperson of
the plan commission; the chairperson of the zoning board of appeals; the CEO of the Greater Oak Brook chamber of commerce; and the following "at
large" members: four (4) local business executives; one homeowners' association president; six (6) village residents; and one hotel general manager. At
large members shall serve for a term of two (2) years.
A. Initial Membership: The committee's initial members shall be those members serving on the village's streetscape committee or commercial
revitalization committee at the time this chapter was adopted. The initial at large members shall serve the time remaining on their terms with the
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 43/438
streetscape committee or the commercial revitalization committee as at large members of the community enhancement committee.
B. Future Membership: Upon the expiration of the term of an at large member, a new at large member shall be appointed by the village president with the
advice and consent of the board of trustees. (Ord. G-1080, 7-12-2016)
2-11-4: OFFICERS:
The chairperson and secretary of the community enhancement committee shall be selected by the village president with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees. The committee shall select a vice chairperson from its membership at its first meeting. Officers will serve for terms of two (2) years. Any
vacancies in those offices will be filled for the balance of any unexpired terms. (Ord. G-1080, 7-12-2016)
2-11-5: MEETINGS:
The community enhancement committee shall meet as often as necessary to carry out its obligations. (Ord. G-1080, 7-12-2016)
Chapter 12
SPORTS CORE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
2-12-1: COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED:
The Sports Core Advisory Committee is established. The committee shall be composed of nine (9) members all of whom must be residents of the Village.
Members will serve for three-year terms and will function as an advisory committee to the Village President and the Village Board. The members of the
Sports Core Advisory Committee will be chosen by the Village President and such appointments must be confirmed by the Village Board. When the first
appointments are made, the Village President will name four (4) members to serve for three-year terms; and five (5) members to serve for two-year terms.
Subsequent appointments shall be for three (3) years. When there are vacancies in positions on the Sports Core Advisory Committee, the Village
President shall name a successor who will serve out the term of the vacancy. Appointments to fill vacancies shall also be confirmed by the action of the
Village Board. In making appointments, the Village President shall seek to have members on the committee at all times who, as a group, have interests in
golf, swimming and tennis.
The Sports Core Advisory Committee shall make recommendations to the Village Board in writing and where requested by the Village President or Village
Manager. The committee may be requested to present their report and recommendations at Village Board meetings. The Sports Core Advisory
Committee may on its own determine that there are issues which the committee believes should be evaluated, and on which written and, where requested
by the Village President, oral reports shall be provided to the Village Board. Among the areas which the Sports Core Advisory Committee may be asked to
investigate and report upon or may choose to do so on its own initiative are to update and improve various areas of the Sports Core which include the
Bath and Tennis Club, golf course and grounds. The Village President shall appoint the Chairman of the committee and the committee will meet as
needed but not less than four (4) times per year. The committee shall be subject to the Open Meetings Act, the Freedom of Information Act and shall
follow procedural rules as generally apply to the Village Board. (Ord. G-1116, 11-14-2017; Ord. G-1125, 2-27-2018; Ord. G-1144, 1-22-2019)
Chapter 13
TECHNOLOGY ADVISORY COMMITTEE
2-13-1: COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED:
The Technology Advisory Committee is hereby established. The Technology Advisory Committee shall be advisory in nature to the Village President and
Board of Trustees. (Ord. G-1143, 1-8-2019)
2-13-2: PURPOSE:
The Technology Advisory Committee's purpose shall be to provide advice and recommendations to the Village President and Board of Trustees
concerning:
A. Development of information technology-related goals and a Village technology strategy;
B. Information technology-related policies for the Village;
C. Technology issues impacting a resident or customer's ability to do business with or receive services from the Village;
D. Proposals for new technology and information technology services;
E. Requests for technology or information technology funding;
F. Strategic information technology planning matters, including an annual review of any technology or information technology plan, as needed;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 44/438
G. Other issues referred to the Technology Advisory Committee by the Village President and Board of Trustees. (Ord. G-1143, 1-8-2019)
2-13-3: MEMBERSHIP:
A. Appointment: The Technology Advisory Committee shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Village President and confirmed by the Board of
Trustees. Each member shall be a resident of the Village that demonstrates through application materials a background in and specific, relevant
knowledge of technology and information technology. The committee shall be supported by the Village Manager, or his designee, and a liaison from
the Board of Trustees.
B. Term: When members are initially appointed to the Technology Advisory Committee upon the committee's creation, two (2) members shall serve two
(2) year terms, or until their successor is appointed and confirmed, and three (3) members shall serve three (3) year terms, or until their successor is
appointed and confirmed. The term of all subsequent member appointments shall be three (3) years, or until their successor is appointed and
confirmed.
C. Vacancies: When there are membership vacancies on the Technology Advisory Committee, a successor member shall be appointed in accordance
with subsection A of this section to serve the remainder of the vacating member's term. (Ord. G-1143, 1-8-2019)
2-13-4: OFFICERS:
At its first meeting, the Technology Advisory Committee shall elect a member to serve as its Chairperson, a member to serve as its Secretary, and a
member to serve as its Vice Chairperson. With the assistance of the Village Manager or his designee, the Secretary shall keep a record of all
recommendations, proceedings, and actions taken by the Technology Advisory Committee. If the Chairperson is absent from a meeting, the Vice
Chairperson shall assume the role of Chairperson for that meeting. Each officer's term shall expire upon the expiration of the term of the member that is
holding the office in question, or until a successor officer is elected by the committee. (Ord. G-1143, 1-8-2019)
2-13-5: MEETINGS:
The Technology Advisory Committee shall meet as often as is necessary to carry out its obligations. (Ord. G-1143, 1-8-2019)
2-13-6: AUTHORITY:
The Technology Advisory Committee shall be a committee of the Corporate Authorities and shall serve strictly as a recommending body to the Village
President and Board of Trustees. The committee may expend no monies except those expressly approved by the Corporate Authorities. (Ord. G-1143, 1-
8-2019)
2-13-7: RULES:
The Technology Advisory Committee shall be subject to the Open Meetings Act, the Freedom of Information Act, and any rules for the conduct of
meetings adopted by the Corporate Authorities. (Ord. G-1143, 1-8-2019)
Title 3
PUBLIC SAFETY
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
3-1-1: COMPOSITION OF DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created a police department, an administrative department of the village, to consist of such members as set forth in the village's budget
ordinance or as otherwise determined from time to time by the village president and board of trustees. (Ord. G-650, 12-14-1999; 2000 Code)
3-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. Office Created; Appointment: The office of police chief of the police department of the village is hereby created. The police chief shall be appointed by
the village president and approved by the board of trustees on the basis of merit, fitness and experience. He need not be a resident of the village. The
police chief shall serve at the pleasure of the village president and board and may be removed by them at any time.
B. Bond: The police chief shall give bond payable to the village in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) conditioned according to law, and with
sureties to be approved by the village president.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 45/438
C. Powers And Duties: The police chief shall have the custody, care and control of the public property of the police department, subject to the supervision
of the village president, and of all firearms and other equipment; he shall be the head of the police department and shall promulgate such orders, rules
and regulations for the conduct of the department and the subordinate members thereof as to him shall seem fit and proper, which said orders, rules
and regulations shall be subject to and not in conflict with the rules and regulations of the board of fire and police commissioners of the village. He
shall devote full time to the municipal affairs of the village, preserve the peace, order, safety and cleanliness thereof, and to this end he shall execute
and enforce all provisions of this code and other village ordinances and all orders of the president. He shall be charged with the duty of protecting the
rights of persons and the protection of property in the village. (Ord. G-76, 9-26-1967; Ord. G-127, 11-24-1970)
3-1-3: OTHER DEPARTMENTAL OFFICERS:
A. Deputy Police Chief: There is hereby created in and for the village the office of deputy chief of police.
1. Appointment: The deputy chief of police shall be appointed by the chief of police and may be appointed from any rank of sworn, full time officers of
the village's police department, and must have at least five (5) years of full time service as a police officer in the Oak Brook police department.
2. Rank; Term: The deputy chief of police position shall be an exempt rank subordinate exclusively to the chief of police. Said deputy chief of police
shall serve at the discretion of the chief and, if removed from the position, shall revert to the rank held immediately prior to the appointment to the
deputy chief position.
B. Police Commanders:
1. Appointments; Number: The office of police commander is hereby created. Police commanders shall be appointed by the board of fire and police
commissioners of the village pursuant to the statutes of the state.
2. Duties: The duties of police commander shall be to give attention to the affairs of said village, preserve the peace, order, safety, cleanliness and to
otherwise enforce the ordinances of the village and the orders of the chief of police and the village president. The commander shall be subject to the
direct supervision of the chief of police and shall at all times be subject to the rules and regulations of the board of fire and police commissioners.
C. Police Sergeants:
1. Appointments; Number: The office of police sergeant is hereby created. Police sergeants shall be appointed by the board of fire and police
commissioners of the village pursuant to the statutes of the state and rules of the board.
2. Duties: The duties of police sergeant shall be to give attention to the affairs of the village, preserve the peace, order, safety and cleanliness, and to
otherwise enforce the ordinances of the village, and the orders of the police chief, any other superior officer, commander and the village president.
3. Supervision: Police sergeants shall be under the direct supervision of designated superior officers, and shall at all times be subject to the rules and
regulations of the board of fire and police commissioners.
D. Police Patrol Officers:
1. Appointments; Number: The position of police patrol officer is hereby created. Police patrol officers shall be appointed by the board of fire and police
commissioners of the village pursuant to the statutes of the state and the rules of the board of fire and police commissioners.
2. Duties: The duties of police patrolmen shall be to give their attention to the affairs of said village, preserve the peace, order, safety, cleanliness and
to otherwise enforce all provisions of this code and other ordinances of the village, and the orders of superior officers and the village president.
3. Supervision: Police patrol officers shall be under the direct supervision of their superior officers, and shall at all times be subject to the rules and
regulations of the board of fire and police commissioners. (Ord. G-76, 9-26-1967; Ord. G-127, 11-24-1970; Ord. G-134, 6-8-1971; Ord. G-172, 1-14-
1975; Ord. G-174, 8-12-1975; Ord. G-243, 2-13-1979; Ord. G-268, 7-22-1980; Ord. G-379, 5-13-1986; Ord. G-650, 12-14-1999; 2000 Code; Ord. G-
970, 4-10-2012)
3-1-4: CONDITIONS OF MEMBERSHIP:
A. Oath: Every member of the police department, before entering upon his duties as such, shall take and subscribe an oath of office in substantially the
following form:
I solemnly swear that I shall support the Constitution of the United States and the constitution of the State of Illinois and that I will faithfully discharge
the duty of the office of (naming the specific office) to the best of my ability.
Such oath shall be subscribed and sworn to before some officer authorized by the state of Illinois to administer oaths and shall be filed in the office of
the village clerk.
B. Police Training: The village hereby elects to participate in the program provided for in the Illinois police training act1. Before an individual may be
awarded a permanent appointment as a police officer, he must have been certified by the Illinois local governmental law enforcement officers training
board as having successfully completed an approved training course as provided in said act.
C. Removal From Office: Except for the office of police chief, no officer of the police department shall be removed from office except pursuant to and in
accordance with the statutes of the state and the rules and regulations of the board of fire and police commissioners.
D. Compensation: Every member of the police department shall receive such compensation as the village president and board shall from time to time
determine. From and after the effective date of this chapter, and until otherwise changed by the village president and the board, the police chief, the
deputy police chief, police commander, police sergeants, and police patrol officers shall receive the same salary as provided in the salary schedule
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 46/438
adopted from time to time by the village president and the board except that police patrolmen heretofore designated as desk officers shall continue to
receive the salaries heretofore provided in the salary schedule for desk officers until a new schedule is adopted. (R-54, 5-24-1965; Ord. G-76, 9-26-
1967; Ord. G-970, 4-10-2012)
3-1-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Arrests: All police officers shall have power:
1. To arrest, with or without process, all persons who break the peace or are found violating any provision of this code or other ordinance of the village
or any criminal law of the state;
2. To commit arrested persons for examinations;
3. If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody overnight or on Sunday in the village jail or any other safe place, until they can be brought before
a magistrate or a judge for hearing or trial;
4. They shall have all the powers of constables as established by common law.
B. Police As Witnesses: All officers making arrests shall attend as witnesses before the court where the trial may be had, and shall procure all necessary
evidence in their power, and furnish a list of witnesses to the court; no village officer or police officer shall be entitled to any witness fees to be taxed
against the village in any action for a violation of any provisions of this code or other ordinance where the village is plaintiff.
C. Furnishing Bail Prohibited: No member of the police force shall become or furnish bail for any person arrested for violation of any provisions of this
code or other ordinance of the village or of the criminal laws of the state.
D. Aiding Fire Department: It shall be the duty of the police force to aid the fire department by giving alarms in case of fire and by clearing the streets or
grounds in the immediate vicinity of the fire, so that the members of the fire department shall not be hindered or obstructed in the performance of their
duties.
E. Accidents; Reports: Each and every police officer of the village, whenever any accident shall occur within the village limits of which he has or should
have notice or knowledge, shall record forthwith in writing the place, day and nature of the accident, the hour of the day or night when it occurred, the
condition of the weather (and, if at night, whether cloudy, clear or moonlight and whether the streetlamps nearby were or were not lighted), the name
of each person injured, the extent and nature of the injury suffered, the names and residences of the principal witnesses and the name and residence
of the examining physician, if any. Said records shall be kept on file at the police station, and where the village may be involved a copy of said record
shall be sent forthwith to the village attorney.
F. Park District Rules: All officers may enforce the laws, ordinance, rules and regulations of the Oak Brook park district within the corporate limits of the
village, and sign and file complaints for any violations thereof, in accordance with, and pursuant to, that certain intergovernmental agreement between
the village of Oak Brook and the Oak Brook park district regarding policing of park property, dated June 14, 1994. (Ord. G-1054, 7-14-2015)
3-1-6: SPECIAL EVENTS:
A. Any person, group, civic organization or other entity may request special police or fire services by a written application to the police or fire chief. The
chief of the department requested, shall review the application and determine whether or not the requested service can be performed without
additional cost to the village and without adversely affecting the normal operation of the department.
B. If the chief determines with the concurrence of the village manager that the requested services will disrupt the normal operation of the department or
will result in additional expense to the village, the applicant will be informed that a charge will be made by the village for the special services.
C. If the applicant agrees to payment of the charge, the chief shall assign one or more officers to said special duty not to exceed twenty (20) hours per
week, per officer.
D. The charge to the applicant, payable to the village, shall include:
1. A rate per hour per officer for each hour served on the special duty based upon one point five (1.5) times the mean salary set for grade 26 of the
village of Oak Brook salary schedule;
2. The costs of any additional payroll taxes incurred by the village to provide the special event services; and
3. An administrative fee equal to six percent (6%) of all of the charges set forth in subsections D1 and D2 of this section.
Such charges shall be for a minimum period of two (2) hours and shall be paid by the applicant within thirty (30) days of the date of the invoice
therefor.
E. The person or persons serving at special events shall be paid the amount listed in subsection D1 of this section by the village for the same, less the
usual deductions for payroll purposes. At no time will village employees accept wages for services directly from the applicant. (Ord. G-1017, 12-10-
2013)
3-1-7: FINGERPRINTING FEES:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 47/438
The village, through its police department, currently provides fingerprinting services to all residents and commercial nonresidents of the village, and the
corporate authorities of the village deem it appropriate to impose a user charge for such service in order to partially offset the cost to the village to provide
such service, a fee is hereby imposed upon persons requesting such service in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) per fingerprint card, provided there
shall be no charge for fingerprinting of children seventeen (17) years and younger for identification purposes only. Retakes will be offered at no charge
when the person so fingerprinted presents sufficient proof that the original set is not satisfactory to the submitting authority. Commencing June 1, 1993,
charges for fingerprinting shall be paid at the time of service. (Ord. G-508, 5-11-1993)
3-1-8: POLICE PENSION FUND:
A. Creation: There is hereby created a police pension fund pursuant to Illinois Compiled Statutes2.
B. Board Of Trustees: There is hereby created a board of trustees of the police pension fund, which shall perform all the duties and obligations as set forth
in the state law. (Ord. S-108, 6-28-1966; Ord. G-468, 6-11-1991)
3-1-9: AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICERS:
A. Appointment: The police chief may appoint not more than ten (10) auxiliary police officers to serve in the police department under the direction and
control of the police chief. Auxiliary police officers shall not be members of, and shall not supplement members of, the regular police department of the
village, except as otherwise provided in this section.
B. Qualifications: Prior to appointment as an auxiliary police officer, all persons must be fingerprinted. No person who has been convicted of a felony or
other crime involving moral turpitude shall be appointed as an auxiliary police officer.
C. Powers And Duties:
1. Conservators Of The Peace: Auxiliary police officers shall be conservators of the peace, and shall have all of the powers thereof, upon receiving a
certificate attesting to their successful completion of a training course administered by the Illinois law enforcement training standards board.
2. Firearms: Auxiliary police officers shall not carry firearms without the specific permission of the chief of police, and then only while in uniform and
during the performance of their duties. No auxiliary police officer shall be permitted to carry a firearm unless the auxiliary police officer has first
completed the course of training required of peace officers under section 2 of the peace officer firearm training act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes
710/2.
3. Duties: The chief of police may assign auxiliary officers to perform only the following duties:
a. To aid or direct traffic within the village;
b. To aid in control of natural or manmade disasters;
c. To aid in case of civil disorder as directed by the chief of police; and
d. When it is impractical for members of the regular police department to perform their normal and regular police duties, the chief of police may
assign auxiliary police officers to perform those normal and regular police duties.
D. Training: In addition to any other training required by this section and 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-30-20, all auxiliary police officers must receive
a course of training in the use of weapons and other police procedures appropriate for the exercise of the powers conferred upon them under the
Illinois municipal code and this section.
E. Identification: Identification symbols worn by auxiliary police officers shall be different and distinct from those used by members of the regular police
department. (Ord. G-1022, 3-25-2014)
Chapter 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT
3-2-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; COMPOSITION:
A. Created: There is hereby created a fire department, an administrative department of the village.
B. Composition: The fire department shall consist of such members as set forth in the village's budget ordinance or as otherwise determined from time to
time by the board of trustees.
C. Members; Requirements: The members of such fire department shall be considered officers of the village as defined and determined by the statutes of
the state. They need not be residents of the village.
D. Compensation: Members of the fire department, including the chief, shall receive such compensation as the board of trustees shall from time to time
determine. (Ord. G-729, 8-26-2003)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 48/438
3-2-2: FIRE CHIEF:
A. Office Created; Appointment: The office of fire chief of the fire department of the village is hereby created. The fire chief shall be appointed by the
village president and approved by the board of trustees. He/she need not be a resident of the village. The fire chief shall serve at the pleasure of the
village president and board and may be removed by them at any time.
B. Control And Command: The fire chief shall be responsible for the management of the fire department and is subject to the supervision of the village
manager. The fire chief has the control and command over all persons connected with the fire department of the village while on duty. The fire chief
may prescribe and establish from time to time such rules and regulations as he/she deems advisable, subject to the approval of the village manager.
C. Suspensions: The chief of the fire department shall have power to suspend any firefighter from duty for not to exceed five (5) calendar days, but he/she
shall promptly report such suspension to the board of fire and police commissioners.
D. Custody Of Property: The fire chief shall have the custody of and full responsibility for the pumpers, tankers, trucks, ladders and all property and
equipment belonging to the fire department.
E. Emergency Operations Center (EOC): The fire chief or designee shall, if in his or her power, staff the fire section of the emergency operations center
whenever the EOC is operational.
F. Investigation Of Fires: The fire chief or designee shall ensure the investigation of the cause of all fires which may occur in the jurisdiction of the
department as soon as practicable, and shall ensure that a record is made and kept of the investigation and of the circumstances of each case.
G. Report: The fire chief or designee shall, as prescribed by the village manager, prepare reports regarding the emergency and nonemergency activities
of the fire department.
H. Inspection Of Premises: The fire chief shall make or cause to be made regular inspections of all buildings, structures and places used for
manufacturing or commercial purposes, or occupied or frequented by large numbers of people, and of all school buildings, public halls, churches,
institutional buildings, theaters, and all places of amusement, recreation or employment in order to ascertain whether the applicable fire regulations are
being efficiently carried out. No person shall exclude the fire chief or any one of his/her deputies or assistants from any such building, structure or
premises.
I. Prescribing Limits At Fire And/Or Rescue Emergency Incidents: The Fire Chief or other officer in command at any incident may prescribe limits in the
vicinity of the fire within which no persons, excepting those who reside therein, firefighters, police officers, officers of the Village and those admitted by
any officer of the Fire Department shall be permitted to go.
J. Removal Of Property: The Fire Chief shall have power to cause the removal of any property whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of
said property from harm, or to protect adjoining properties.
K. Incident Mitigation: The Fire Chief, or, in his or her absence, the acting fire officer in command at any emergency incident, may direct the members of
the Fire Department to take whatever actions are appropriate to mitigate the incident and/or prevent further harm or damage to persons or property.
(Ord. G-729, 8-26-2003)
3-2-3: APPOINTMENT AND PROMOTION OF FIREFIGHTERS; DEPUTY FIRE CHIEF:
A. Appointment And Promotion: The power of appointment to all entry level firefighter positions, and the power of promotion for the ranks of Lieutenant
and Battalion Chief shall be in the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the Village.
B. Deputy Fire Chief:
1. There is hereby created in and for the Village the Office of Deputy Fire Chief.
2. The Deputy Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Fire Chief.
3. The Deputy Fire Chief may be appointed from any rank of sworn, full time firefighters of the Village's Fire Department and must have at least five (5)
years of full time service as a firefighter in the Oak Brook Fire Department.
4. The Deputy Fire Chief position shall be an exempt rank subordinate exclusively to the Fire Chief. Said Deputy Fire Chief shall serve at the discretion
of the Fire Chief, and, if removed from the position, shall revert to the rank held immediately prior to the appointment to the Deputy Fire Chief
position. (Ord. G-729, 8-26-2003; Ord. G-788, 7-26-2005)
3-2-4: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Hindering Firefighters, Damaging Apparatus: No person shall offer any hindrance to any officer or firefighter in the performance of his or her duty at a
fire and/or rescue incident or in any manner destroy, damage or deface any emergency vehicle belonging to the Village.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 49/438
B. Driving Over Hose: No automobile, motor truck, or other vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose, when laid down by order of the Fire Chief
or other officer or member in charge of said hose.
C. Obstructing Fire Hydrants: No person shall in any manner obstruct the use of any fire hydrant, or have or place any material or vehicle in front thereof,
or within fifteen feet (15') from either side thereof, and in addition to any monetary penalty, any and all materials or vehicles found as an obstruction as
aforesaid may be forthwith removed by any member or members of the Fire or Police Department, and at the risk, cost and expense of the owner or
claimant.
D. Impersonating Firefighter: No person not a member of the Fire Department shall impersonate a firefighter or officer of the Fire Department.
E. Salvaged Property: No person shall take away any property in the possession of the Fire Department and salvaged from any fire until proof of
ownership be made satisfactory to the Fire Chief or designee. (Ord. G-729, 8-26-2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1150 - FIRE DEPARTMENTAL FEES. Go to new ordinance.
3-2-5: DEPARTMENTAL FEES:
A. Emergency Medical Services: As the Village, through its Fire Department, currently provides emergency medical service to the Village, and the
Corporate Authorities of the Village deem it appropriate to impose a user charge for such service in order to defray partially the cost to the Village of
providing such service, a fee is hereby imposed upon any person receiving emergency medical service and transportation for each use provided by
the Village as follows:
1. One thousand six hundred dollars ($1,600.00) for residents of the Village plus nineteen dollars ($19.00) per mile from the point of pick up to the
hospital for basic life support services.
2. One thousand six hundred dollars ($1,600.00) for residents of the Village plus nineteen dollars ($19.00) per mile from the point of pick up to the
hospital for advanced life support level I services.
3. One thousand six hundred dollars ($1,600.00) for residents of the Village plus nineteen dollars ($19.00) per mile from the point of pick up to the
hospital for advanced life support level II services.
4. One thousand eight hundred dollars ($1,800.00) for non-residents plus nineteen dollars ($19.00) per mile from the point of pick up to the hospital for
basic life support services.
5. One thousand eight hundred dollars ($1,800.00) for non-residents plus nineteen dollars ($19.00) per mile from the point of pick up to the hospital for
advanced life support level I services.
6. One thousand eight hundred dollars ($1,800.00) for non-residents plus nineteen dollars ($19.00) per mile from the point of pick up to the hospital for
advanced life support level II services.
B. Extrication Fee: In addition to the fees required pursuant to subsections A and C of this section, when members of the Fire Department are required to
use hydraulic, gas powered, electric powered, air powered, or any other specialized rescue equipment to remove a resident or nonresident from a
vehicle or other structure, such person shall pay the Village an additional service fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
C. Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation And First Aid Classes: The Village, through its Fire Department, currently provides cardiopulmonary resuscitation and
first aid instruction to interested persons, and the Corporate Authorities of the Village deem it appropriate to impose a user charge for such service in
order to defray partially the cost to the Village to provide such service. Fees, as determined by the Village Board or such other fee established by the
Village Manager upon consultation with the Village Board are imposed per the table below:
CARDIOPULMONARY RESUSCITATION
Number Of Participants Course Fee
1 - 7 $250.00
8 - 14 500.00
15 - 21 750.00
(Ord. G-1132, 7-10-2018)
3-2-6: HANDLING OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS; COSTS:
A. Definitions:
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE: Any response by the Village, including the Oak Brook Fire Department, alone or in conjunction with any
other governmental fire department(s) or agencies rendering aid to the Oak Brook Fire Department in relation to said response, in regard to an
incident involving the spilling, leaking or escape of any hazardous substance from any container intended for the storage or transportation of said
hazardous substance, or in regard to any fire or explosion involving a hazardous substance. For purposes of this section, "hazardous substance" shall
be defined as in 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.14, except that petroleum products and natural gas shall be considered "hazardous substances" for
purposes of this section.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 50/438
RECIPIENT OF A HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE: The owner(s) and/or tenant(s) of the building and/or real or personal property in relation to
which the hazardous materials response has taken place.
B. Reimbursement: Any recipient of any hazardous materials response by the Village, including the Fire Department, shall be responsible for reimbursing
the Village for the extraordinary costs and expenses of the Village, including, but not limited to, overtime labor and outside consulting or contracting
costs, extraordinary administrative, equipment and materials costs, and all disposal costs as a result of said hazardous materials response. For
purposes of this section, "extraordinary costs and expenses" shall also include the actual costs and expenses of any other municipality or agency
rendering aid to the Fire Department in relation to said hazardous materials response.
C. Itemized Bill: Upon completion of a hazardous materials response, the Village shall tender an itemized written bill to the recipient which sets forth the
extraordinary costs and expenses relative to said hazardous materials response. (Ord. G-729, 8-26-2003)
3-2-7: FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION FUND:
A. Definition: The term "firefighter" as used in this chapter shall mean full time paid members of the fire department and shall not include part time or
volunteer firefighting personnel and no member of the fire department other than full time paid members of the fire department shall be qualified to
receive any of the benefits provided herein.
B. Creation Of Fund: There is hereby created a pension fund to be known as the Oak Brook firefighters' pension fund, which pension fund shall be
administered by a board and operate pursuant to the statutory authority for municipalities of five hundred thousand (500,000) and under as contained
in state law. (Ord. G-729, 8-26-2003)
Title 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
LIQUOR CONTROL
4-1-1: TITLE:
The provisions of this chapter may be cited and referred to as the OAK BROOK LIQUOR CONTROL ORDINANCE. (Ord. G-570, 5-14-1996)
4-1-2: PURPOSE:
It is the policy of the Village to limit the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail primarily to the sale in its "original package" or by "restaurants", "recreational
facilities" or "hotels", as defined in section 4-1-3 of this chapter. It is not deemed conducive to the promotion of this public policy to allow the sale of
alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption on the premises where such sale is the sole business to be conducted. Further, it is the policy of the Village to
limit the purchase, consumption or possession of alcoholic liquor to persons of the age of twenty one (21) years or older in order to prevent intoxication,
disorderly conduct, trespass, unruly disturbance at public or private assemblies, traffic accidents and similar conduct which often result from the purchase,
consumption or possession of alcoholic liquor by persons under the lawful age. (Ord. G-570, 5-14-1996)
4-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having, as a substantial portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for rent, sale or for viewing
on the premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin operated means, and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities", or "specified anatomical areas" as defined in this section, or an establishment
with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such materials; or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such
materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin operated booths, exclusion of minors from the
establishment's premises or any other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: An establishment offering to its patrons, as entertainment, any exhibition or display, or any theatrical or other live
performances which include topless or go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers, or any persons
singing, reading, posing, modeling, or serving food or beverages, where the exhibition, performance, display or dance is intended to sexually arouse the
entertainer or the patrons, or where the attire of persons involved is such as to expose "specified anatomical areas", as defined in this section.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building, regardless of its seating capacity, which is used to present for public view on the premises,
films, movies, previews, trailers or advertisements which are distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined in this section.
ADULT USE: Includes adult bookstores, adult entertainment cabarets, and adult motion picture theaters, and similar uses.
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and including synthetic
ethyl alcohol, but not including denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 51/438
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable
of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured
alcohol produced in accordance with acts of congress and regulations promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing one-half of one
percent (0.5%) or less, of alcohol by volume.
ANNUAL SPECIAL EVENT: A business which would comply with the requirements of section 4-1-17, "Special Events Licenses And Promotions", of this
chapter but seeks to conduct more than one but no more than ten (10) special events in one license year. When an applicant has held ten (10) special
events within the year, an applicant must either apply for a new annual special events liquor license or apply for a per event special event liquor license.
APPLICANT: An individual, partnership, corporation or limited liability company which seeks to be licensed under the provisions of this chapter. In the
case of a corporation or limited liability company, it shall mean the officers, directors, all persons owning directly or beneficially more than five percent
(5%) of the stock of such corporation, and the person operating as manager of the premises.
BAR: A counter upon or over which alcoholic liquor is the principal commodity served or dispensed for consumption by persons at such a counter.
CATERER: A person who serves alcoholic liquors for consumption at the customer's site, whether the location is licensed or unlicensed, as an incidental
part of food service.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for pecuniary profit, but solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a
building or space in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and
accommodation of its members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining
a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and their guests; provided that its affairs and
management are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting and that no
member or any officer, agent, or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits
from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount of such
salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of
the club.
COFFEE SHOP: A place of business that is: a) licensed if such requirement is contained within the ordinances of the village; b) opens to the public for
business each day and remains open to the public for business continuously for not less than ten (10) hours; and c) is engaged in the primary business of
the sale, over a counter located at the point of sale where customers place orders, of: 1) coffee, tea, coffee based beverages, tea based beverages, and
other beverages prepared on the premises for consumption on or off the premises where served; and 2) food items, including baked goods for
consumption on or off the premises where served. The sale or service of beer and wine at any coffee shop located within the village is prohibited except
pursuant to a class K coffee shop license. No coffee shop located within the village is eligible for any class of liquor license other than a class K coffee
shop license.
FOOD HALL: A place of business that:
A. Holds a class L license if alcoholic liquor is sold, possessed, or consumed on the premises;
B. Is located in the B2 district and within a building having no less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of building area;
C. Has seating capacity, whether with stools, chairs, benches, couches or other furniture, for no more than four hundred thirty (430) persons (not
including the seating capacity of any adjacent food hall restaurants and food hall coffee shops);
D. Provides the exclusive means of customer access to no fewer than five (5) and no more than ten (10) premises suitable for occupancy by
restaurants or coffee shops (whether or not any 1 or more of such premises are occupied, and whether or not any 1 or more of such premises are
licensed for the sale of alcohol);
E. Has at least one access control point with an enclosed vestibule, video surveillance, and signage prohibiting customers from exiting or entering the
food hall with any alcoholic beverage;
F. Is fully enclosed by some or all of the following: solid walls; planters no less than thirty inches (30") in height and no less than two feet (2') in width;
other nonpermeable barriers approved by the liquor control commissioner; access control points; one-way emergency exit gates identified as such
with signage; doorways specifically marked and located for use only by employees and delivery personnel; and premises for food hall restaurants
and food hall coffee shops (whether or not occupied); and
G. Complies with enclosure and access control plans reviewed and approved by the liquor control commissioner, village fire department, and
community development department, which enclosure and access control plans shall be designed and constructed to ensure that: 1) no customer of
a restaurant or coffee shop that is adjacent and accessible to a food hall may enter except through that food hall's access control points; and 2) no
such customer may exit such restaurant or coffee shop except through that food hall's approved access control points and approved one-way
emergency exit gates.
FOOD HALL COFFEE SHOP: A coffee shop that is adjacent to a food hall and accessible by customers only from or through that food hall, regardless of
whether such coffee shop holds a class K license or has had a class K license that is permanently revoked or temporarily suspended and regardless of
whether the adjacent food hall holds a class L liquor license.
FOOD HALL RESTAURANT: A restaurant that is adjacent to a food hall and accessible by customers only from or through that food hall, regardless of
whether such restaurant holds a class A-1 license or has had a class A-1 license that is permanently revoked or temporarily suspended and regardless of
whether the adjacent food hall holds a class L liquor license.
GENERAL MANAGER: The person who directs, controls, supervises, or is generally in charge of all operations of the licensed establishment.
HOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where a restaurant is located and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 52/438
sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which twenty five (25) or
more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations for transients.
LICENSED FOOD HALL: A food hall that holds a class L license. No food hall shall be required to hold a class L license unless any of the following
applies: a) alcohol will be sold, possessed, or consumed within the food hall premises; b) an adjacent food hall restaurant holds a class A-1 license; or c)
an adjacent food hall coffee shop holds a class K license.
LICENSED FOOD HALL COFFEE SHOP: A food hall coffee shop that holds a class K license. No food hall coffee shop shall be required to hold a class K
license unless alcohol will be sold by the food hall coffee shop.
LICENSED FOOD HALL RESTAURANT: A food hall restaurant that holds a class A-1 license. No food hall restaurant shall be required to hold a class A-1
license unless alcohol will be sold by the food hall restaurant.
LIQUOR MANAGER: The person who directs, controls, supervises, or is generally in charge of its employees and staff relating to the distribution or
purveyance of alcoholic beverages within the licensed establishment.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT: The playing of live music by a person or persons using string, brass, reed, woodwind, percussion, electronic and digital
instruments at a volume which does not create a public nuisance and/or performances by individuals and/or groups which may involve acting, singing,
dancing, comedy and the reading and/or recital of poetry.
LOUNGE AREA: That portion of a restaurant possessing a liquor license which contains a bar, tables and chairs and is set aside primarily for the service
of alcoholic beverages by the poured drink without food, and which is operated in compliance with the liquor license requirements.
MEN'S OR WOMEN'S CLUB: An establishment which offers entertainment where any person may appear in a nude or seminude state, or offers the
customer a role playing interaction, including, but not limited to, servers, hosts, hostesses, dancers, singers, models or other performance artists, or an
establishment which offers customers role playing interaction.
NUDE OR NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY: The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast; or, a
state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, barrel, keg, or other receptacle or container whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and labeled by
the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any alcoholic liquor.
PACKAGE LIQUOR SALES: The sale or offering for sale at retail of alcoholic liquor, in the original package, and not to be consumed in whole or in part on
the premises where sold.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, corporation or limited liability company.
PREMISES: Premises licensed under this chapter shall refer to that area for which a license has been issued to sell alcoholic beverages. Where more
than one area for the sale of alcoholic beverages is under the same roof or at one street address, each area shall be considered to be a separate
premises for licensing purposes.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY: A building or area in which the primary business is to provide, by membership or user fee or both, a place in which the public
may participate in a sport or engage in physical fitness activities, including, but not limited to, golf courses, tennis, racquetball or handball clubs and health
clubs, provided, that such facilities shall include an area in which service of food prepared on premises is provided, including hot or cold sandwiches or
other similar foods, and in which the guest seating capacity is not less than thirty five (35).
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where the primary business is the service of
meals, and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, and where adequate provision is made for sanitary kitchen
and dining room equipment and capacity and a sufficient number of employees to prepare, cook and serve a reasonable variety of meals for its
customers. The mere availability and service at any premises of cold sandwiches, hors d'oeuvres or other similar foods will not, standing alone, be
deemed sufficient to constitute such premises a restaurant within the meaning of this definition, it being the intent of this definition that the primary
business conducted on premises to be licensed as restaurants hereunder shall be the service of meals.
RETAIL SALE: The sale for use or consumption and not for resale.
ROLE PLAYING INTERACTION: An arrangement, service or program where a server, host, hostess, dancer, singer, model or other performance artist
engages a customer in a meeting or conversation involving, depicting, participating in, or relating to any specified sexual activities as set forth in
subsection 4-1-24A7 of this chapter.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, for a consideration and not for resale, including all sales made by
any person, except a person acting in the privacy of his/her home, or as part of a religious ceremony, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or
employee, and including, but not limited to, all of the following acts when done for consideration:
A. The selling of liquor;
B. The delivery of liquor, without additional charge, with a meal or with entertainment or the providing of samples of liquor as part of a promotion or
sales device of any kind;
C. The dispensing of liquor;
D. The providing of mix, ice, water or glasses for the purposes of serving or mixing drinks containing alcoholic liquor for consumption on the same
premises;
E. The pouring of liquor;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 53/438
F. The providing of "setups" containing alcoholic liquor.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of the
body covered by supporting straps or devices.
SPECIAL EVENT: An event conducted by a person who is not licensed under this chapter which involves the sale of alcoholic liquor or at which alcoholic
liquor is made available to the general public, or an event conducted by a person who is licensed under this chapter which exceeds the restrictions and
limitations of such license.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair; buttocks; and female
breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B. Acts or representations of acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation or flagellation;
C. Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast;
D. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities set forth in subsections A through C of this definition. (Ord. G-570, 5-14-1996; Ord.
G-587, 4-8-1997; Ord. G-591, 5-13-1997; Ord. G-1057, 10-13-2015; Ord. G-1076, 5-10-2016; Ord. G-1078, 7-12-2016; Ord. G-1083, 8-9-2016)
4-1-4: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
A. Designated: The village president shall be the local liquor control commissioner and shall be charged with the administration within the village of the
appropriate provisions of this chapter, and whenever the term "commissioner" is used herein, such term shall refer to the local liquor control
commissioner.
B. Powers: The liquor control commissioner shall have the following powers, functions and duties with respect to licenses granted hereunder:
1. To grant, impose a monetary fine, and/or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days, or revoke for cause, all local licenses issued to persons for
premises within the village jurisdiction;
2. To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto or by the state of Illinois liquor control commission have been or are
being violated, and at such time to examine said premises of said licensee in connection therewith;
3. To receive complaints that any of the provisions of this chapter, or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant hereto, have been or are being violated
and to act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter provided;
4. To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of
revocation has been served, or any licensee against whom a citation proceeding has been instituted by the state of Illinois liquor control
commission; to examine, or cause to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant or licensee, and to hear testimony and take
evidence for use in the performance of the commissioner's duties, and for the information of the commissioner to issue subpoenas which shall be
effective in any part of this state. Other persons may be designated by the commissioner to take action for the purpose of obtaining any of the
information desired by the commissioner under this section;
5. To report to the village board from time to time actions which have been taken to grant or deny liquor licenses or to penalize licensees. (Ord. G-570,
5-14-1996; Ord. G-671, 2-13-2001)
4-1-5: APPLICABILITY OF OTHER PROVISIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or relieve the licensee, owner, proprietor or person in charge of any place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold
from the restrictions and requirements of any other provision of this code, other ordinances of the village or of the statutes of the state. (Ord. G-570, 5-14-
1996)
4-1-6: LICENSE REQUIRED; TERM:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, at retail, within the limits of the Village any alcoholic liquor without having first properly obtained
and displayed a retail liquor license, or in violation of the terms of such retail liquor license, or in violation of the provisions of this chapter. The term of
each retail liquor license issued hereunder shall be from July 1 through June 30. (Ord. G-1026, 7-8-2014)
4-1-7: LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS:
Retail liquor licenses issued under this chapter shall be divided into the following classes:
CLASS A-1: Retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold when the primary business conducted on said premises is that of a
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 54/438
restaurant, when the ratio of seating predominantly or exclusively used for dining purposes to that seating for bar or lounge areas equals or exceeds three
and one-half to one (3.5:1). A license of this classification may be issued to an establishment located within another establishment, such as a department
store, provided that the licensed establishment meets all other criteria stated herein. Holders of a Class A-1 license with banquet hall facilities containing
not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor space open to the public may dispense alcoholic liquor brought on the licensee's premises by a
customer of the licensee in conjunction with the use of the licensee's banquet hall facility and the licensee may charge such customer a fee in connection
with the service of such alcoholic liquor. Also permitted is the distribution of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises provided that the alcoholic
liquor is not sold and is offered only in conjunction with a special event or sale which is by invitation only and not open to the general public in a
department store which contains at least fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of retail area.
CLASS A-2: Retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold when the primary business conducted on said premises is that of a
restaurant when the ratio of seating predominantly or exclusively used for dining to that seating for bar/lounge area is less than three and one-half to one
(3.5:1), but not less than one and four-tenths to one (1.4:1). A license of this classification may be issued to an establishment located within another
establishment, such as a department store, provided that the licensed establishment meets all other criteria stated herein. Holders of a Class A-2 license
with banquet hall facilities containing not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor space open to the public may dispense alcoholic liquor
brought on the licensee's premises by a customer of the licensee in conjunction with the use of the licensee's banquet hall facility and the licensee may
charge such customer a fee in connection with the service of such alcoholic liquor.
CLASS A-3: Retail sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises where sold, such as in a tavern, saloon or bar where the primary business is
not that of a restaurant.
CLASS A-4: Retail sale of alcoholic liquor by a restaurant with a premises that: a) has an interior area of between two thousand (2,000) and eight
thousand (8,000) square feet; b) has an interior seating capacity between fifty (50) and two hundred (200) customers; c) has a seasonal or year-round
outdoor seating of no greater than six thousand (6,000) square feet; d) is located within a retail store that has no less than twenty five thousand (25,000)
square feet of area and a portion of which is designated as the retail store's "retail service area", as defined in section 4-1-16.8 of this chapter; e) is
subleased by the holder of the license from the store tenant, as defined in section 4-1-16.8 of this chapter; f) is located within a regional retail or mixed
use center in the B-2 Zoning District having no less than eighty (80) acres of land area and no less than one million (1,000,000) square feet of building
area, g) is not within five hundred feet (500') of any public right-of-way; and h) has a ratio of seating that is predominantly or exclusively used for dining
purposes to seating for bar or lounge areas equaling or exceeding three and one-half to one (3.5:1). Holders of a Class A-4 license are permitted to
conduct cooking classes.
CLASS B: Retail sale of alcoholic liquors in the original package, not for consumption on the premises where sold, except for as specifically permitted by
section 4-1-17 of this chapter. No licensee shall give, or offer to give, alcoholic liquor as a gift or gratuity with the sale of products other than alcoholic
liquors, or induce the purchase of or promote the sale of products other than alcoholic liquors, except for as specifically permitted by section 4-1-17 of this
chapter. A license of this classification may be issued to an establishment located within another establishment, such as a department store, provided that
the licensed establishment meets all other criteria stated herein.
CLASS C: Retail sales of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises of regularly organized clubs.
CLASS D: Retail sale of alcoholic liquor in conjunction with the service of food by caterers for catered events conducted off the premises of the licensee,
provided that the sale of alcoholic liquor by the drink is not permitted.
CLASS E: Retail sale of alcoholic liquor in hotels and motels. Retail sales may take place only in areas specifically designated on the license.
A. The holder of a Class E license issued to a hotel/motel may install cabinets for the storage of liquor for the use of room guests in each room;
provided, however, that each such cabinet shall be securely locked and a separate key from the room key given only to a guest twenty one (21)
years or older at the time of registration.
B. Any hotel/motel providing cabinets for the storage of liquor available in guestrooms on the effective date hereof shall provide locks for such
cabinets.
CLASS F: Retail sale or dispensing of alcoholic liquor on a temporary basis during a special event as defined and regulated in section 4-1-17 of this
chapter.
CLASS G: Retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption at the Village Sports Core which includes the following facilities: Municipal golf clubhouse,
beverage cart service, veranda, Oak Brook room, saddle room, polo fields, poolside and library.
CLASS H: Retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of Municipally owned and operated recreation facilities, including the grounds,
but not including the Village Sports Core.
CLASS I: Retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold when the primary business conducted on the premises is that of a
movie theater, provided that a movie theater is not an adult motion picture theater.
CLASS J: The consumption of beer and wine on the premises of a restaurant, which beer or wine has been brought into the licensed premises by a
patron for consumption while being served a meal on the premises, subject to the conditions and restrictions set forth in this chapter.
CLASS K: Retail sale of beer and wine for consumption on the premises where sold when the primary business conducted on the premises is that of a
coffee shop. All sales of beer and wine will be for consumption on the premises only. All alcoholic beverages shall be poured from original packaging into
glass containers prior to service to consumers. Beer and wine sales will account for less than ten percent (10%) of the total sales of the business. All
employees will be twenty one (21) years of age or older and no table service will be permitted. Beer and wine must be ordered and received at a counter.
CLASS L: Sale and consumption of beer, wine, and other alcoholic beverages within a food hall, including consumption within the food hall of beer, wine,
and other alcoholic liquor that is purchased from an adjacent food hall restaurant or food hall coffee shop.
CLASS M: Annual special events license for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic liquor during special events as required in section 4-1-17 of this chapter.
CLASS N: Retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold when the primary business conducted on the premises is that of a
spa, nail salon, or beauty salon. (Ord. G-1108, 9-12-2017; Ord. G-1138, 10-23-2018)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 55/438
4-1-8: LICENSE FEES AND NUMBERS:
A. Fees And Number Of Licenses Authorized: The fees for the licenses issued and the number of licenses authorized pursuant to this chapter shall be as
follows:
A-1 $2,000.00 $2,750.00 34
A-2 2,000.00 2,750.00 0
A-3 2,000.00 2,750.00 1
A-4 2,000.00 2,750.00 1
B 2,000.00 2,750.00 16
C 2,000.00 2,200.00 1
D 2,000.00 2,200.00 3
E 2,000.00 4,950.00 7
F No fee $50.00 per event Not applicable
G No fee No fee 1
H No fee No fee 1
I $2,000.00 $2,750.00 2
J 2,000.00 500.00 1
K 2,000.00 2,750.00 0
L 2,000.00 2,750.00 1
M - 500.00 3
N 2,000.00 2,750.00 1
B. Fee Regulations:
1. There shall be no refund or proration of the license application fee. For any license issued on or after July 1 of any year, the annual license fee shall
be prorated by dividing the fee set forth in this section by twelve (12) and multiplying the resulting sum by the number of months, or parts thereof,
remaining in the license year.
2. If an applicant conducts, or proposes to conduct, the retail sale of alcoholic liquor within a single building in ways which would require the issuance
of more than one license to authorize all of the subject activities, the fee for the second or any additional licenses shall be five hundred dollars
($500.00), and no application fee shall be required for the second or any additional licenses. Each license issued shall be publicly posted at the
appropriate location where alcoholic liquor is being offered for retail sale. All of the subject activities must be conducted within a single building, and
must be under the same ownership and control. Nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to prevent any hotel operator licensed under the
provisions of this chapter from serving alcoholic liquor to his registered guests in any room or part of his hotel, if such liquor so served shall be kept
in and served from a licensed location, place, or premises in the hotel. Nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to prevent any holder of a
Class I liquor license from serving a customer in any movie theater if such liquor is kept in, and served from, a bar located in the lobby of the movie
theater. Nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to prevent the operations of a licensed food hall or to prevent any licensed food hall
restaurant or licensed food hall coffee shop from serving a customer liquor for consumption within the adjacent licensed food hall and within any
other food hall restaurants and coffee shops that are accessible only from or through the same food hall.
Further, nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to prevent the operations of a licensed food hall, a food hall restaurant (whether or not
such food hall restaurant holds a Class A-1 liquor license), or a food hall coffee shop (whether or not such food hall coffee shop holds a Class K
liquor license) from permitting the consumption, on premises, of liquor purchased within the adjacent food hall, licensed food hall restaurants or
licensed food hall coffee shops.
Further, nothing herein contained shall prohibit: a) the holder of Class A-4 license from selling or serving alcoholic liquor to a customer for
consumption within a retail service area or b) a retail store from permitting the consumption of such alcoholic liquor within the retail service area
associated with the Class A-4 license, as described in section 4-1-16.8 of this chapter.
C. License Number Reductions: The number of authorized liquor licenses stated in subsection A of this section shall be automatically reduced for any
such license which is:
1. Not issued; or
2. Not used for thirty (30) days or more. (Ord. G-570, 5-14-1996; Ord. G-574, 9-24-1996; Ord. G-580, 1-14-1997; Ord. G-591, 5-13-1997; Ord. G-594,
6-24-1997; Ord. G-598, 9-9-1997; Ord. G-603, 11-11-1997; Ord. G-613, 7-14-1998; Ord. G-617, 8-25-1998; Ord. G-627, 11-24-1998; Ord. G-632, 4-
27-1999; Ord. G-640, 8-10-1999; Ord. G-641, 8-24-1999; Ord. G-661, 9-12-2000; Ord. G-667, 1-9-2001; Ord. G-682, 8-28-2001; Ord. G-692, 2-26-
2002; Ord. G-697, 6-11-2002; Ord. G-698, 6-11-2002; Ord. G-714, 2-25-2003; Ord. G-717, 4-8-2003; Ord. G-743, 3-9-2004; Ord. G-746, 4-13-2004;
Ord. G-751, 7-27-2004; Ord. G-757, 8-24-2004; Ord. G-761, 10-12-2004; Ord. G-771, 1-17-2005; Ord. G-774, 1-25-2005; Ord. G-775, 2-22-2005;
Ord. G-800, 2-13-2006; Ord. G-804, 6-13-2006; Ord. G-805, 6-27-2006; Ord. G-806, 7-25-2006; Ord. G-807, 7-25-2006; Ord. G-809, 8-22-2006;
Class Of
License
Application
Fee
Annual
License Fee
Number
Issued
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 56/438
Ord. G-810, 9-12-2006; Ord. G-811, 9-12-2006; Ord. G-812, 10-10-2006; Ord. G-815, 11-14-2006; Ord. G-818, 11-28-2006; Ord. G-823, 1-9-2007;
Ord. G-824, 1-9-2007; Ord. G-829, 2-27-2007; Ord. G-851, 1-8-2008; Ord. G-855, 3-25-2008; Ord. G-867, 9-9-2008; Ord. G-872, 10-14-2008; Ord.
G-881, 1-27-2009; Ord. G-883, 2-24-2009; Ord. G-888, 6-9-2009; Ord. G-894, 7-28-2009; Ord. G-896, 9-8-2009; Ord. G-899, 9-8-2009; Ord. G-909,
12-8-2009; Ord. G-913, 1-12-2010; Ord. G-929, 8-10-2010; Ord. G-932, 9-14-2010; Ord. G-933, 9-28-2010; Ord. G-947, 7-12-2011; Ord. G-949, 9-
13-2011; Ord. G-951, 9-27-2011; Ord. G-952, 10-11-2011; Ord. G-954, 12-13-2011; Ord. G-962, 2-14-2012; Ord. G-967, 3-27-2012; Ord. G-972, 5-
22-2012; Ord. G-975, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-978, 9-11-2012; Ord. G-993, 3-26-2013; Ord. G-999, 5-14-2013; Ord. G-1005, 7-9-2013; Ord. G-1006, 7-9-
2013; Ord. G-1008, 10-8-2013; Ord. G-1009, 10-8-2013; Ord. G-1018, 1-14-2014; Ord. G-1024, 6-10-2014; Ord. G-1026, 7-8-2014; Ord. G-1028, 7-
22-2014; Ord. G-1030, 8-12-2014; Ord. G-1034, 9-23-2014; Ord. G-1035, 10-14-2014; Ord. G-1039, 10-28-2014; Ord. G-1044, 2-24-2015; Ord. G-
1045, 3-24-2015; Ord. G-1046, 4-14-2015; Ord. G-1050, 7-14-2015; Ord. G-1055, 8-11-2015; Ord. G-1056, 9-8-2015; Ord. G-1057, 10-13-2015;
Ord. G-1061, 10-13-2015; Ord. G-1076, 5-10-2016; Ord. G-1077, 5-24-2016; Ord. G-1078, 7-12-2016; Ord. G-1079, 7-12-2016; Ord. G-1083, 8-9-
2016; Ord. G-1085, 9-13-2016; Ord. G-1086, 9-13-2016; Ord. G-1091, 11-22-2016; Ord. G-1093, 12-13-2016; Ord. G-1094, 12-13-2016; Ord. G-
1100, 2-28-2017; Ord. G-1105, 5-23-2017; Ord. G-1106, 5-23-2017; Ord. G-1107, 5-23-2017; Ord. G-1108, 9-12-2017; Ord. G-1109, 9-12-2017; Ord.
G-1110, 9-12-2017; Ord. G-1111, 9-12-2017; Ord. G-1114, 10-10-2017; Ord. G-1118, 11-28-2017; Ord. G-1122, 12-12-2017; Ord. G-1123, 1-23-
2018; Ord. G-1126, 3-13-2018; Ord. G-1128, 6-12-2018; Ord. G-1129, 6-12-2018; Ord. G-1133, 9-11-2018; Ord. G-1136, 10-9-2018; Ord. G-1137,
10-9-2018; Ord. G-1138, 10-23-2018; Ord. G-1139, 11-27-2018; Ord. G-1146, 3-26-2019; Ord. G-1148, 4-23-2019)
4-1-9: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for a retail liquor license shall be made in writing or electronically sent to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner on forms provided by the
Village, signed by the applicant, if an individual; or if a corporation, partnership or limited liability company, by a duly authorized agent thereof, verified by
oath or affidavit.
All applications for a retail liquor license hereunder shall be accompanied by the deposit of a check, money order, or cash in the full amount of the
application fee required to be paid for the classification of license applied for pursuant to section 4-1-8 of this chapter. All applications for a retail liquor
license must contain the following:
A. The name, date of birth, driver's license number and state where issued to the applicant, in the case of an individual; in the case of a partnership, the
same information from the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation, the date of incorporation, the objects and
purposes for which it was organized, a summary of its activities during the past year, and the aforesaid information for each of the officers, directors,
all persons owning directly or beneficially more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation, the general manager(s) and the person(s)
operating as liquor manager(s) of the premises; and in the case of a limited liability company, the date of organization, the purposes for which it was
organized, a summary of its activities during the past year, and the aforesaid information for each of the managers and members owning directly or
beneficially more than five percent (5%) of the ownership of the company and the person operating as manager of the premises;
B. The citizenship of the applicant, the place of the applicant's birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the date and place of the applicant's naturalization. If the
applicant is not a citizen of the United States, a statement indicating if the applicant is a permanent resident of the United States, and if so, the date
the applicant's permanent resident status was granted;
C. The character of business of the applicant; and in case of a corporation or limited liability company, the purposes for which it was formed;
D. The length of time said applicant has been in business of that character, or in the case of a corporation or limited liability company, the date when its
charter was issued;
E. The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such liquor license;
F. A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar or other liquor license on premises other than described in this application, and the
disposition of such application;
G. A statement that the applicant is not unqualified to receive a liquor license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter, laws of this state,
or the ordinances of the village, and a statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony;
H. Whether a previous liquor license issued by any licensing authority has been revoked, and the reasons therefor;
I. A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state of Illinois, or of the United States, including, but not limited to, the Americans
with disabilities act, or any ordinances of the village in the conduct of the applicant's business;
J. A statement describing the specific procedures to be enacted by the applicant to monitor operations to ensure no incidence of underage drinking;
K. A completed fingerprint card from each general partner, sole proprietor, general manager and liquor manager; and any officer of a corporation or limited
liability company who owns either directly or indirectly more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of any class of the capital stock of said
corporation or more than five percent (5%) ownership interest of said limited liability company. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
this subsection, a person named herein is not required to submit a fingerprint card to the village if the village already has a fingerprint card on file for
that person; and
L. Such additional information or identification as the local liquor control commissioner may deem necessary for directors and other persons affiliated with
the applicant in order to establish the character of the applicant. (Ord. G-1026, 7-8-2014)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 57/438
4-1-10: PERSONS ELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
No such liquor license shall be issued or renewed to the following:
A. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community;
B. A person who is not a citizen or a permanent resident of the United States;
C. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law if the local liquor control commissioner determines after investigation, that
such person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust;
D. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of, or is keeping, a house of ill fame;
E. A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to public decency and morality;
F. A person whose liquor license under this chapter has been revoked for cause;
G. A person who at the time of application for renewal of any liquor license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such liquor license under a first
application;
H. If the applicant is a partnership:
1. Unless all of the partners of such partnership would be qualified to obtain a license if each of the partners applied for a license in their individual
capacity;
2. To which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period, or if any
of the partners have been issued a federal gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax period;
I. If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company:
1. If any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning directly or beneficially in the aggregate more than five percent
(5%) of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a liquor license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship or permanent
resident status;
2. Unless it is incorporated in Illinois or a foreign corporation qualified under the Illinois business corporation act to transact business in Illinois;
3. If any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation
has been issued a federal gaming stamp or a federal wagering stamp for the current tax period;
J. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of
the licensee;
K. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or who
shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation;
L. A person who does not own the premises for which a liquor license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the liquor
license is issued;
M. Any elected public official, village employee, and no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in any business holding an
Oak Brook liquor license;
N. A person who fails to obtain a state liquor license;
O. A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee;
P. A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or
as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions;
Q. A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period;
R. Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period. (Ord. G-1026, 7-8-2014)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 58/438
4-1-11: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE:
A. No liquor license shall be issued to any person for premises upon which theatrical or other live performances which include the types of conduct
enumerated in subsections 4-1-24A6 and A7 of this chapter shall constitute the entertainment offered to the patrons thereof. This prohibition includes,
but is not limited to, any entertainment, fashion show or other presentation which may include any person in a nude or seminude state, including, but
not limited to, servers, hosts, hostesses, dancers, singers, models or other performance artists, or role playing interactions.
B. No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school, other than an institution of
higher learning, or other entity as provided in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-11 provided that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering
restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business.
C. No liquor license shall be issued to any person or premises which are to be operated as a "men's or women's club" as defined in section 4-1-3 of this
chapter.
D. No liquor license shall be issued to any person or premises which is to be operated as an "adult use", as defined in section 4-1-3 of this chapter. (Ord.
G-570, 5-14-1996; Ord. G-591, 5-13-1997)
4-1-12: LIST OF LICENSES KEPT:
The village clerk shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record and shall furnish the commissioner, village manager, village treasurer and chief of
police each with a copy thereof; upon the issuance of any new license, or any revocation of any old license, the village clerk shall give written notice to
each of said officers of such action. (Ord. G-570, 5-14-1996)
4-1-13: LICENSE RENEWAL, FAILURE TO RENEW:
A. Any licensee may apply for renewal of his license prior to the expiration thereof, provided he is then entitled to receive a license and the premises for
which such renewal license is sought is suitable for such purpose.
B. In order to assure eligibility to renew the license, the licensee shall either certify to the continued compliance of the premises with the conditions
pursuant to which the license was initially granted, including the approved floor plan, or shall submit a request for approval of certain changes in the
licensed business pursuant to subsection 4-1-20C1 of this chapter. The renewal application shall be on forms provided by the village and shall include
the same information as provided for an original application, to determine whether the licensee is, and will continue to be, qualified for a license.
Provided, in lieu of new submittals, the renewal applicant may certify, on forms provided for by the village, that some or all of the information previously
provided by the applicant with any original or renewal application has not changed, and provided further, that subsection 4-1-9K of this chapter, shall
not apply in the case of a renewal of a liquor license in good standing.
C. Applications for renewal along with the required license fee shall be filed with the village no later than the second Friday of June each year.
Applications for renewal filed after this deadline shall be considered a late filing, but shall be accepted by the village until June 30 of each year,
provided that any licensee submitting a late filing shall, in addition to the license fee, pay a late fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). No application for
renewal shall be accepted after June 30 of each year. Any application filed after June 30 shall be treated as an application for an original license.
D. Applications for renewal shall be considered by the commissioner and either approved or denied based upon the standards and qualifications for
issuance as set forth in this chapter and state law.
E. Except for special events licenses under section 4-1-17 of this chapter, any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall terminate by operation of law
at 11:59:59 P.M. of the June 30 following issuance. Any licensee who has filed an application shall be permitted to continue operation under the
authority of the existing license, even after June 30, until a final decision is made by the commissioner as provided herein. Any licensee who fails to
file a renewal application shall cease liquor operation on or before June 30. (Ord. G-570, 5-14-1996; Ord. G-612, 6-9-1998; Ord. G-722, 6-24-2003)
4-1-14: LICENSE A PERSONAL PRIVILEGE; NOT SUBJECT TO ATTACHMENT, TRANSFER, DEVOLUTION:
A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance, unless sooner revoked as in this chapter provided, and shall
not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily,
or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the
death of the licensee; provided, that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt
licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate
court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent or such insolvency or
bankruptcy until the expiration of such license, but not longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. A refund shall
be made of that portion of the license fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from operating under such license in accordance
with the provisions of this section. (Ord. G-570, 5-14-1996)
4-1-15: CONDITIONS OF LICENSES:
A. Insurance Requirements:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 59/438
1. All licensees shall have in effect, prior to the issuance of any liquor license hereunder, general liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit or one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and per aggregate, naming the Village of
Oak Brook as a party insured, and shall submit to the Village a certificate or policy of insurance as evidence of such coverage, issued by an
insurance company licensed to do business in the State and have a "Best" rating acceptable to the Village. The effective period of such insurance
coverage shall coincide with the period the liquor license is in effect. A general liability insurance policy containing a self-insurance retention
requirement (SIR) does not satisfy the requirements of this subsection.
2. In addition, each liquor license applicant shall furnish evidence satisfactory to the Liquor Control Commissioner, or the Commissioner's designee,
that it is covered by a policy of liquor liability insurance by a responsible insurance company authorized and licensed to do business in the State
insuring such applicant in the amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). A liquor liability insurance policy containing a selfinsurance
retention requirement (SIR) does not satisfy the requirements of this subsection.
B. Display Of License: All current licenses and required warning signs issued under this chapter shall be displayed together by the licensee at all times in
a conspicuous place where they are readily visible to the public. The same requirements shall apply for any license issued by the Illinois State Liquor
Control Commission.
C. Mandatory Alcohol Awareness Training:
1. It shall be the responsibility of each licensed establishment which sells alcoholic liquor to provide certified training from the State licensed beverage
alcohol sellers and servers education and training (BASSET) program or training for intervention procedures (TIPS) program to its liquor managers,
bartenders, servers, and any other employee involved in the furnishing of alcoholic beverages to its customers.
2. It shall be the responsibility of each licensed establishment which sells alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises to have present on the
premises at all times when alcoholic liquor may legally be sold, a manager or other employee in charge of such establishment who shall have
successfully completed a training program for servers and sellers licensed by the Illinois Department of Alcohol and Substance Abuse and approved
by the Commissioner. In addition to the penalties otherwise provided in this chapter, failure to comply with this section shall be cause for denial of a
liquor license or subject a licensee to the penalties set forth in section 4-1-25 of this chapter.
3. The initial application and all subsequent renewal applications for all classes of retail liquor licenses shall be accompanied by proof of completion
(copy of certificate) of such program licensed by the State by all liquor managers and such other current employees as are necessary to comply with
the provisions of subsection C1 of this section.
4. In addition to the other requirements of this section, all liquor managers shall attend a program conducted by the Oak Brook Police Department
relative to alcohol awareness at least once every two (2) years commencing July 1, 2001, provided that any liquor manager hired after July 1, 2002,
shall attend the next available alcohol awareness program.
D. Sanitation: All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the storage of such liquor for such sale or for consumption within a licensed
food hall or retail service area as defined in section 4-1-16.8 of this chapter, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be kept in full
compliance with all ordinances and regulations concerning the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption.
E. Consumption On Premises:
1. Except for tasting of samples as authorized in subsection 4-1-23B of this chapter and for special events as authorized by the Commissioner
pursuant to section 4-1-17 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for anyone having a Class B license under this chapter to sell or offer for sale any
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the licensed premises, or to permit alcoholic liquor to be consumed on such premises.
2. Except for private functions not open to the public, special events as authorized by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner pursuant to section 4-1-
17 of this chapter, food hall coffee shops that satisfy the insurance requirements of subsection A of this section, food hall restaurants that satisfy the
insurance requirements of subsection A of this section, or a retail service area as defined in section 4-1-16.8 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person operating or employed by any business establishment which is not licensed to sell alcoholic liquor in the Village pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter to permit alcoholic liquor to be consumed on the business premises.
F. Permitted Hours For Sale And Consumption: The hours during which a licensee shall be permitted to sell, offer for sale, cause to be sold or to be given
away, or to permit the consumption in or upon any licensed premises of any alcoholic liquor shall be as follows:
Monday 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M. Tuesday
Tuesday 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M. Wednesday
Wednesday 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M. Thursday
Thursday 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M. Friday
Friday 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M. Saturday
Saturday 6:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M. Sunday
Sunday 9:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M. Monday
New Year's Eve Day 6:00 A.M. to 4:00 A.M. New Year's Day
New Year's Eve Day Sunday 9:00 A.M. to 4:00 A.M. New Year's Day
It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or to admit the public to or to permit the public to remain within, or to permit the consumption of
alcoholic liquor in or upon any licensed premises by any person, including employees of the licensee, other than during the above permitted hours;
provided, however, that in the case of restaurants, movie theaters, and hotels, such establishments may be kept open for business, but alcoholic
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 60/438
liquor may only be sold or consumed in or upon such licensed premises by any person, including the employees of the licensee, during such
permitted hours.
Upon payment of an additional annual license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00), the holder of a Class A-1 license may extend its hours of
operation on Friday until two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on Saturday.
No person holding a Class N license issued pursuant to this chapter shall sell or permit to be sold, offer for sale, give away, or deliver any alcoholic
liquor except between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. Monday through Sunday or between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on Saturdays to only bridal parties receiving salon and spa services.
Permitted hours for sale and consumption of alcohol for licensee which has been granted a Class K license, shall permit the sale of beer and wine
only between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Monday through Sunday.
G. License Limited To Single Business: All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be limited to a single business establishment. No licensee shall
operate, advertise or otherwise represent that it is operating a liquor establishment or business except as expressly designated on the face of the
license. Nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to prevent the lawful operations of a food hall or its adjacent food hall restaurants and food
hall coffee shops. Nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to prevent a retail store from permitting the consumption of alcoholic liquor within
a retail service area as described in section 4-1-16.8 of this chapter.
H. Delivery Of Alcoholic Liquor Off Premises: It shall be unlawful for any liquor licensee licensed by the Village to deliver alcoholic liquor to someone
located in the Village and outside of the licensee's licensed premises. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, Class B liquor
licensees may deliver alcoholic liquor to their customers outside of the licensee's licensed premises provided that the Class B liquor licensee complies
with the following regulations:
1. Alcoholic liquor must be delivered to, and signed for at the time of delivery by, a person who is twenty one (21) years of age or older;
2. The person delivering alcoholic liquor on behalf of the liquor licensee must check the identification of any person accepting delivery of the alcoholic
liquor at the time of delivery;
3. Alcoholic liquor may only be delivered in its original and unopened container; and
4. The liquor licensee must comply with all Federal, State, and local laws, regulations, rules and ordinances that are applicable to the delivery of
alcoholic liquor.
Nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to prevent the lawful operations of a licensed food hall, licensed food hall restaurant or licensed
food hall coffee shop from serving liquor for consumption to any customer seated within an adjacent licensed food hall or within any other food hall
restaurant or food hall coffee shop that is accessible only from or through that same licensed food hall.
Nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to prevent the holder of a Class A-4 license or applicable store tenant from allowing customers
with alcoholic beverages from moving between the adjacent restaurant areas and retail service areas as provided in section 4-1-16.8 of this chapter.
(Ord. G-570, 5-14-1996; Ord. G-587, 4-8-1997; Ord. G-591, 5-13-1997; Ord. G-612, 6-9-1998; Ord. G-630, 3-23-1999; Ord. G-656, 3-14-2000; Ord.
G-698, 6-11-2002; Ord. G-722, 6-24-2003; Ord. G-828, 2-27-2007; Ord. G-874, 11-11-2008; Ord. G-1026, 7-8-2014; Ord. G-1046, 4-14-2015; Ord.
G-1047, 5-26-2015; Ord. G-1059, 10-13-2015; Ord. G-1076, 5-10-2016; Ord. G-1078, 7-12-2016; Ord. G-1108, 9-12-2017; Ord. G-1120, 12-12-
2017; Ord. G-1138, 10-23-2018)
4-1-16: CLASS I LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
In addition to the other applicable conditions and requirements of this chapter, Class I liquor licensees may sell alcoholic liquor subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:
A. Alcoholic liquor shall only be drawn, poured, or mixed at the bar located in the lobby of the movie theater.
B. Alcoholic liquor may be delivered and consumed only in the lobby bar area or in the movie theater auditoriums.
C. The movie theater may only serve alcoholic liquor in containers that are of a different color, size and design than those in which it serves nonalcoholic
beverages.
D. No more than twenty four (24) ounces of beer may be sold in a single container at a time. No more than eight (8) ounces of wine may be sold in a
single container at a time.
E. Except for the sale of beer and wine, no drink may be sold that contains more than three (3) ounces of alcohol.
F. Alcoholic liquor may not be sold unless the movie theater is open for the showing of movies or for the holding of private rentals and events. Alcoholic
beverages may not be served more than one hour prior to the advertised showing time of the first movie shown on a particular day, except for private
rentals and events.
G. The lobby bar and the lounge area may comprise no more than twenty percent (20%) of the floor area outside of the movie theater auditoriums. (Ord.
G-1046, 4-14-2015)
4-1-16.5: CLASS J LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 61/438
In addition to the other applicable conditions and requirements of this chapter, Class J liquor licensees may serve alcoholic liquor brought into the licensed
premises by a patron subject to the following provisions, conditions and restrictions:
A. It shall be unlawful:
1. To serve any type of alcoholic liquor that is brought into the licensed premises by a patron other than beer or wine;
2. For any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to bring beer or wine into a licensed premises;
3. For any person to bring beer or wine into the licensed premises in an unsealed container or receptacle, or in a container or receptacle other than its
"original package" as defined in section 1-3.06 of the Liquor Control Act of 19341;
4. For a person to bring more than seven hundred fifty milliliters (750 mL) of wine or thirty six (36) ounces of beer into the licensed premises per day;
5. For a liquor licensee to serve any person beer or wine that is brought into the licensed premises by a patron who is:
a. Under the age of twenty one (21) years; or
b. Not seated at a table and being served a meal;
6. For any person other than an employee of the licensed premises to open or pour the container of beer or wine;
7. For any person to exit the licensed premises with an open container of beer or an open container of wine, provided, however, that a person may exit
the licensed premises with one partially consumed bottle of wine that has been sealed in compliance with section 6-33 of the Liquor Control Act of
19342;
8. To store on the licensed premises after the permitted consumption hours any unconsumed beer or wine that was brought into the licensed premises
by a patron.
B. The licensed premises may charge a service or corkage fee for the serving of beer or wine that is brought into the licensed premises by a patron. (Ord.
G-1057, 10-13-2015)
4-1-16.6: ADDITIONAL LIQUOR CONTROLS FOR CLASS L LICENSES, CLASS A-1 LICENSES FOR FOOD HALL
RESTAURANTS, AND CLASS K LICENSES FOR FOOD HALL COFFEE SHOPS:
A. In addition to the other applicable conditions and requirements of this chapter, each Class A-1 liquor licensee whose licensed premises is a food hall
restaurant and each Class K liquor licensee whose licensed premises is a food hall coffee shop may only sell alcoholic liquor subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:
1. Alcoholic liquor shall only be drawn, poured, or mixed within the licensed premises owned or leased by the licensee;
2. Alcoholic liquor may be delivered and consumed only within: a) the licensed premises owned or leased by the licensee; b) the adjacent licensed
food hall; or c) the premises of other food hall restaurants or coffee shops that satisfy the insurance requirements of subsection 4-1-15A of this
chapter and are located adjacent to a licensed food hall;
3. Alcoholic liquor may only be served in containers that are of a different color, size and design than those in which nonalcoholic beverages are
served by any one or more food hall restaurant or coffee shop adjacent to the same food hall, and such alcoholic liquor containers shall clearly and
legibly state on the container's exterior the name of the licensed food hall restaurant or licensed food hall coffee shop that served the alcoholic
liquor;
4. No more than twenty four (24) ounces of beer may be sold in a single container at a time, and no more than eight (8) ounces of wine may be sold in
a single container at a time; and
5. Except for the sale of beer and wine, no drink may be sold that contains more than three (3) ounces of alcohol.
B. Without limiting the provisions of subsection A of this section, neither this section nor any other provision in this chapter requires that every food hall
restaurant adjacent to a food hall or licensed food hall hold a Class A-1 license or that every food hall coffee shop adjacent to a food hall or licensed
food hall hold a Class K license. Further, the suspension or revocation of any one or more Class A-1 licenses or Class K licenses issued to food hall
restaurants or food hall coffee shops shall not cause a revocation, suspension or impairment of licenses held by the other licensees accessible from
the same food hall.
C. In consideration for the practical operations of multiple, independent food hall restaurants and food hall coffee shops that have been designed to be
accessible only from and through a particular food hall, no revocation or suspension of a licensed food hall's Class L license shall cause the revocation
or suspension of any one or more Class A-1 license held by the adjacent licensed food hall restaurants or Class K licenses held by the adjacent
licensed food hall coffee shops so long as:
1. The food hall premises continues to be accessible for customers only through access control points with enclosed vestibules, video surveillance,
and signage prohibiting customers from exiting or entering the food hall premises with any alcoholic beverage; and
2. While such revocation or suspension of the food hall's Class L license is in effect, no alcoholic beverages purchased at its adjacent licensed food
hall restaurants and adjacent licensed food hall coffee shops may be consumed within the food hall premises, and such alcoholic beverages may
only be consumed within the premises where the beverages were purchased or within the premises of other licensed food hall restaurants and
licensed food hall coffee shops. (Ord. G-1078, 7-12-2016)
4-1-16.7: CLASS N LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 62/438
This section contains specific conditions that spa, nail salon, or beauty salon licensees would need to follow in order to serve liquor. These conditions
have been specifically tailored for spas, nail salons, or beauty salons. The Village Board may remove or add any conditions it deems desirable if it
decides to create a new liquor license specifically for spas, nail salons, or beauty salons.
A. The retail sale of alcoholic liquor shall be limited to one drink per hour per customer or patron of the premises, and no such customer or patron shall be
served more than two (2) alcoholic beverages during the permitted hours of retail sale of alcoholic liquor during any one calendar day.
B. No more than twelve (12) ounces of beer may be sold in a single container at a time. No more than six (6) ounces of wine may be sold in a single
container at a time.
C. Except for the sale of beer and wine, no drink may be sold that contains more than one ounce of alcohol.
D. Customers and patrons shall not be served alcoholic beverages unless receiving contemporaneous spa/salon services from the license holder.
E. No live entertainment of any nature shall be permitted on the specified premises.
F. No window or any other external signage shall be permitted on the specified premises or surrounding property that indicates that alcoholic liquor is
available for retail sale at the specified premises, provided, however, that the business identification signage may contain the word "bar", and provided
further that the word "bar" is only used as part of the business name. (Ord. G-1108, 9-12-2017)
4-1-16.8: CLASS A-4 LICENSE REGULATIONS:
A. In addition to the other applicable conditions and requirements of this chapter, each holder of a Class A-4 license shall be subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:
1. In addition to the application requirements of section 4-1-9 of this chapter, an application for a Class A-4 license must include the following:
a. A site plan clearly delineating the boundaries of the restaurant premises to be licensed, including any outdoor areas (the "restaurant area"); the
areas of the adjacent retail store in which alcohol can be consumed (the "retail service area"); designated points of ingress/egress to and from the
restaurant area and the retail service area; examples of signage in compliance with this chapter; and the location of furniture within the restaurant
area,
b. Written evidence of the following: 1) that both the retail service area and restaurant area are leased pursuant to a single, valid lease (the "store
lease"), the tenant under such store lease being referred to herein as the "store tenant"; 2) that the applicant holds a valid sublease of the
restaurant area from the store tenant, and 3) that both the applicant and the store tenant satisfy the insurance requirements of subsection 4-1-15A
of this chapter, and
c. Written policies or employee training manual provisions of both the applicant and the store tenant addressing the cleaning and operations of the
retail service area in relation to alcoholic beverage service and consumption within the retail service area. Such policies or training manuals shall,
in any event, require that applicant personnel regularly monitor the retail service area for used beverage containers and regularly retrieve any
such containers.
2. The location of furniture within the restaurant area shall remain consistent during the term of the license, provided, however, the license holder may
submit revised furniture diagrams for administrative review and approval by the Village Clerk, Village Fire Department and Village Building
Inspections Supervisor.
3. One partially consumed bottle of wine may be taken outside the restaurant area and the retail service area if it has been sealed in compliance with
section 6-33 of the Liquor Control Act of 19343.
4. The license holder shall be required to provide a visually distinct and branded non-transferable wristband, bracelet, or similar item to persons
seeking to consume alcoholic beverages within the retail service area prior to such persons exiting the restaurant area with alcoholic liquor.
5. The license holder shall only serve alcoholic liquor for consumption within the retail service area in glassware or containers having a tag or other
feature making them visually distinct from merchandise in the retail service area.
6. Alcoholic liquor served or dispensed within the restaurant area (as opposed to alcohol sold by the license holder in sealed packages for offpremises
consumption) may only be consumed within the restaurant area and retail service area. Further, alcoholic liquor may only be consumed
within the retail service area: a) if purchased from or dispensed within the restaurant area; b) during licensed special events held pursuant to Class
F licenses held by the store tenant, or c) during private events not open to the general public.
7. Other than for purposes of emergency ingress and egress, ingress to the restaurant area shall only be from the retail service area or from the
Village Green as defined in Village ordinance 2014-ZO-PUD-EX-S-1391 (the "Village Green").
8. Notwithstanding the requirements of section 4-1-18 of this chapter, egress from the restaurant area's outdoor dining areas may occur via: a) gates
for emergency use only, with signage to that effect; and b) a walkway to the Village Green that has the signage described in subsection A9 of this
section. In addition, each of the restaurant area's outdoor dining areas must be surrounded on all sides by the exterior walls of the restaurant area or
planters, fences, railings, or similar enclosure improvements except in the locations of required or permitted ingress and egress.
9. Signage must:
a. Direct customers to see the restaurant area's host stand for admission to or seating within the outdoor dining areas,
b. Alert customers that exiting the restaurant area with any alcoholic beverages (other than to the retail service area) is prohibited; and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 63/438
c. Provide for and alert customers that exiting directly from the restaurant area to the Village Green is prohibited except in emergency circumstances
or when the retail service area is not open for business.
10. No more than twenty four (24) ounces of beer may be sold in a single container at a time. No more than eight (8) ounces of wine may be sold in a
single container at a time. Except for the sale of beer and wine, no drink may be sold that contains more than three (3) ounces of alcohol. (Ord. G-
1138, 10-23-2018)
4-1-17: SPECIAL EVENTS LICENSES AND PROMOTIONS:
A. Special Events:
1. The purpose of this section is to provide for the issuance of licenses for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic liquor during special events. Except for
as specifically permitted in subsection B of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person who does not hold a valid special event license issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to sell or dispense or cause to be sold or dispensed alcoholic liquor at a grand opening, winetasting, open
house or other special event open to the public without first having obtained a special event license from the commissioner. It shall be unlawful for
any person who holds a valid license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor in any manner which
exceeds the restrictions and limitations of such license without first having obtained a special event license from the commissioner. A special event
license does not authorize a licensee to engage in package liquor sales at a special event.
2. Applications for a special event license shall be filed on forms provided by the village clerk. The general application procedures set forth in sections
4-1-9 and 4-1-10 of this chapter shall not apply to licenses issued under this section. The application shall include such information as the
commissioner determines is necessary to process such application, which information may include, but shall not be limited to, the estimated number
of persons attending the event, the location and layout of liquor sales at the event and at the premises, the persons responsible for dispensing of
alcoholic liquor, steps to be taken by the applicant to protect against any violations of the village's ordinances, and information regarding the manner
in which liquor will be dispensed and consumed. Information and material related to applicant's qualifications may be required during the processing
of such application, in addition to the information provided in the original submittal, including attachments. In the event that the applicant is made
aware that any information or document submitted as part of this application process is inaccurate or incomplete, applicant shall immediately notify
the commissioner and provide appropriate corrections. Failure to accurately and completely provide, or as necessary update, required information
may delay the processing of such application or result in its denial.
3. A class F license shall be required regardless of the number of events to be held by the licensee. The license fee for a class F license shall be as
provided in subsection 4-1-8A of this chapter.
4. Upon submittal of a properly completed application and payment of the fee, the commissioner may issue a special events license subject to the
following conditions and restrictions:
a. Each special event shall last no longer than three (3) consecutive days.
b. The licensee shall notify the commissioner of each event to be held no less than ten (10) days prior to the event and shall obtain a license to be
posted at such event for each such event. Any licensee who fails to notify the commissioner within the ten (10) day period shall be required to pay
the village a surcharge of fifty dollars ($50.00) which shall be in addition to all other fees required to be paid by the licensee.
c. The provisions of subsection 4-1-11B of this chapter, regarding the proximity of the licensed premises to a church, school, other institution of
higher learning, or other entity as provided in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-11, shall not apply to special event licenses issued under this
section.
d. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the applicant shall comply with all applicable provisions of this code, including, but not limited to,
zoning, building, and health and safety regulations.
e. Applicant shall provide the commissioner or the commissioner's designee with a certificate or policy of insurance as evidence that it has obtained
coverage as follows: general liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit, or one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and per aggregate, naming the village of Oak Brook as a party insured. Such insurance coverage shall be
issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state and shall have a "Best" rating acceptable to the village. The effective period
of such insurance coverage shall coincide with the period during which the special event license is in effect. In addition, the applicant shall furnish
evidence satisfactory to the commissioner or the commissioner's designee that it is covered by a policy of liquor liability insurance by a
responsible insurance company authorized and licensed to do business in the state, insuring such applicant in the amount of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
f. It shall be the responsibility of any special event licensee selling alcoholic liquor to provide certified training from the state licensed beverage
alcohol sellers and servers education and training (BASSET) program or training for intervention procedures (TIPS) program to its liquor
managers (except for caterers), bartenders, servers, and any other employee involved in the furnishing of alcoholic beverages to customers at a
special event. Each application for a special event license shall be accompanied by proof of completion (copy of certificate) of such program
licensed by the state for all liquor managers and such other current employees as are necessary to comply with the provisions of this subsection.
B. Promotions: Class B liquor licensees may dispense, free of charge, liquor in small and limited amounts for tasting purposes only, immediately prior and
incident to the sale of liquor in the original package for on site consumption with the intent of promoting the sale of liquor in accordance with the
following conditions and limitations:
1. Class B licensees whose primary business is not the sale of liquor may hold a promotion only once a month for a period not to exceed three (3)
consecutive days unless the licensee obtains a special event license for additional promotions pursuant to subsection A of this section.
2. The liquor shall be dispensed, and the promotional event supervised, at all times by a full time or part time manager or employee of the class B
licensee;
3. Any manager or employee dispensing liquor must be certified and trained from the state licensed beverage alcohol sellers and servers education
and training (BASSET) program or training for intervention procedures (TIPS) program. Each class B licensee desiring to hold a promotion must
submit proof of completion (copy of certificate) of such program licensed by the state for all managers and employees dispensing liquor at a
promotion prior to the promotion.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 64/438
4. The total amount of liquor tasted by any one individual may not exceed one ounce of distilled spirits, four (4) ounces of wine, or sixteen (16) ounces
of beer;
5. The sample shall be served in a container which shall be disposed of following the sampling. (Ord. G-1036, 10-14-2014)
4-1-18: OUTDOOR SALES:
Except on the premises of a licensee holding a class G liquor license, the sale of alcoholic liquor in an outdoor area included in the licensed premises
shall be permitted adjacent to premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, subject to the following conditions:
A. The outdoor area is delineated by an enclosure; and
B. The outdoor area is owned or leased by the licensee; and
C. The outdoor area is included as part of the regular food service business located on the licensed premises; and
D. Except as otherwise provided in section 4-1-16.8 of this chapter, access to the outdoor area is through the licensed premises, and no direct entrance to
or exit from such area is permitted, except as required for emergency ingress and egress; and
E. The outdoor area is lawfully established pursuant to the zoning regulations4 of the Village. (Ord. G-570, 5-14-1996; Ord. G-617, 8-25-1998; Ord. G-
1138, 10-23-2018)
4-1-19: CLUB LICENSES:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee holding a Class C license to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic liquor for any event which is open to the general public,
except as follows:
A. An event open to the public which is for the benefit of a not-for-profit or charitable organization and which is sponsored by a member of the club shall
be permitted.
B. An event open to the public which is not for the benefit of a not-for-profit or charitable organization or which is not sponsored by a member of the club
may be held as a special event, subject to the restrictions of section 4-1-17 of this chapter. (Ord. G-570, 5-14-1996)
4-1-20: CHANGES TO LICENSEE'S BUSINESS:
A. Change In Ownership:
1. The occurrence of any one or more of the following events shall be deemed to constitute a change in ownership of licensed businesses for which a
new license shall be required:
a. With respect to any licensee that is a corporation, or limited liability company, the replacement or addition of any shareholder owning directly or
indirectly (including ownership by members of the same household) twenty percent (20%) or more of the outstanding shares of any class of the
capital stock of said corporation; provided that any sale or exchange of stock which results in a change in controlling ownership under the bylaws
of the corporation shall be deemed to be a change of ownership hereunder regardless of the percentage of actual sale or exchange.
b. With respect to any licensee that is a general partnership, the replacement or addition of any general partner.
c. With respect to any licensee that is a limited partnership, the replacement or addition of any general partner or of any limited partner holding
directly or indirectly (including ownership by members of the same household) twenty percent (20%) or more interest in the earnings of said
limited partnership.
d. The operation of a licensed business by an unlicensed individual or corporation under a management agreement which permits such unlicensed
individual or corporation to control and direct the operation of the business, to retain all or a majority of the profits derived from such business, or
to utilize the privileges of the liquor license issued to another for such business for any period in excess of ninety (90) days. A management
agreement shall not be deemed to include a contract for employment between a licensee and an individual manager or managers, who operate
the licensed business on behalf of or at the discretion of the licensee.
2. At least ninety (90) days prior to any of the events described in subsection A1 of this section as constituting a change of ownership, the licensee
shall apply for a new license pursuant to the requirements of section 4-1-9 of this chapter. The Commissioner shall act promptly thereon; however,
the licensee shall not conduct its business following any change of ownership as defined herein until a new license has been issued. No license fee
shall be required for the new license.
3. The occurrence of any one or more of the following events shall constitute a change in ownership of licensed businesses for which a new license
shall be required, but shall not be subject to the application requirements established in section 4-1-9 of this chapter. Within five (5) business days
following any change described below, licensee shall notify the Commissioner in writing describing the event in detail.
a. With respect to any licensee that is a corporation, or limited liability company, the replacement or addition of any officer or director of said
corporation or any shareholder owning directly or indirectly (including ownership by members of the same household) more than five percent (5%)
but less than twenty percent (20%) of the outstanding shares of any class of the capital stock of said corporation.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 65/438
b. With respect to any licensee that is a limited partnership, the replacement or addition of any limited partner holding directly or indirectly (including
ownership of members of the same household) more than a five percent (5%) interest but less than a twenty percent (20%) interest in the
earnings of said limited partnership.
4. Within ten (10) days of any change of liquor manager, general manager or agent conducting business for the licensee, the licensee shall report such
change to the Commissioner and shall provide information concerning such liquor manager, general manager or agent as required in Section 4-1-9
of this Chapter.
Failure to give the notice required in subsections A2 and A4 of this Section shall constitute a violation of this Chapter subjecting the licensee to the
penalties set forth in Section 4-1-25 of this Chapter, including revocation or suspension of the license. No additional license fee shall be payable for
a new license required by virtue of changes described in this paragraph and so long as an application therefor is pending and not yet acted upon by
the Commissioner, the applicant may continue to conduct its business and operations under the license in effect immediately prior to such changes.
B. Change Of Location: A license issued under this Chapter shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application for
the license. Such location may be changed only upon written permission to make such change issued by the Commissioner. No change of location
shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of the State, and under
ordinances of the Village.
C. Change In Floor Plan Or Focus Of Local Operation:
1. During the term of any license issued for the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, if a licensee proposes to make any of the
changes hereinafter enumerated, which would alter its operation from the conditions pursuant to which the license was initially granted, the licensee
shall apply in writing to the Commissioner for approval of such changes, and provide information concerning the specific changes proposed,
including a revised floor plan, if any. The following shall be considered a change in the operation for purposes of this subsection: a) a change in the
floor plan in any manner which would alter the number of seats provided primarily for restaurant use by more than ten percent (10%), or which
would expand any area in which entertainment or service of alcoholic liquor is provided; b) any increase in the number of bar seats; c) a change in
the type and/or focus of the theme, decor, motif, advertising or menu for the licensed business in any manner which would promote the sale of
alcohol or the entertainment available on the premises as opposed to the availability of food service.
2. Upon receipt of a request for approval of any of the changes as provided in subsection C1 of this Section, the Commissioner shall review the
licensee's proposed changes to determine the nature and significance of the changes in consideration of the classification of license held and the
requirements established for such classification. The Commissioner may approve the proposed changes if it is determined that the proposed
changes in the floor plan, the nature and focus of the local operation, the menu, the type and focus of advertising for the licensed business are in
substantial conformity with the requirements of the liquor control ordinance for the license classification. If it is determined that such proposed
changes are not in substantial conformity, the Commissioner will so advise the licensee.
3. No additional license fee shall be payable and no new license shall be required by virtue of the changes described in subsection C1 of this Section.
4. So long as an application for approval of any of the changes described in subsection C1 of this Section is pending, and not yet acted on by the
Commissioner, the applicant may continue to conduct its business and operations in the manner approved at the time the license was initially
granted. If approval of the proposed changes is granted, the licensee may proceed to implement such changes in accordance with the approval
granted, and subject to any conditions which may be established as part of such approval. If approval is denied, licensee shall continue to operate
its business in the manner approved at the time the license was initially granted.
5. Any licensed business which implements any of the changes on licensed premises as provided in subsection C1 of this Section, without requesting
and receiving approval of the Commissioner as provided therein, shall be subject to the penalties for violation of this Chapter, as established in
Section 4-1-25 of this Chapter, up to and including revocation of the license.
D. Cessation Of Business: Any licensee who has ceased to do business or closes its place of business for a period of more than thirty (30) successive
days without written permission from the Commissioner shall be subject to having its license declared forfeited and lapsed by order of the
Commissioner. (Ord. G-570, 5-14-1996; Ord. G-587, 4-8-1997; Ord. G-591, 5-13-1997)
4-1-21: SALE OR DELIVERY AT MUNICIPAL FACILITIES:
Notwithstanding the licensing requirements of this chapter, alcoholic liquor may be sold or delivered at facilities owned or controlled by the Village, in
particular, the facilities at the Oak Brook Sports Core, 700 Oak Brook Road, Oak Brook, IL; the Oak Brook Bath and Tennis Club, 800 Oak Brook Road,
Oak Brook, IL; and the Oak Brook Golf Club, 2606 York Road, Oak Brook, IL; or in any facility located on land owned or controlled by the Village as may
be designated from time to time by the Village Board5.
The sale of alcoholic liquor shall be subject to all other State and local laws and regulations, including specifically those relating to hours of operation, sale
of alcoholic liquor as a supplement to food service, and insurance. (Ord. G-570, 5-14-1996; Ord. G-1125, 2-27-2018; Ord. G-1144, 1-22-2019)
4-1-22: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by an officer, director, general manager, liquor
manager or other agent or employee of any licensee, if such act is committed or omission is made within the scope of such agency or employment or with
the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee and such employer and
licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by the employer or licensee. (Ord. G-570, 5-14-
1996; Ord. G-587, 4-8-1997; Ord. G-591, 5-13-1997)
4-1-23: AGE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Sales To Certain Persons Prohibited:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 66/438
1. No licensee or other person shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor, including beer and wine, to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years,
or to any intoxicated person or to any person known by the licensee or other person to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, or insane, feeble-minded
or distracted person.
2. If a person under the age of twenty one (21) years is in possession of alcoholic liquor on premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption
on such premises, it shall be presumed that the licensee sold, gave or delivered such alcoholic liquor to the minor in possession thereof.
3. For the purpose of preventing the violation of this subsection, any licensee, or its agent or employee, may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic
beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is twenty one (21) years of
age or older.
B. Delivery Of Samples Of Alcoholic Liquor: No licensee shall deliver wine at a wine tasting, or any other alcoholic liquor at a tasting pursuant to a special
event license issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner pursuant to section 4-1-17 of this chapter, unless an employee or agent of the licensee
who is twenty one (21) years of age or older is present in the display area where the wine or other alcoholic liquor is available for consumption on the
premises. It shall be the responsibility of such employee or agent, on behalf of the licensee, to demand presentation of positive identification showing
proof of age if such employee or agent has reason to believe or should have reason to believe that any prospective recipient is underage.
C. Evidence Of Age Of Person Attempting To Purchase Or Receive Alcoholic Liquor:
1. If a licensee or its agent or employee believes, has reason to believe, or should have reason to believe, that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is
prohibited because the prospective recipient is underage, then, before making such sale or delivery, the licensee shall demand presentation of
positive identification issued by a public officer in the performance of official duties, and containing proof of age and a picture of the holder thereof. A
traffic citation shall not be accepted as identification or evidence of age.
2. No person shall transfer, alter or deface an identification card issued by a Federal, state, county or municipal government or subdivision or agency
thereof, use the identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged identification card, or obtain an identification card by means of false
identification.
3. No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of alcoholic liquor by the use of an altered, forged or defaced identification card or by
the use of an identification card of another person.
4. No person shall misrepresent his age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place in the Village where alcoholic liquor is
sold at retail.
D. Required Warning Signs:
1. In every place in the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold, there shall be displayed at all times, with the liquor license, in a prominent place, a "proof
of age" sign provided by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission.
2. The Village Board finds that there is a need for public information about the risk of birth defects when women consume alcoholic liquor during
pregnancy. The U.S. Surgeon General has recommended abstinence from alcohol during pregnancy. Since fetal alcohol syndrome and fetal alcohol
effects are preventable, the Village Board finds that it is in the public interest to provide warning about the risk of alcohol related birth defects at
places where alcoholic liquors are sold.
In every place in the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold, there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed card, eight and onehalf
inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11") in size, which shall read substantially as follows:
GOVERNMENT WARNING: ACCORDING TO THE SURGEON GENERAL, WOMEN SHOULD NOT DRINK ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
DURING PREGNANCY BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF BIRTH DEFECTS.
E. Employment Of Underage Persons:
1. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ or
permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to attend bar or to draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor; provided that the provisions of
this subsection shall not be construed to prevent the employment of persons who are at least nineteen (19) years of age as waiters or waitresses in
restaurants, recreational facilities or hotels for the purpose of serving food and alcoholic liquor in the licensed retail premises.
2. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any agent or employee of any licensee holding a retail liquor license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor
not for consumption on the premises to permit any employee under the age of twenty one (21) years or any customer of any age to register, by
mechanical or electronic means, the sale of any alcoholic liquor, including beer and wine.
F. Unlawful Possession And Consumption By Persons Underage; No Seating At The Bar:
1. No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall possess, consume, purchase, attempt to purchase or accept delivery of alcoholic liquor
within the Village; provided the possession and dispensing, or consumption by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years of alcoholic liquor in
the performance of a religious ceremony, the consumption by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years under the direct supervision and
approval of the parent or guardian of such underage person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home, or the possession and delivery of
unopened containers of alcoholic liquors in pursuance of a person's lawful employment is not prohibited and shall not be construed as a violation of
this subsection. A violation of this subsection F1 shall be treated as an infraction, and shall, upon conviction, be punishable as set forth in
subsection 1-3-1A of this Code.
2. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of
twenty one (21) years, except as allowed under subsection F1 of this section.
3. No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall occupy a seat at the bar.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 67/438
G. Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any child under the age of twenty one (21) of whom he or she may be
the parent or guardian to violate any provision of this chapter.
H. Responsibility Of The Owner Or Occupant Of Premises:
1. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises located within the Village to knowingly allow any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years and not his/her child to remain on such premises while in the possession of alcoholic liquor or while consuming alcoholic liquors in
violation of subsection F of this section.
2. For purposes of this subsection, to "possess" alcoholic liquor shall include, but is not limited to, the presence of any amount of alcohol within the
body of a person.
3. For purposes of this subsection, the refusal to submit to a test of a person's blood, urine or breath to determine if alcohol is present shall create a
rebuttable presumption that the person possessed alcohol within his body. (Ord. G-570, 5-14-1996; Ord. G-630, 3-23-1999; Ord. G-656, 3-14-2000;
Ord. G-828, 2-27-2007; Ord. G-1127, 3-27-2018)
4-1-24: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Prohibited Activities On Licensed Premises:
1. No holder of a liquor license, its agent or employee shall allow, permit or suffer to maintain on the licensed premises any person who engages in an
act which constitutes soliciting for a prostitute or soliciting for a juvenile prostitute as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-15 and 5/11-15.1.
No holder of a liquor license, its agent or employee shall commit any act which constitutes keeping a place of prostitution as set forth in 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-17 on the licensed premises.
2. No holder of a liquor license, its agent or employee shall allow or permit any gambling on any premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor.
3. No holder of a liquor license, its agent or employee shall allow, permit or suffer to remain on the licensed premises any person who solicits any
customer or patron of the licensed premises to purchase alcoholic liquor or nonalcoholic beverages.
4. No holder of a liquor license, its agent or employee shall allow or permit any employee or contractor who performs any dance or exhibition on the
licensed premises to solicit or accept payment of money or other valuable consideration from any customer or patron of the licensed premises for
such performance.
5. No holder of a liquor license, its agent or employee shall employ or contract with any person to engage in any live act, dance or exhibition on the
licensed premises in any room or area where alcoholic liquor is sold, dispensed, or delivered unless such act, demonstration, dance or exhibition is
performed on a single continuous stage which has an area of not less than one hundred (100) square feet and which, if circular, has a radius of not
less than six feet (6') and which, if square or rectangular, has a width at its smallest point of not less than ten feet (10').
6. No holder of a liquor license, its agent or employee shall allow, permit or suffer any person to engage in any live act, demonstration, dance,
exhibition or appearance on the licensed premises which exposes to public view:
a. His or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum and anal region or pubic hair region; or
b. Any device, costume or covering (including latex, plastic or other substances) which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair,
buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
c. Any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, or any simulation thereof.
For purposes of this section, any of the items described in subsections A6a through A6c of this section shall be considered exposed to public view
if it is uncovered or is less than completely and opaquely covered.
7. No holder of a liquor license, its agent or employee shall allow, permit or suffer the following kinds of conduct; nor allow, permit or suffer books,
magazines, or coin operated motion picture devices depicting, describing or relating to the following kinds of conduct to be present on the licensed
premises:
a. The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts
which are prohibited by law;
b. The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals; or
c. The actual or simulated displaying of the breasts, pubic hair, anus, vulva, or genitals; or
d. The permitting by a licensee of any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes his or her genitals or anus to public view.
8. No holder of a liquor license shall present for public view on the premises films, movies, previews, trailers or advertisements which are distinguished
by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
9. No holder of a liquor license, its agent or employee shall allow, permit or suffer any entertainment, fashion show, presentation or performance which
may include any person in a nude or seminude state, including, but not limited to, servers, hosts, hostesses, dancers, singers, models or other
performance artists, or to permit role playing interactions.
10. No liquor licensee may permit a patron to bring alcoholic liquor into a licensed premises for consumption in the licensed premises except for:
a. Class A-1 liquor licensees with banquet hall facilities containing not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor space open to the public;
b. Class A-2 liquor licensees with banquet hall facilities containing not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor space open to the public;
c. Class J liquor licensees;
d. Class E liquor licensees, provided that such consumption occurs only within hotel or motel rooms; and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 68/438
e. Special event licensees specifically authorized within such special event license to allow patrons to bring alcoholic liquor onto a licensed premises
for consumption on the licensed premises.
Nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to prevent a food hall restaurant (whether or not such food hall restaurant holds a Class A-1
license), food hall coffee shop (whether or not such food hall holds a Class K liquor license), or licensed food hall from allowing patrons to bring
alcoholic liquor into their respective licensed premises that was purchased from the other licensed premises comprising or adjacent to the same
licensed food hall.
Nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to prevent the holder of a Class A-4 license or applicable store tenant from allowing customers
with alcoholic beverages from moving between the adjacent restaurant areas and retail service areas established pursuant to section 4-1-16.8 of
this chapter.
B. Limitations On The Sale And Promotion Of Alcoholic Liquor On Licensed Premises:
1. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any employee or agent of any licensee, on licensed premises where alcoholic liquor is sold or offered for sale
for consumption thereon, to engage in any of the following practices:
a. Delivery of two (2) or more drinks to one person at one time.
b. Sell, offer for sale, or delivery to any person an unlimited number of drinks during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private
functions not open to the public.
c. Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink without a proportionate increase in the price charged for such drink as compared to
prices during the same calendar week.
d. Encouraging or permitting on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves drinking or the awarding of drinks as prizes.
2. No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or outside the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under this
section.
3. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a licensee from engaging in any of the following practices:
a. Offering free food or entertainment at any time;
b. Offering a drink as part of a meal or hotel services package;
c. Offering free winetastings;
d. Offering room service to registered guests in hotels licensed for such service;
e. Selling pitchers or the equivalent, including, but not limited to, buckets, carafes or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in such
manner and delivered to two (2) or more persons at one time.
f. Discounting any drink of alcoholic liquor during a specified time only if:
(1) The price of the drink of alcoholic liquor is not changed during the time that it is discounted;
(2) The period of time during which any drink of alcoholic liquor is discounted does not exceed four (4) hours per day and fifteen (15) hours per
week; however, this period of time is not required to be consecutive and may be divided by the licensee in any manner;
(3) The drink of alcoholic liquor is not discounted between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and the licensed premises' closing hour; and
(4) Notice of the discount of the drink of alcoholic liquor during a specified time is posted on the licensed premises or on the licensee's publicly
available website at least seven (7) days prior to the specified time.
C. Peddling Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the Village. (Ord. G-570, 5-14-1996; Ord. G-587, 4-8-1997; Ord. G-591, 5-13-
1997; Ord. G-713, 2-25-2003; Ord. G-731, 10-14-2003; Ord. G-1046, 4-14-2015; Ord. G-1057, 10-13-2015; Ord. G-1078, 7-12-2016; Ord. G-1098, 1-
24-2017; Ord. G-1138, 10-23-2018)
4-1-25: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
A. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this chapter may be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for a first violation within a twelve (12) month period, one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a second violation within a twelve
(12) month period, and two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a third or subsequent violation within a twelve (12) month period. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Not more than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) in fines under this section may be imposed against any licensee during the period of its license. In addition to any other penalty, a
licensee convicted of violating any provision of this chapter may be subject to having its license revoked, suspended or not renewed by the
Commissioner.
Any licensee determined by the Village President to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the Village the costs of the hearing
before the Village President on such violation. The Village President shall determine the costs incurred by the Village for said hearing, including, but
not limited to: court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorney fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other
miscellaneous expenses incurred by the Village or such lesser sum as the Village President may allow.
B. Revocation Or Suspension Of Local License; Notice And Hearing:
1. The Commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued if the Commissioner determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions
of this chapter or any State law pertaining to the sale of alcohol. However, no such license shall be so revoked or suspended except after a public
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 69/438
hearing by the Commissioner with at least three (3) days' prior written notice to the licensee, as provided in subsection C of this section, affording
the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. If the licensee fails to appear for such public hearing after receiving notice as provided in said
subsection C of this section, a default judgment may be entered and the Commissioner may revoke or suspend the license. If the Commissioner has
reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community, the
Commissioner may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion, and without notice or hearing, order the licensed
premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period; except, that if such licensee
shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business.
2. The Commissioner shall, as promptly as practicable, after such hearing, if the Commissioner determines after such hearing that the license should
be revoked or suspended, state the reasons for such determination in a written order of revocation or suspension and shall serve copy of such order
upon the licensee.
C. Method Of Notice: All notices herein required shall be in writing. The notice will be effective upon service by delivery of the notice personally to any
agent of the licensee on the licensed premises and by mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner, if the licensee is an
individual, to a partner, if the licensee is a partnership, or to the registered agent of the licensee, if the licensee is a corporation.
D. Appeal: In the event of an appeal from an order or action of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner to the State Liquor Commissioner, the appeal shall
be limited to a review of the official records of the proceedings of the Commissioner. (Ord. G-570, 5-14-1996; Ord. G-603, 11-11-1997; Ord. G-636, 6-
22-1999; Ord. G-670, 2-13-2001)
Chapter 2
TAXICABS
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms, for the purposes of this chapter shall have the
meanings indicated in this section:
DRIVER: A person who drives or is licensed to drive a taxicab on the streets and ways within the village.
LICENSE YEAR: The term for which a license issued pursuant to this chapter is effective, which term shall be from April 1 to March 31.
MILEAGE: The distance in the rate of fare, as mechanically or electronically registered, from the point of passenger pick up to the point of passenger
delivery.
OWNER: Every individual, person, trustee, partnership, association or corporation owning, leasing, operating or having the use or control of one or more
taxicabs in the village.
PERSON: Includes natural persons, partnerships, associations, firms or corporations.
RATE SHEET: The schedule of rates and fares charged for the transport of persons in a taxicab.
TAXI STAND: A place which has been designated by the village as reserved exclusively for the use of taxicabs.
TAXICAB: All vehicles driven by mechanical power used for the carriage of persons for hire except buses and limousines as such terms are defined in the
Illinois vehicle code.
TAXICAB COMPANY: Every individual, trustee, partnership, association, firm, or corporation engaged in business as a proprietor, franchisor or dispatcher
of one or more taxicabs.
TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE: That license issued to the driver of a taxicab, pursuant to section 4-2-5 of this chapter.
TAXICAB LICENSE DECAL: That decal provided by the village upon issuance of a taxicab license pursuant to this chapter to be displayed on each
taxicab as evidence of license issuance.
TAXIMETER: Any mechanical, electrical or electronic device installed in a taxicab, which calculates and indicates the fares, measures the distance
traveled and time elapsed, and indicates other charges which may be due. (Ord. G-1062, 10-27-2015)
4-2-2: TAXICAB COMMISSIONER:
A. The taxicab commissioner (hereafter referred to as the commissioner) shall perform all the duties and functions of commissioner as provided in this
chapter, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Convening and presiding at certain hearings and meetings required by this chapter, and
2. Approving, denying, revoking and suspending licenses pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
B. The village manager shall assume the duties of commissioner. The commissioner may at any time appoint a deputy commissioner, who shall have the
power to perform any of the duties of the commissioner hereunder. (Ord. G-802, 4-11-2006)
4-2-3: TAXICAB COMPANY LICENSES:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 70/438
A. Taxicab Company License Required: No taxicab company shall pick up or solicit passengers within the village unless the taxicab company first obtains
a taxicab company license from the village. Such taxicab company licenses shall be valid for a license year, or such part thereof as remains at the time
the license is granted, and shall be effective for the license year unless sooner suspended, terminated, or revoked.
B. Taxicab Company License Applications:
1. Application Forms: All applications for a new taxicab company license, or to renew a taxicab company license, must be made in writing to the village
on forms as reasonably required and approved of by the taxicab commissioner.
2. Applications For A New Taxicab Company License Or To Renew A License That Has Been Expired For One Year Or More: Any taxicab company
applying for a taxicab company license for the first time, or to renew a taxicab company license that has been expired for one year or more, must
submit with its application the following nonrefundable taxicab company license application fee:
a. Three hundred dollars ($300.00) if the application is submitted prior to October 1 of the license year.
b. One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) if the application is submitted on or after October 1 but prior to April 1 of the license year.
3. Applications To Renew A Taxicab Company License That Has Not Yet Expired Or Has Been Expired For Less Than One Year: A taxicab company
seeking to renew a taxicab company license that has not yet expired, or has been expired for less than one year, may submit to the village an
application for such renewal on or after February 1 but prior to March 2 preceding the applicable license year. Applications for renewal will not be
accepted prior to February 1.
All renewal applications submitted pursuant to this subsection must be submitted with the following nonrefundable taxicab company license renewal
application fee:
a. One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) if the application is submitted on or after February 1 but prior to February 16 immediately preceding the
applicable license year; or
b. Three hundred dollars ($300.00) if the application is submitted on or after February 16 but prior to March 2 immediately preceding the applicable
license year.
Applications to renew taxicab licenses pursuant to this subsection shall be due by March 1 immediately preceding the applicable license year. Any
taxicab company license renewal application submitted pursuant to this subsection B3 that is received by the village after March 1 immediately
preceding the applicable license year shall be deemed late and must be accompanied with a late fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) in
addition to the taxicab license renewal application fee required by subsection B3b of this section.
4. Application Requirements: As part of an application for a new taxicab company license or to renew such license, taxicab companies must include
the following as part of their application:
a. A true statement of certain facts including, but not limited to: the state of incorporation of the taxicab company if the company is a corporate entity;
whether the company is organized and qualified to do business under the laws of the state if it is a corporate entity; the taxicab company's
principal place of business; the full names and addresses of the individuals who own the taxicab company; whether the taxicab company is a
corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship; and the registered agent of the corporate taxicab company. The full names, dates of birth and
residential addresses of persons having an ownership interest of five percent (5%) or more in the taxicab company shall be disclosed on the
application;
b. A rate sheet that will be in effect for the applicable license year;
c. A certificate of automobile liability insurance issued by a solvent company authorized to do business in the state showing that each taxicab
proposed to be licensed is insured in an amount not less than is required by the state of Illinois covering each taxicab proposed to be licensed.
The policy shall be endorsed to provide a thirty (30) day advance written notice of any cancellation or expiration thereof to the village.
C. Investigation Of Applicants For Taxicab Company Licenses: The village shall investigate, to the extent it deems necessary, the owner(s) of the
applicant taxicab company, including each officer, general partner, sole proprietor and all persons having an ownership interest of five percent (5%) or
more of any such applicant. If this investigation reveals information showing any of the following, the application shall not be approved and no license
shall be issued or renewed to the taxicab company:
1. If any owner or officer, shareholder or director of the owner, has been convicted of a felony related to the taxicab business or a similar business
within the past ten (10) years;
2. The owner or an officer, shareholder or director of the owner, has been convicted of any business related felony or misdemeanor within the past five
(5) years; or
3. The owner or officer, shareholder or director of the owner, has misrepresented or omitted material facts in the application for a license.
D. Requirements On Taxicab Company Licensees: All taxicab company licensees shall comply with the following requirements at all times during a
license year:
1. Taxicab company licensees shall license, or cause to be licensed, each individual taxicab that it operates, or that is operated on its behalf, and that
picks up or solicits passengers within the village in accordance with this chapter.
2. Taxicab company licensees must maintain insurance policies consistent with the requirements of subsection B4c of this section during the entire
license year.
a. In the event that a final judgment or claim has been paid by any indemnitor or insurance policy, as a result of which the amount of insurance held
by a taxicab company no longer satisfies the minimum amount of coverage required to be maintained pursuant to subsection B4c of this section,
the taxicab company's license, and all taxicab vehicle licenses and taxicab driver's licenses issued to taxicabs and drivers associated with that
taxicab company, shall immediately terminate.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 71/438
b. In the event that a taxicab company's insurance policy terminates or expires, the taxicab company's license, and all taxicab vehicle licenses and
taxicab driver's licenses issued to taxicabs and drivers associated with that taxicab company, shall immediately terminate.
c. In the event that a taxicab company's license, and the taxicab vehicle licenses and the taxicab driver's license associated with that taxicab
company, terminate pursuant to this subsection D2, such licenses shall be subject to reinstatement by providing the village a new certificate of
insurance that satisfies all of the requirements of subsection B4c of this section.
3. All licensed taxicab companies shall provide proof of automobile liability insurance for each taxicab registered pursuant to this chapter. Such proof
of insurance must be carried in each individual taxicab licensed pursuant to this chapter at all times and shall be made available to any person
involved in an accident at the time of such accident.
4. Taxicab companies having taxicabs operated by independent contractors must cause each driver to provide proof of automobile liability insurance
for each taxicab registered pursuant to this chapter or provide the required insurance on behalf of such independent contractor.
E. Responsibility For Actions Of Taxicabs And Drivers: The taxicab company licensee shall be responsible for the acts, omissions and general conduct of
persons operating a taxicab for, on behalf of, or with the permission of, such taxicab company. The taxicab company shall, periodically during the
license year, determine if its taxicab drivers continue to meet the qualifications set forth in this chapter and shall promptly inform the village of the
names of any such drivers who fail to so qualify.
F. Changes In Principal Place Of Business: If a taxicab company licensee changes its principal place of business, it shall promptly notify the village in
writing.
G. Taxicab Company Licenses Nontransferable And Nonassignable: Taxicab company licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are nontransferable and
nonassignable. If ownership of a taxicab company license is conveyed to a new owner, the new owner must apply for a new taxicab company license
in its name in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in this section. (Ord. G-1062, 10-27-2015; Ord. G-1073, 2-9-2016)
4-2-4: TAXICAB VEHICLE LICENSE; VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Taxicab Vehicle License Required: No taxicab vehicle shall pick up or solicit passengers within the village unless the village issues a taxicab vehicle
license to the vehicle for the license year. Taxicab vehicle licenses shall be valid for a license year, or such part thereof as remains at the time the
license is granted, and shall be effective for the license year unless sooner suspended, terminated, or revoked.
B. Taxicab Vehicle License Applications:
1. Application Forms: All applications for a taxicab vehicle license, or to renew a taxicab vehicle license, must be made in writing to the village on
forms as reasonably required and approved of by the taxicab commissioner.
2. Application Fees: Anybody applying for a new taxicab vehicle license or to renew such license must submit with its application the following
nonrefundable application fee:
a. Twenty five dollars ($25.00) if the application is submitted preceding the applicable license year;
b. Twenty five dollars ($25.00) if the application is submitted prior to October 1 of the license year; or
c. Fifteen dollars ($15.00) if the application is submitted on or after October 1 but prior to April 1 of the license year.
3. Application Requirements: As part of an application for a taxicab vehicle license, applicants must include the following information as part of its
application:
a. The year, make, color and vehicle identification number;
b. Name, address and telephone number of the vehicle owner; and
c. Written certification that required safety inspections of the taxicab and the taximeter have been completed not more than thirty (30) days prior to
the date of the application and that such inspections find the taxicab to be safe and the taximeter to be in proper working order and accurate.
C. Vehicle Inspection:
1. Every taxicab operated by a taxicab company shall pass mechanical inspection tests as specified by the village. The inspections must take place
not more than thirty (30) days prior to application for a taxicab license or the renewal of such license. The inspections must take place at a firm or
firms designated from time to time by the village. The expense for such inspection shall be that of the licensee. No license shall be issued for any
taxicab that fails to meet this inspection requirement. The taxicab commissioner shall maintain a list of private firms which are authorized to perform
vehicle safety (mechanical) inspections.
2. All taxicabs licensed by the village are subject to periodic inspection by the village police department, as required by the taxicab commissioner, and
the taxicab company shall promptly upon notice from the police department make said taxicab available for inspection.
D. Identification Of Taxicabs: Every taxicab licensed by the village shall be identified on and in the taxicab, as follows:
1. Taxicab Number: On the center of the exterior main panel of the front or rear doors of a taxicab, there shall appear the taxicab number assigned by
the taxicab company and the taxicab company's name and telephone number;
2. Display Of Licenses: On the rear facing window there shall be affixed the taxicab license decal. On the back of the front seat, clearly visible to
passengers in the rear seat of the vehicle, there shall be affixed a copy of the taxicab company's license and the taxicab driver's licenses in plainly
legible print, the telephone number of the taxicab company, and the rates charged for trips inside and outside of the village; and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 72/438
3. Paint: All taxicabs owned or operated by or on behalf of a taxicab company licensee shall be identically painted so that they are readily identifiable.
No coloring scheme or name shall be similar to that of any other taxicab company who has previously been issued a taxicab license by the village.
E. Taxicab Vehicle Requirements: The condition of taxicabs licensed by the village shall be as follows:
1. Condition: Every taxicab shall be maintained in a safe condition at all times. If any taxicab shall become unsafe for operation or if its body or seating
facilities shall become damaged or deteriorated in a manner that renders the taxicab unfit for public use, the taxicab commissioner may, after a
hearing, suspend the license issued to the taxicab company operating that vehicle or suspend that taxicab vehicle license, until the vehicle is made
safe for use by the public or replaced with a vehicle that complies with this chapter.
2. Doors: All doors of every taxicab shall have functional interior door handles and latches.
3. Exterior Requirements: The vehicle's exterior appearance including paint, lettering and chrome shall be in good condition and free from excessive
rust.
4. Interior Requirements: The vehicle's interior shall be kept clean, sanitary and the upholstery shall be in good repair.
5. Seat Belts: Each taxicab shall provide seat belts for each passenger, provide entrances and exits free of interior barriers and have a sufficient
number of exits to permit every passenger and the driver to exit from the vehicle in the event that one side of the vehicle is rendered impassible as
the result of an accident, safety conditions or otherwise.
6. Taximeter Requirements: Every taxicab licensed by the village shall be equipped with a taximeter, in good working order. No taxicab license shall be
issued for any taxicab until the taximeter therein meets the following requirements:
a. Taximeters shall have a lighted dial or screen to register the fare in accordance with lawful rates as set forth herein and the dial or screen shall at
all times be maintained by the taxicab company in plain view and readable by the passenger. Such taximeter shall also properly and accurately
register, indicate and display the time consumed by the taxicab while in waiting, the distance traveled and the amount of fare to be determined
and charged therefor.
b. Each taxicab shall be equipped with a light which shall enable the passenger engaging and using such taxicab to read the taximeter.
c. Prior to licensing, and if required by the taxicab commissioner, the village may inspect the taximeter as follows:
(1) No taximeter shall be attached to a taxicab unless it has been inspected by an inspector approved by the police department and found to be
accurate and sealed by such inspector. The taxicab company shall keep certificates of accuracy issued by the inspector for each taximeter in
each taxicab and provide the same for inspection by a passenger or any police officer upon request. The expense for such inspections shall be
that of the licensee.
(2) Each taximeter shall be inspected annually not more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of application, or such other date set by the police
chief or his designee, and a certificate of accuracy, as provided above, shall be submitted by the taxicab company to the village prior to the
renewal of the taxicab company license. In the event a complaint is made that any taximeter registers improperly or inaccurately, the police
chief or his designee shall immediately examine and inspect or cause such examination and inspection of such taximeter complained of. Upon
request by the chief of police, the taxicab company shall submit any taximeter installed on a taxicab to an inspection to determine its accuracy.
(3) Every taximeter shall be tested by running the taxicab to which it is attached over a course of standard mile in length or by a mechanical test to
prove the accuracy of the register thereof. Either of the foregoing tests may be selected at the discretion of the chief of police. In order to
determine whether such taximeter correctly registers "waiting time", it shall be the duty of the chief of police, his designee or a testing firm
approved by him to test such taximeter by comparing the time recorded as shown by the fare computed on the dial thereof with the standard
time. Such tests shall ensure that the taximeter correctly registers those rates and fares authorized by this chapter.
d. No person shall detach any certified or inspected taximeter from any taxicab and attach the same to any another taxicab, the front wheels of
which are of different diameter from those with reference to which the taximeter was originally tested, unless a new inspection of certification is
had on such taximeter.
e. No taxicab driver or taxicab company shall operate a taxicab with a taximeter that is inaccurate, that has not been inspected as provided herein,
or that is otherwise not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
f. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with a taximeter or to break any seal thereon.
g. No driver of a taxicab equipped with a taximeter while carrying passengers or under employment, shall display the signal affixed to such taximeter
or other similar device in such a position as to denote that he is employed at a rate of fare different from that to which he is entitled under the
provisions of this chapter.
h. The police department shall from time to time issue a list of private firms authorized to perform taximeter inspections.
F. Taxicab Vehicle Licenses Nontransferable: Taxicab vehicle licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are nontransferable and nonassignable. If a
company substitutes another taxicab for any taxicab licensed with the village pursuant to this section, or adds any additional taxicabs to the list of
licensed taxicabs, the company must license such substitute or additional taxicabs with the village pursuant to this section. (Ord. G-1062, 10-27-2015)
4-2-5: TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE:
A. Taxicab Driver's License Required: In addition to other requirements of this chapter, no taxicab driver shall pick up or solicit passengers within the
village unless the village issues a taxicab driver's license to the driver for the license year. No taxicab driver's license shall be issued unless the
requirements relating to taxicab companies set forth in section 4-2-3 of this chapter and the requirements related to taxicab vehicles in section 4-2-4 of
this chapter have been satisfied. Taxicab driver's licenses shall be valid for a license year, or such part thereof as remains at the time the license is
granted, and shall be effective for the license year unless sooner suspended, terminated, or revoked.
B. Taxicab Driver's License Applications:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 73/438
1. Application Forms: All applications for taxicab driver's licenses, or to renew a taxicab driver's license, must be made in writing to the village on forms
as reasonably required and approved of by the taxicab commissioner.
2. Application Fees: Anybody applying for a new taxicab driver's license or to renew such license must submit with its application the following
nonrefundable application fee:
a. Fifty dollars ($50.00) if the application is submitted preceding the applicable license year;
b. Fifty dollars ($50.00) if the application is submitted on or after April 1 but prior to October 1 of the license year; or
c. Twenty five dollars ($25.00) if the application is submitted on or after October 1 but prior to April 1 of the license year.
3. Application Requirements: As part of an application for a taxicab driver's license, applicants must include the following information as part of its
application:
a. A true statement of certain facts including, but not limited to, the name and address of the driver, the age and date of birth of the driver, the driving
convictions of the driver, the type and class of driver's license of the driver, convictions for the use, possession or sale of controlled substances,
cannabis, intoxicating compounds or alcoholic liquor, any felony or misdemeanor convictions of the driver-applicant, the home address and
telephone number of the driver. All such information shall be provided under oath.
b. The applicant's driving abstract obtained from and certified by the Illinois secretary of state's office dated not more than thirty (30) days prior to the
submittal of the application for a license.
c. A photograph of the applicant, which photo shall clearly and accurately show the applicant's face and shoulders.
C. Investigation Of Applicants For Taxicab Driver's Licenses: The police chief or his designee shall investigate the applicant for a taxicab driver's license.
If this investigation or the application materials reveal that the statements made as part of the application are inaccurate or reveal information showing
any of the following, the taxicab commissioner shall not issue a taxicab driver's license to the applicant:
1. The applicant has been convicted of a forcible felony;
2. The applicant is registered in the Illinois sex offender database or similar database in another state or country;
3. The applicant is registered in the Illinois murderer and violent offender against youth database or a similar database in another state or country;
4. The applicant has been convicted of a felony criminal offense within the past ten (10) years;
5. The applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor criminal offense within the past five (5) years;
6. The applicant has been convicted of driving under the influence of a controlled substance, cannabis, an intoxicating compound or alcoholic liquor
under Illinois law as amended from time to time or similar provision of a local ordinance or any like offense of another state or country, within the
past five (5) years;
7. The applicant has been convicted of reckless driving under Illinois law as amended from time to time or similar provision of a local ordinance or any
like offense of another state or country within the past five (5) years; or
8. The applicant's driver's license has been suspended for moving or nonmoving violations of a motor driven vehicle within the past five (5) years.
D. Driver Qualifications: Each driver who drives any taxicab in the village that is required to be licensed pursuant to section 4-2-4 of this chapter shall at all
times meet the following qualifications:
1. Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license of a classification required by state law for the transport of persons for hire;
2. Be twenty one (21) years of age or older;
3. Be in good physical condition; and shall not have any nervous, organic, or functional condition or disease which is likely to interfere with the safe
performance of his or her duties as a driver; and
4. Be able to complete the taxicab driver's license application in the presence of a village employee without the assistance of a third party.
E. Taxicab Driver's Licenses Nontransferable: Taxicab driver's licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are nontransferable and nonassignable. (Ord. G-
1062, 10-27-2015)
4-2-6: USE OF TAXICABS:
A. It shall be unlawful to refuse any person transportation in a taxicab to any place of destination within the village in a taxicab that is unoccupied by a
passenger for hire, unless such taxicab is on its way to pick up a passenger or otherwise out of service or unless the person to be served appears
intoxicated or uses profane or abusive language in attempting to contract for service. When the taxicab is out of service or carrying a passenger, there
shall be displayed on the taxicab, and visible to those outside the taxicab, a sign or light indicating the taxicab is "not for hire" in letters at least two
inches (2") in height.
B. Group riding is permitted in taxicabs, provided, that the driver accepts no more than five (5) passengers for any trip, and provided that the fare charged
to any passenger will be no greater than as permitted by this chapter.
C. Additional passengers picked up subsequent to an original flag pull may be picked up with the consent of the passenger first employing the taxicab and
will be charged for the prorated meter reading as determined by the driver. (Ord. G-802, 4-11-2006)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 74/438
4-2-7: CONDUCT OF TAXICAB DRIVERS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any driver to conduct himself in a disrespectful or contemptuous manner toward any person, or to use abusive or profane
language while so occupied or in charge of such vehicle.
B. It shall be unlawful for any driver to solicit by word, gesture or otherwise the patronage of any person upon any public street or place in the village.
C. It shall be unlawful for any driver to seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving a taxicab about the streets of the village or otherwise
interfering with the proper and orderly access to or egress from any theater, hotel or other place of public gathering.
D. Drivers shall be obligated to render reasonable aid to any person who suffers injury or illness while a passenger of a taxicab operated by the driver.
E. It shall be unlawful for any driver to use, possess or be under the influence of any controlled substance, cannabis, intoxicating compound or alcoholic
liquor when operating a taxicab.
F. It shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any provision of this chapter. (Ord. G-802, 4-11-2006; Ord. G-889, 7-14-2009)
4-2-8: RATES AND FARES:
A. No person owning, operating or controlling any taxicab within the limits of the village shall charge in excess of the rates and fares shown on the current
rate sheet on file with the village clerk and as determined by the taximeter. Rates and fares may be revised by the taxicab company at any time,
provided the taxicab company files a revised rate sheet with the village prior to the imposition of such revised rates and fees.
B. Waiting time shall include the time when the taxicab is not in motion beginning within a reasonable time after arrival at the place to which it had been
called, or the time consumed while standing at the direction of the passenger, or time consumed while standing because of conditions beyond control
of the driver, but no charge shall be made for time lost for inefficiency of the taxicab or its driver or time consumed by premature response to a call.
C. A schedule of the rates and fares authorized herein shall be prominently and clearly displayed in each taxicab by affixing a notice containing same on
or to the rear of the front seat of each taxicab. The size of such notice and the manner of its display shall be in accordance with regulations therefor
promulgated by the village. It shall be unlawful to refuse or fail to display the schedule of rates and fares as required herein.
D. No taxicab driver shall charge or attempt to charge any passenger a fare greater than that to which such driver is entitled under the provisions of this
chapter. When the village is notified of a rate change during the period of the license, the taxicab company shall place corrective stickers on the
previously issued license to reflect the new rate.
E. Every taxicab driver shall have the right to demand payment of the legal fare in advance and may refuse employment unless prepaid, but no driver of a
taxicab shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person upon request anywhere in the village unless previously engaged or unable to do
so.
F. If demanded by the passenger, the taxicab driver shall deliver to the person paying for the hiring of the same at the time of such payment, a receipt
therefor in legible type or writing containing the name of the owner or driver, the municipal license number or the driver's license number, or the
taximeter number and any items for which a charge is made, the total amount paid and the date of payment.
G. This chapter shall not affect the right of a duly licensed taxicab company operating duly licensed taxicabs to enter into private contracts, whether verbal
or written, with any person, firm or corporation, for a regular carrying for hire of special persons or groups, as the parties may contract. However,
nothing in this section shall authorize any taxicab driver to negotiate fares upon any pick up in the usual course of business. (Ord. G-1062, 10-27-
2015)
4-2-9: REGISTER OF LICENSES:
The taxicab commissioner shall keep a register of the name, address and photograph of each person owning or operating a taxicab licensed under this
chapter, together with the license number and the description, make and model of such taxicab, with the date and complete record of inspections made of
it. Such records shall be open to the inspection of the public at all reasonable times, and shall be public records. (Ord. G-1062, 10-27-2015)
4-2-10: BOOKS AND RECORDS OF ACCOUNT:
Every licensed taxicab company shall keep accurate books and records of account and logbooks of service rendered in its dispatching office. The Taxicab
Commissioner or his designee shall be permitted to examine those books and records of account and logs as they may relate to a specific charge that is
the subject of a complaint or public hearing under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. G-802, 4-11-2006)
4-2-11: COMPLAINTS:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 75/438
A. Any person may file a written complaint with the Village Manager regarding the conduct of a taxicab driver or taxicab company or the condition of a
vehicle.
B. The Village Manager or his designee shall investigate all complaints against taxicab drivers, or taxicab companies or vehicles. He shall notify the driver
and the taxicab company of the complaint and may conduct a meeting on the matter. If the Village Manager determines that such a meeting is
necessary, the driver and a representative of the taxicab company shall be present. If the Village Manager determines that any provision of this
chapter has been violated, he shall take any further action consistent with the provisions of this chapter and may also refer the matter to the Police
Department or President. (Ord. G-802, 4-11-2006)
4-2-12: DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF TAXICAB LICENSE:
A. Denial; Appeal: If a license is denied under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant may file a written appeal of the decision to the Taxicab
Commissioner within seven (7) days of receipt of the decision. The written appeal shall set forth the reasons why the applicant believes the decision to
deny the license should be reversed. The Taxicab Commissioner shall respond to the appeal within fourteen (14) days either affirming or reversing the
decision to deny the license; the Commissioner's response shall be final.
B. Suspension Or Revocation: Any taxicab company license, taxicab vehicle license or taxicab driver's license shall be subject to suspension or
revocation after hearing, by the Taxicab Commissioner upon a finding that the holder thereof has violated any provision of this chapter, this Code,
State Statute or other applicable law. Upon suspension or revocation of any taxicab company license, taxicab vehicle license or taxicab driver's license
granted hereunder, the holder or holders thereof shall be immediately and automatically barred from taxicab activity and operation within the Village
per the terms of the supervision or revocation. (Ord. G-802, 4-11-2006)
4-2-13: PENALTIES:
A. Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties contained within subsection 1-3-1A of this Code.
B. Notwithstanding the imposition of the fines aforesaid, any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the
Taxicab Commissioner for the same violation that resulted in the imposed fine. (Ord. G-998, 4-23-2013; Ord. G-1127, 3-27-2018)
Chapter 3
SCAVENGERS
4-3-1: LICENSES REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of scavenger or garbage collection or the collection of recyclable materials or landscape
waste within the limits of the village without having first secured a license to conduct such business, or in violation of the terms of such license, or in
violation of the provisions of this chapter. Each licensee shall comply with all applicable federal, state, county and local and other laws and regulations
which govern the collection and disposal of solid waste. (Ord. G-59, 5-24-1966; Ord. G-445, 2-27-1990; Ord. G-602, 11-11-1997)
4-3-2: LICENSE APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE:
A. Application: Applications for licenses required under this chapter shall be made to the village clerk on forms provided by the village, and shall contain
such information deemed necessary to determine whether to issue such license requested.
B. Issuance: The village manager or his designee shall review each application and recommend issuance to the board of trustees pursuant to the
standards contained in this chapter. (Ord. G-15, 8-9-1960; Ord. G-445, 2-27-1990; Ord. G-602, 11-11-1997)
4-3-3: EXEMPTIONS:
A contractor, developer, builder, craftsman, installer, serviceman and the like need not be licensed or have a permit by reason of any requirements set
forth in this chapter in order to privately remove the debris caused by their normal operations; however, such persons must otherwise conform with the
regulations contained in this code. In addition, the scavenger service need not be licensed or have a permit byreason of any requirements set forth in this
chapter in order to remove trees, logs, brush, limbs of trees or junked cars. (Ord. G-602, 11-11-1997)
4-3-4: LICENSE NUMBER AND FEE:
A. Number Of Licenses Issued:
1. The number of residential scavenger licenses issued by the village shall be limited to one in number. For purposes of this license, residential
scavenger service shall include detached single-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings containing fewer than four (4) attached units. The
residential scavenger license holder shall also be entitled to receive a commercial scavenger license, and the fee for said commercial scavenger
license shall be waived.
2. The number of commercial scavenger licenses issued by the village shall be unlimited; provided, however, that each licensee shall at all times
comply with the standards and specifications set forth in this chapter. For purposes of this license, commercial scavenger service shall include
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 76/438
business establishments, religious and civic organizations, construction work sites, industrial establishments, and multiple-family dwellings
containing four (4) or more attached dwelling units.
B. Fees:
1. The fee for a residential or commercial scavenger license shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year, and the license period shall be from
January 1 until December 31 of each year. All fees shall be paid to the village clerk prior to the issuance of said license. The fee for any license
issued after January 1 of any given year shall be prorated on a monthly basis for the number of months remaining in the fiscal year as above
established.
2. Revocation of a license by action of the president and board of trustees shall not entitle the licensee to a refund of all or any part of the license fee.
(Ord. G-22, 4-11-1961; Ord. G-602, 11-11-1997; Ord. G-715, 3-11-2003)
4-3-5: RENEWAL AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
Except as provided in section 4-3-6 of this chapter, licenses shall be revocable at any time by action of the president and board of trustees upon the
recommendation of the village manager after notice and hearing by the village manager and a finding by the president and board of trustees that the
licensee has failed to comply with the rules and regulations established in this chapter.
Licenses may be renewed by the president and board of trusteesif, in their sole discretion, such renewal is in the best interest of the residents of the
village. (Ord. G-15, 8-9-1960; Ord. G-602, 11-11-1997)
4-3-6: RESIDENTIAL SCAVENGER SERVICE:
Notwithstanding any provision contained herein to the contrary, no person, whether licensed as a scavenger or not, shall purchase and/or collect
residential municipal waste unless authorized by the village to do so pursuant to a written agreement entered into between the village and the waste
hauler. In the event that the residential scavenger waste collection contract is terminated, the residential scavenger license shall be automatically revoked
without notice or hearing. (Ord. G-602, 11-11-1997)
4-3-7: SERVICE FEES:
All fees charged for the collection of residential municipal waste (solid waste, recyclable materials, and landscape waste) shall be as determined by the
president and board of trustees pursuant to the residential municipal waste collection contract. No change in such service fees may be made by any
licensee without prior approval of the village president and board of trustees.
Service fees for commercial customers shall be as agreed upon by and between the licensee and the commercial customer. (Ord. G-15, 8-9-1960; Ord.
G-445, 2-27-1990; Ord. G-602, 11-11-1997)
4-3-8: SCAVENGER SERVICE STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
The following standards and specifications shall apply to all persons holding a residential or commercial scavenger service license:
A. Bond Requirements: Prior to the issuance of a license for commercial scavenger service, each licensee shall file with the village clerk a performance
bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with sureties, in a form acceptable to the village.
Prior to the issuance of a license for residential scavenger service, the residential scavenger service licensee shall file with the village clerk a
performance bond in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the amount of the residential municipal waste collection contract pursuant to the
terms of the contract.
B. Insurance And Indemnity: Prior to the issuance of a residential or commercial license, the licensee shall provide to the village a certificate of insurance
with insurance coverage pertaining to all of the licensees equipment,personnel and operations under the contract including general liability insurance,
workers' compensation insurance and motor vehicle insurance in the amounts set forth in this subsection. The licensee shall maintain adequate
safeguards and use reasonable care in the performance of all work and shall indemnify, defend and hold the village harmless from any and all liability,
costs and fees, including attorney fees resulting from damage to or destruction of any property or death of or injury to any person (including, but not
limited to, the licensees employees) or any administrative or judicial proceedings in whole or in part arising out of the contract or in connection with the
work to be performed, including, without limitation, all acts or alleged acts of the licensee, its employees, agents, or subcontractors, but excluding that
arising out of the sole legal cause of the village, its agents or employees.
1. General Liability: Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage.
2. Automobile Liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage.
3. Workers' Compensation And Employers' Liability: Workers' compensation limits as required by the labor code of the state of Illinois and employers'
liability limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per accident.
Any change to the certificate or policy of insurance must be reported to the village clerk prior to the change(s) becoming effective.
C. Collection: The licensee shall collect and pick up all waste from each premises served by said licensee. Residential collection shall be conducted per
the terms of the residential municipal waste collection contract.
Commercial scavenger service licensees shall offer regular collections for commercial customers at least once per week according to a schedule to
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 77/438
be agreed upon by the licensee and commercial customer. Collections shall be made from a location at the commercial customers building behind the
front line of said building. Commercial type containers shall be furnished by the licensee, or may be furnished by the customer, if approved by the
licensee.
D. Restrictions And Condition Of Equipment: The licensee shall use modern loader trucks and keep all equipment used in the performance of its work in a
clean, sanitary condition and not permit the same to remain standing anywhere in the village. No such vehicle shall be driven through or over any road
or street within the village during or on a Sunday. All scavenger vehicles shall be cleaned and disinfected when not in use inorder that such vehicles
do not become offensive. Recyclable material shall be collected in a vehicle appropriate for this purpose. Landscape materials shall be collected in a
leakproof packer type truck. Such trucks and equipment shall at all times be available for inspection by the village upon request.
E. Disposal Of Refuse: All refuse collected by a licensee shall be disposed of by the licensee at his own expense outside the corporate limits of the
village. Recyclable refuse shall be disposed of at a proper processing facility or a materials vendor. Landscape waste shall be disposed of at a site in
conformance with state requirements. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to dispose of or store any refuse in any place within the village limits.
All refuse collected by any licensee shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable statutes of the state of Illinois and the ordinances of the
village.
F. Holiday Pick Ups: When a scheduled pick up day falls on a holiday, the refuse shall be picked up on the next business day occurring immediately
thereafter.
G. Customer Service: Each licensee shall provide an area office and telephone number for the receipt of service calls or complaints, and shall have an
employee available to receive such calls on working days from eight oclock (8:00) A.M. to four oclock (4:00) P.M. Complaints shall be given prompt
and courteous attention. In case of missed scheduled collections, the licensee shall investigate and, if the claim is valid, shall arrange for a pick up of
the refuse in question within twenty four (24) hours after the complaint is received. Any complaints received by the village will be immediately
forwarded to the licensee. All licensees shall maintain a log of every complaint received, the date received, the person making the complaint, any
action taken and the date such action is taken. Such complaint log shall at all times be available for inspection by the village. (Ord. G-15, 8-9-1960;
Ord. G-602, 11-11-1997; Ord. G-803, 5-9-2006)
4-3-9: STORAGE OF REFUSE:
No person may place any container containing solid waste, recyclable material, or landscape waste in public view for pick up prior to six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. on the day prior to any scheduled pick up. In addition, all such containers shall be removed from public view after collection no later than six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. the day following such collection. (Ord. G-15, 8-9-1960; Ord. G-445, 2-27-1990; Ord. G-602, 11-11-1997)
4-3-10: COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS:
Recyclable materials including, but not limited to, newsprint, glass bottles, aluminum cans, and plastic milk and watercontainers shall be subject to
recycling pursuant to programs established by the village. Such recyclable materials shall be set out for collection only in containers approved for such
purpose by the village.
It shall be a violation for any person not licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to collect, pick up, or cause to be collected or picked up any
such recyclable items. Any such violation shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-3-1 of this code. (Ord. G-445, 2-27-1990; Ord. G-602, 11-
11-1997)
Chapter 4
SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
ARTICLE A. COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION
4-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION: The going upon any premises or to or in one or more private residence(s) by any person without appointment by personal
contact with the resident or occupant for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale for profit of goods, books, magazines, or any other article or thing
whatsoever, or for any service, or for the purpose of peddling (providing the article or thing at the time of the transaction) any of the same, or for the
purpose of making or requesting appointments or procuring interviews or arranging for demonstrations or explanations preliminary to any actual
solicitation or orders, selling, peddling or hawking of any of the same.
PERSON: Any individual, organization, group, association, partnership, corporation, trust, or any combination thereof.
RESIDENCE: Shall mean and include every separate living unit occupied for dwelling purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of
building or structure, including the common areas inside multiple-dwelling buildings. (Ord. G-584, 3-11-1997)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 78/438
4-4A-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person desiring to engage in commercial solicitation within the Village without having first obtained a permit from the Village
as hereinafter provided.
B. Application for a commercial solicitation permit shall be made to the individual designated by the Chief of Police or his designee upon a form provided
by the Village. The person (applicant) shall truthfully state in full on the application the following information:
1. The name and address of the person applying for the permit.
2. The name and address of each person in charge of and supervising the commercial solicitation in the Village.
3. The names, addresses and dates of birth of all individuals who will engage in commercial solicitation in the Village for that person.
4. The nature and purpose of the commercial solicitation.
5. The requested dates for commercial solicitation.
6. The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for a commercial solicitation permit under this Article.
7. Whether a commercial solicitation permit issued to the person under this Article has ever been revoked.
8. Whether the person (applicant) or any individual listed in subsection B3 of this Section has ever been convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this Article, or the ordinances of any other Illinois municipality regulating commercial solicitation.
9. Whether the person (applicant) or any individual listed in subsection B3 of this section has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the
laws of the state of Illinois or any other state, or of a federal law of the United States within five (5) years of the date of application.
10. Any additional information that the individual designated by the chief of police may deem necessary to process the application. (Ord. G-584, 3-11-
1997)
4-4A-3: TERM; RENEWAL:
Each commercial solicitation permit shall be in effect for not more than ninety (90) days. To renew a permit, a person shall complete a short form,
indicating no changes in the information provided in the initial application, or if changes have occurred, a new application, and shall also submit the
required renewal fee, as described in section 4-4A-7 of this article. The village may, as a condition of renewal of a commercial solicitation permit, require
the person (applicant) to show that the person and all individuals soliciting for that person continue to meet the standards of issuance enumerated in
section 4-4A-5 of this article. Renewal is subject to availability pursuant to section 4-4A-4 of this article. (Ord. G-584, 3-11-1997; Ord. G-723, 7-22-2003)
4-4A-4: NUMBER OF PERMITS ISSUED:
At no time shall there be more than fifteen (15) commercial solicitation permits outstanding. (Ord. G-584, 3-11-1997)
4-4A-5: STANDARD OF ISSUANCE:
No permit shall be issued to a person:
A. If the application is not truthfully completed as required by section 4-4A-2 of this article;
B. If the person has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the state of Illinois or any other state or under the federal law of the United States, within
five (5) years of the date of application;
C. If the person has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this or similar ordinances within two (2) years of the date of application;
D. If the person engages for the purposes of commercial solicitation any individual who has been convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of such
offenses as are enumerated in subsections B and C of this section; or
E. If any commercial solicitation permit issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided in section 4-4A-9 of this article. (Ord. G-584, 3-
11-1997)
4-4A-6: DENIAL OF PERMIT; APPEAL:
A. Within ten (10) working days of the date of application for a commercial solicitation permit, the individual designated by the chief of police shall notify
the person (applicant) of approval or denial of the permit. In the event that any commercial solicitation permit is denied for failure to comply with the
standards set forth above, the notice shall include in writing the reasons for denial.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 79/438
B. If a commercial solicitation permit is denied, the person may, within ten (10) days of the date such notice is sent, cure the defect resulting in the denial
by any appropriate action, including removal of any individual engaging in solicitation for the person who fails to meet the standards enumerated in
subsections 4-4A-5B and C of this article. If the person chooses not to cure the defect in the application, the person may file a written appeal
addressed to the village manager. Based on his review of the written appeal and the standards of section 4-4A-5 of this article, the village manager
shall, within a reasonable time, either affirm the refusal or order the individual designated by the chief of police to issue the permit. (Ord. G-584, 3-11-
1997)
4-4A-7: FEES:
The fee for a commercial solicitation permit, and/or renewal of same, shall be one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00), which shall be effective for not
more than ninety (90) days. (Ord. G-584, 3-11-1997; Ord. G-723, 7-22-2003)
4-4A-8: REGULATIONS:
A. Duty To Leave Premises On Request: No person shall engage in solicitation upon any premises or at any residence after having been asked by an
owner or occupant thereof to leave such premises or residence.
B. Duty To Honor No Soliciting Signs: No person shall come upon any premises nor engage in solicitation upon any premises or at any residence located
thereon, if such premises or residence is posted against solicitation by means of a notice, prominently displayed, upon which is printed the legend, "No
Solicitors or Peddlers", or substantially similar language. Said posting shall be exhibited at or near the main entrance to the premises or on or near the
main door to any residence located thereon, and shall consist of a sign at least two inches by four inches (2" x 4") in size, which bears the above
legend in letters at least one-third inch (1/3") in height. Alternatively, said posting shall be clearly visible at all entrances to any subdivision having only
private streets, provided all residents in the subdivision consent to the erection of "No Solicitors" sign(s) which bear(s) the above legend in letters at
least three inches (3") in height. Signs complying with the foregoing requirements shall be made available at no cost at the office of the village clerk in
the village hall.
C. Fraudulent Misrepresentation And Misstatement Prohibited: No person shall cheat, deceive, or fraudulently misrepresent, whether through himself or
through an employee or representative, while soliciting in the village, or barter, sell or peddle any goods, books, magazines, or services other than
those specified in the permit application.
D. Duty To Wear Badges: Every person issued a permit or any individual soliciting for such person shall wear conspicuously on the outside of his outer
garments a commercial solicitation badge provided by the village. Such badge shall include at least the following information printed legibly: the name
of the individual issued the badge, the organization issued the permit, the purpose of the solicitation, and the date of the expiration of the permit. Each
badge shall also contain a statement indicating that the card is not an endorsement by the village or any of its employees. Badges issued under this
article shall be nontransferable.
E. Restrictions On Individuals Who May Solicit: No person shall use any individual for commercial solicitation unless such individual is listed on that
person's application pursuant to subsection 4-4A-2B3 of this article.
F. Time Limits: No person shall engage in "commercial solicitation" as herein defined at any time prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after six o'clock (6:00)
P.M., local time on a Saturday or weekday, or any time on a Sunday or state or national holiday. (Ord. G-584, 3-11-1997)
4-4A-9: PERMIT SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A. Any permit issued under this article may be revoked or suspended by the village manager, after notice and hearing, for any of the following reasons:
1. The failure or refusal by the person issued a permit to truthfully complete the application;
2. The failure or refusal by the person issued a permit to comply with the regulations of this article, or other applicable law; or
3. The failure or refusal by the person issued a permit, within three (3) business days of notice by the village, to remove from the solicitation activities
of the person, any individual who has failed or refused to comply with the regulations of this article.
B. In addition to the above referenced grounds for revocation by the village manager, if any person having obtained a permit under this article, or any
individual soliciting for such person shall thereafter be convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of such offenses as are enumerated in
subsections 4-4A-5B and C of this article, his permit under this article shall automatically be revoked. Written notice of such revocation shall be
promptly sent to the person.
C. Notice of a hearing for revocation or suspension of a permit issued under this article shall be provided in writing and shall set forth specifically the
grounds for the proposed revocation or suspension and the time and place of the hearing. Notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at
the address shown on the permit application or at the last known address of the permittee.
D. Any revocation of a permit shall preclude that person from receiving another permit under this article for one year subsequent to such revocation;
provided that:
1. Upon automatic revocation, as provided above, the person shall not be permitted to receive another permit for such periods of time as are
enumerated in subsections 4-4A-5B and C of this article for the respective offenses; and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 80/438
2. Automatic revocation due to violations enumerated in subsections 4-4A-5B and C of this article by an individual soliciting for the person shall be
rescinded if the person removes the individual violator from its solicitation activities.
E. Suspension of a permit shall be for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. No revocation or suspension shall require return by the village of any permit
fee.
F. Revocation or suspension of a permit shall not preclude the imposition of a fine for violation of any part of this article by a court of competent
jurisdiction. (Ord. G-584, 3-11-1997)
4-4A-10: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY:
A. Violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be treated as an infraction, and shall, upon conviction, be punishable as set forth in section 1-3-1 of
this code.
B. In addition to any criminal enforcement, the village or any individual may pursue any available civil remedies deemed appropriate and necessary. (Ord.
G-584, 3-11-1997)
ARTICLE B. NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITATION
4-4B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITATION: The going upon any premises or to or in one or more private residences by any person without appointment by
personal contact with the resident or occupant for the purpose of requesting directly, or indirectly, money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other
thing of value on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value will be used for a noncommercial
purpose, such as a political, charitable, or religious purpose. Noncommercial solicitation shall not include canvassing or calling from house to house only
for the purpose of communicating issues of general interest to the public.
PERSON: Any individual, organization, group, association, partnership, corporation, trust, or any combination thereof.
RESIDENCE: Shall mean and include every separate living unit occupied for dwelling purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of
building or structure, including the common areas inside multiple-dwelling buildings. (Ord. G-584, 3-11-1997)
4-4B-2: REGISTRATION REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
A. Registration Required: Any person desiring to engage in noncommercial solicitation within the village shall register with the individual designated by the
chief of police for the purpose of identification only.
B. Application: Application for a certificate of registration shall be made to the individual designated by the chief of police upon a form provided by the
village. The person shall truthfully state in full on the application the following information, or in lieu thereof, a statement of the reason or reasons why
such information cannot be furnished:
1. The name and address of the person applying for the certificate.
2. The name and address of each person in charge of and supervising the noncommercial solicitation in the village.
3. The nature and purpose of the noncommercial solicitation.
4. The requested dates for noncommercial solicitation.
5. The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for a certificate under this article.
C. Supplemental Application For Solicitation In Public Roadways: Village law enforcement personnel, firefighters, or other persons employed by the
village to protect the public safety that desire to engage in solicitation for a charitable organization in the designated vehicular lanes of any public
roadway, must, no later than ten (10) days prior to the requested dates of solicitation, submit a supplemental application to the chief of police stating in
full the following additional information:
1. The name of the charitable organization for which the solicitation will be conducted;
2. The location or locations, including all public roadways, on which the solicitation will occur;
3. The manner and conditions under which the solicitation is to occur; and
4. Proof that the charitable organization for which the solicitation will be conducted maintains in effect a valid general liability insurance policy with
coverage in the amount of no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with coverage to be written on an "occurrence" basis. The required
insurance policy must cover all personnel to be involved in the solicitation and any bodily injury and property damage that may arise out of, or in
connection with, the solicitation.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 81/438
D. Certificate Of Registration Issued: Except as provided by section 4-4B-4 of this article, upon receipt of an application, the individual designated by the
chief of police shall forthwith issue the person a certificate of registration. The chief of police shall issue a certificate of registration to any village law
enforcement personnel, firefighters, or other persons employed by the village to protect the public safety, that desire to engage in solicitation for a
charitable organization in the designated vehicular lanes of any public roadway no later than five (5) business days after receiving a fully and
accurately completed application and supplemental application as required by this section. (Ord. G-974, 7-10-2012)
4-4B-3: TERM; RENEWAL:
Each registration certificate shall be in effect for not more than ninety (90) days. To renew a certificate of registration, a person shall complete a short
form, indicating no changes in the information provided in the initial application, or if changes have occurred, a new application and shall submit the
required renewal fee as set forth in section 4-4A-7 of this chapter. (Ord. G-584, 3-11-1997; Ord. G-723, 7-22-2003)
4-4B-4: DENIAL OF CERTIFICATE; APPEAL:
A. The failure of a person to complete the application truthfully shall be the sole basis for the denial of a certificate of registration. In the event that any
certificate of registration is denied, the individual designated by the chief of police shall immediately notify the person, in writing, of the reasons for said
denial.
B. If a certificate of registration is denied, the person may within ten (10) days of the date such notice is sent cure the defect resulting in the denial. If the
person chooses not to cure the defect in the application, the person may file a written appeal addressed to the village manager. The village manager
shall then, within a reasonable time, either affirm the refusal or order the individual designated by the village manager to issue the certificate.
C. If a determination is not made by the village manager concerning issuance of the certificate within thirty (30) days after the date of denial, an interim
certificate of registration shall be issued, which shall be valid until such determination is made. (Ord. G-584, 3-11-1997)
4-4B-5: REGULATIONS:
A. Duty To Leave Premises On Request: No person shall engage in solicitation upon any premises or at any residence after having been asked by an
owner or occupant thereof to leave such premises or residence.
B. Duty To Honor No Soliciting Signs: No person shall come upon any premises nor engage in solicitation upon any premises or at any residence located
thereon, if such premises or residence is posted against solicitation by means of a notice, prominently displayed, upon which is printed the legend, "No
Solicitors Or Peddlers", or substantially similar language. Said posting shall be exhibited at or near the main entrance to the premises or on or near the
main door to any residence located thereon, and shall consist of a sign at least two inches by four inches (2" x 4") in size, which bears the above
legend in letters at least one-third inch (1/3") in height. Alternatively, said posting shall be clearly visible at all entrances to any subdivision having only
private streets, provided all residents in the subdivision consent to the erection of "No Solicitors" sign(s) which bear(s) the above legend in letters at
least three inches (3") in height. Signs complying with the foregoing requirements shall be made available at no cost at the office of the village clerk in
the village hall.
C. Fraudulent Misrepresentation: No person who engages in noncommercial solicitation shall use any plan, scheme or ruse to make any statement which
indicates or implies that the purpose of such person's visit is other than to engage in noncommercial solicitation.
D. Duty To Wear Registration Cards: Every person issued a certificate or any individual soliciting for such person shall wear conspicuously on the outside
of his outer garments a registration card provided by the village. Such card shall include at least the following information printed legibly: the name of
the individual issued the certificate of registration, the name and phone number of the person (organization) for whom the individual is soliciting, the
purpose of the solicitation, and the date of the expiration of the card. Each card shall also contain a statement indicating that the card is not an
endorsement by the village or any of its employees. Cards issued under this article shall be nontransferable.
E. Time Limits: No person shall engage in noncommercial solicitation at any time prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., local
time, except as provided for in subsection F of this section.
F. Solicitation In Public Roadways: No person may engage in noncommercial solicitation in the designated vehicular lanes of any public roadway, as
defined by the Illinois vehicle code, with the sole exception of village law enforcement personnel, firefighters, or other persons employed by the village
to protect the public safety who have received a certificate of registration from the chief of police. All solicitation in the designated vehicular lanes of
any public roadway will be subject to the following regulations to protect and preserve public safety:
1. No person engaging in solicitation may impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic in the public roadway or otherwise create an undue risk to
the safety of themselves or the general public.
2. No person engaging in solicitation may use any sound producing or amplifying device, flag, banner, balloon, or other form of attention getting device
which could distract drivers or otherwise create a hazard.
3. No more than four (4) persons may simultaneously engage in solicitation at any intersection in the village.
4. No person may engage in solicitation at any time prior to sunrise or after sunset. (Ord. G-974, 7-10-2012)
4-4B-6: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 82/438
A. After notice and hearing, the right of an individual to engage in noncommercial solicitation for a person registered pursuant to this article may be
revoked or suspended by the village manager, if that individual violates any of the provisions of this article during the period of registration.
B. Notice of a hearing for revocation or suspension of an individual's right to engage in noncommercial solicitation shall be provided in writing and shall set
forth specifically the grounds for the proposed revocation or suspension and the time and place of the hearing. Notice shall be mailed, postage
prepaid, to the registrant at the address shown on the registration application or at the last known address of the registrant.
C. The certificate of the registered person is not revoked by proceedings under this section and such person may substitute another individual for the one
whose right to solicit as herein defined is revoked. (Ord. G-584, 3-11-1997)
4-4B-7: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY:
A. Violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be treated as an infraction, and shall, upon conviction, be punishable as set forth in section 1-3-1 of
this code.
B. In addition to any criminal enforcement, the village or any individual may pursue any available civil remedies deemed appropriate and necessary. (Ord.
G-584, 3-11-1997)
Chapter 5
VENDING MACHINES
(Rep. by Ord. G-679, 7-24-2001)
Chapter 6
TOBACCO AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1151 - TOBACCO, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE
PRODUCTS. Go to new ordinance.
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT: A product or device not consisting of or containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or by any other means. Alternative nicotine product excludes "tobacco
products" as defined in this section and any product approved by the United States food and drug administration as a nontobacco product for sale as a
tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
SMOKING: The holding or carrying of a lighted pipe, lighted cigar, or lighted cigarette of any kind, including the lighting of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any
kind.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or
dipping tobacco.
VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses tobacco products or alternative nicotine products. (Ord. G-1013, 11-12-2013)
4-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION, FEES AND INSPECTIONS:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful to sell at retail, to give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away or delivering
tobacco products or alternative nicotine products within the village without having first obtained a dealers license pursuant to this chapter. Such
license shall be in addition to any other license or permit required by this code.
B. Application: Application for a license hereunder shall be made, in writing, to the village clerk on forms provided by the village, signed by the applicant,
verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following statements and information: the name and address of the applicant's business, name of
owner, manager or lessee; and address of each premises where tobacco products or alternative nicotine products will be dispensed.
C. Fee: The license fee for a dealers license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
D. Term: The term of said license shall be from October 1 to September 30 of each year. Only one dealers license shall be required notwithstanding the
number of locations from which the licensee sells tobacco products or alternative nicotine products. A copy of said license shall be posted in a
conspicuous place wherever any tobacco product or alternative nicotine product is sold.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 83/438
E. Inspections: The director of community development shall cause each retail vendor of tobacco products or alternative nicotine products to be inspected
for compliance no less than two (2) times annually. Inspections are to be unannounced in order to determine if each retail vendor of tobacco products
or alternative nicotine products is in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. G-1013, 11-12-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1151 - TOBACCO, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE
PRODUCTS. Go to new ordinance.
4-6-3: LICENSE REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ or permit any person
under eighteen (18) years of age to sell tobacco products or alternative nicotine products in any licensed premises. (Ord. G-1013, 11-12-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1151 - TOBACCO, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE
PRODUCTS. Go to new ordinance.
4-6-4: PROHIBITED SALES, ACTS:
A. Purchase By Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase tobacco products or alternative
nicotine products.
B. False Or Altered Identification: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to misrepresent that person's identity or age, or
to use any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products or alternative nicotine products.
C. Unlawful Possession Or Use Of Tobacco Products Or Alternative Nicotine Products By Minors:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) to knowingly possess, consume, or use, either by smoking, inhaling, dissolving,
snorting, sniffing, ingesting, absorbing, or chewing any tobacco product or alternative nicotine product, provided that the possession by a person
under the age of eighteen (18) years under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of the parents or
guardians home shall not be prohibited.
2. It shall be rebuttably presumed that the substance within a package or container is a tobacco product or an alternative nicotine product if the
package or container has affixed to it a label which identifies the package or container as containing a tobacco product or nicotine.
D. Unlawful Furnishing Of Tobacco Products And Alternative Nicotine Products To Minors:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish to any person who is under eighteen (18) years of age, by gift, sale, or any other means, any tobacco
products or alternative nicotine products.
2. It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this section that the person furnishing the tobacco product or alternative nicotine product
was presented with and reasonably relied upon a document which identified the person receiving the tobacco product or alternative nicotine product
as being eighteen (18) years of age or older. (Ord. G-1013, 11-12-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1151 - TOBACCO, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE
PRODUCTS. Go to new ordinance.
4-6-5: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Signage: Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided herein shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco
products and alternative nicotine products, and on or upon every vending machine which offers tobacco products or alternative nicotine products for
sale. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
SALE OF TOBACCO ACCESSORIES, SMOKING HERBS, AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN
YEARS OF AGE OR THE MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE TO PROCURE SUCH A SALE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.
Signs informing the public of the U.S. surgeon general's health warning shall be posted by every licensee selling cigarettes at or near every display of
cigarettes and on or upon every vending machine which offers cigarettes for sale. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: SMOKING BY PREGNANT WOMEN MAY RESULT IN FETAL INJURY, PREMATURE BIRTH, AND LOW
BIRTH WEIGHT
The above signs shall be posted in a conspicuous place and shall be printed on white cards in red letters at least one-half inch (1/2") in height.
B. Location Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products or alternative nicotine products
within one hundred feet (100') of any school, childcare facility or other building used for education or recreational programs for persons under the age
of eighteen (18) years.
C. Certain Free Distributions Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing, promoting or
advertising tobacco products or alternative nicotine products, or any employee or agent of any such licensee or person, in the course of such
licensees or persons business, to distribute, give away or deliver tobacco products or alternative nicotine products free of charge to any person on
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 84/438
any right of way, park, playground or other property owned by the village, or any other public body, school district or unit of local government. (Ord. G-
1013, 11-12-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1151 - TOBACCO, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE
PRODUCTS. Go to new ordinance.
4-6-6: VENDING MACHINES:
A. Location: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to place a vending machine selling or distributing tobacco products or alternative nicotine products within
twenty five feet (25') from the entrance of any licensed establishment.
B. Locking Devices:
1. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving away or delivering
tobacco products or alternative nicotine products by use of a vending machine, unless such vending machine is equipped with a manual, electric or
electronic locking device controlled by the licensee so as to prevent its operation by persons under the age of eighteen (18) years.
2. Any premises where access by persons under the age of eighteen (18) years is prohibited by law, or premises where the public is generally not
permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of a business located at such premises, shall be exempt from the
requirements of this section. (Ord. G-1013, 11-12-2013)
4-6-7: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if
such act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally. (Ord. G-1013, 11-12-2013)
4-6-8: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A. Enforcement: The village president shall be charged with the administration of this chapter.
B. Violations, Remedies: The village president may suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this chapter, if it is determined the
licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter. In lieu of suspension or revocation of a license, the village president may instead levy a fine
on the licensee. The fine imposed shall not exceed the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each violation. Each day on which a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Procedures:
1. No such license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the village president with not less
than a seven (7) day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend against the charges contained in such
notice. The seven (7) day notice provisions shall begin the day following delivery by certified mail or by personal service.
2. The village president shall, within fourteen (14) days after such hearing, if it is determined after such hearing that the license should be revoked or
suspended, or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason for such determination in a written order and either the amount of the fine, the
period of suspension or that the license has been revoked, and serve a copy of such order within the seven (7) days upon the licensee.
3. Any licensee determined by the village president to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the village the costs of the
hearing before the village president on such violation. The village president shall determine the cost incurred by the village for said hearing,
including, but not limited to: court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other
miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village or such lesser sum as the village president may allow.
The licensee shall pay said costs to the village within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the village president. Failure to pay said costs
within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this chapter and may be cause for license suspension or revocation, or the levy of a fine.
D. Period Of Revocation: When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to said licensee for the period of six (6)
months thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling tobacco products or alternative nicotine products. (Ord. G-1013, 11-12-2013)
Chapter 7
RAFFLES
4-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered
to those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 85/438
methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in taxsupported
schools.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its
members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would
be cared for by the government.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such
pursuit and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone
as a result of the operation.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in section 28-2(b) of the Criminal Code, being 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-2, conducted by an organization
licensed under this Chapter in which:
A. The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or
by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance;
B. The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the
part of the persons conducting or connected with the lottery; except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION: Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS' ORGANIZATION: An organization or association comprised of members of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or
spouses, widows or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general
public in such a way as to confer a public benefit. (Ord. G-567, 2-27-1996)
4-7-2: CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the conduct or operation of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other than raffles
as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. G-567, 2-27-1996)
4-7-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct a raffle, or sell chances for a raffle, in the village without first having obtained a license therefor pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. Such licenses shall be issued pursuant and subject to the provisions of the Illinois raffles act1. Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide
religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, education or veterans' organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have been in
existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a license and whichhave had during that entire five (5) year
period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objects, or to a nonprofit fundraising organization that the village manager, in consultation
with the village president and board of trustees, determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or
group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster. (Ord. G-567, 2-27-1996)
4-7-4: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Application for a raffle license shall be made on forms provided by the village at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the sale of any raffle chances.
Such applications shall contain the following information:
A. Name and address of the applicant.
B. Authorized representative of the applicant.
C. Date of incorporation, where applicable.
D. Names and addresses of officers and directors.
E. The area or areas within the village in which raffle chances, tickets, and the like will be sold or issued.
F. The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued.
G. The maximum price which may be charged for each chance issued or sold.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 86/438
H. The time of determination of winning chances and the location or locations at which winning chances will be determined.
I. A sworn statement attesting to the not for profit character of the prospective licensee organization signed by the presiding officer and the secretary of
the organization.
J. A statement that the applicant agrees to comply with all laws of the state, the United States, and the village in the conduct of the raffle. (Ord. G-567, 2-
27-1996)
4-7-5: FEE:
A license shall be issued when the requirements of this chapter have been met and a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) has been paid to the village and
received by the village clerk. A license authorizes the licensee to conduct one raffle. (Ord. G-567, 2-27-1996; Ord. G-715, 3-11-2003)
4-7-6: ISSUANCE, DENIAL OF LICENSE:
Within fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of an application for a license, the village manager or his designee shall either issue a license or advise
the applicant in writing of the reason for denial of a license. No such license shall be issued except as authorized under the act. The village manager shall
give notice to the village president and village board not less than forty eight (48) hours before the license becomes effective. Within such forty eight (48)
hour period, the village president or any member of the village board may, through notice to the village manager, cause this issuance to be stayed. In
such case the matter will be formally presented to the Village Board at their next regular Board meeting for decision. (Ord. G-567, 2-27-1996)
4-7-7: RESTRICTIONS:
A. Each license is valid for one raffle only.
B. No more than ten (10) raffle licenses shall be issued to any person in a calendar year.
C. The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars
($250,000.00). The maximum retail value of each prize by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
The Village Board may authorize a higher aggregate retail value and/or retail value of a single prize upon written request of the applicant.
D. The maximum duration during which chances may be issued or sold shall be six (6) months prior to the drawing. The drawing shall be held at the time
and location as set forth in the license.
E. Each licensee shall keep records as required under the Act.
F. The conduct of raffles within the Village is subject to applicable restrictions and conditions as set forth in the Raffles Act2.
G. In no event shall the price of each raffle chance issued or sold exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
H. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct the raffle.
I. No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
J. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the conduct of raffles without the permission of a parent or guardian. A person under
the age of eighteen (18) years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his parent or
guardian.
K. Raffle chances may be sold or issued only at the location(s) as set forth in the license, but when specified location(s) are properties open to the public,
prior approval must be obtained from the Village Manager. (Ord. G-567, 2-27-1996; Ord. G-791, 11-8-2005; Ord. G-1145, 3-12-2019)
4-7-8: RAFFLE MANAGER; BOND:
All operation and conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffle manager designated by the organization. The raffle manager shall give
a fidelity bond in an amount not less than the anticipated gross receipts for the raffle. The bond shall be in favor of the organization and conditioned upon
the raffle manager's honesty and the performance of his/her duties. The terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the Village
not less than thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation, provided, the Village Manager may waive this bonding requirement when, due to the nature, past
experience or competence of the organization involved, the Village Manager determines that such bond would be unnecessarily burdensome. The Village
Manager shall give notice of such waiver to the Village President and Village Board not less than forty eight (48) hours before the license becomes
effective. Within such forty eight (48) hour period, the Village Manager or any member of the Village Board may, through notice to the Village Manager,
cause this waiver to be stayed. In such case the matter will be formally presented to the Village Board at their next regular Board meeting for decision.
(Ord. G-567, 2-27-1996)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 87/438
4-7-9: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
A. Records Kept:
1. Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or
occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment.
2. Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross receipts, if
bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to license thereof issued by the department of revenue of the state of
Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
3. Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3) years, and organizations shall make available theirrecords relating to operation of
raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
B. Reports Required: Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to its membership and to the village its gross receipts, expenses
and net proceeds from the raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required by this section. (Ord. G-567, 2-27-1996)
4-7-10: PENALTY:
Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties contained in section 1-3-1 of this code. (Ord. G-567, 2-
27-1996)
Chapter 8
ADULT USES
4-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having, as a substantial portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for rent, sale or for viewing
on the premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin-operated means, and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities", or "specified anatomical areas", as defined in this Section, or an establishment
with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such materials; or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such
materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin-operated booths, exclusion of minors from the
establishment's premises or any other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: An establishment offering to its patrons, as entertainment, any exhibition or display, or any theatrical or other live
performances which include topless or go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers, or any persons
singing, reading, posing, modeling, or serving food or beverages, where the exhibition, performance, display or dance is intended to sexually arouse the
entertainer or the patrons, or where the attire of persons involved is such as to expose "specified anatomical areas", as defined in this Section.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building, regardless of its seating capacity, which is used to present for public view on the premises,
films, movies, previews, trailers or advertisements which are distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined in this Section.
ADULT USE: Includes adult bookstores, adult entertainment cabarets, and adult motion picture theaters, as defined in this Section.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair; buttocks; and female
breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B. Acts or representations of acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation or flagellation;
C. Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast;
D. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities set forth in subsections A through C of this definition. (Ord. G-592, 5-13-1997)
4-8-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating an adult use in the Village without first having obtained a license therefor from
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 88/438
the Village Clerk. (Ord. G-592, 5-13-1997)
4-8-3: LICENSE APPLICATION; STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE:
A. Application for an adult use license shall be made in writing and shall state the following:
1. The name, address, telephone number and age of the applicant and the registered agent of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation.
2. The location of the adult use business.
3. The exact nature of the adult use to be conducted and of the proposed place of business and the facilities related thereto.
4. A statement by the applicant that he is familiar with the provisions of this Chapter and is in compliance with them.
5. A statement of whether the business will be conducted by a manager and, if so, the name, address, telephone number and age of each such
manager.
6. A statement that no manager or principal operating the business has been convicted of any offense of prostitution, soliciting for prostitution, or
obscenity or public indecency within the last two (2) years, and that the applicant has not had any license for an adult use in any other community
revoked within the last two (2) years.
7. A completed fingerprint card of all applicants, principals and managers listed on the application.
8. Such additional information or identification as the Village deems necessary in order to establish the character of the applicant.
B. Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of an application for an adult use license, the Village shall investigate the information contained in the application
and shall determine the following:
1. That the premises designated by the applicant as the location of the business are in full compliance with all applicable ordinances of the Village,
including zoning ordinances1.
2. That the premises and each manager and employee comply with the provisions of Section 4-8-5 of this Chapter as such provisions apply to them.
3. That the applicant, each manager and each employee is over twenty one (21) years of age.
4. That no manager or principal operator of the business has been convicted of any offense of prostitution, solicitation for prostitution, or obscenity or
public indecency within the last two (2) years, and that the applicant has not had any license for an adult use revoked within the last two (2) years.
C. If the investigation shows the compliance of the applicant for an adult use license, the premises upon which the business is to be conducted, and each
manager and employee, if applicable, with each of the requirements established in subsection B of this Section, and with the conditions and
regulations set forth in Section 4-8-5 of this Chapter, within fifteen (15) days after completion of such investigation, the Village Clerk shall issue a
license, and upon payment by theapplicant of the license fee required under this Chapter, the license shall be issued.
D. If the investigation shows that the applicant for an adult use license, the premises on which the business is to be conducted, or the managers and
employees, if applicable, do not comply with each of the requirements established in subsection B of this Section, and with the conditions and
regulations set forth in Section 4-8-5 of this Chapter, within fifteen (15) days after completion of such investigation, the Village Clerk shall notify the
applicant in writing that the license has been denied. Such denial shall be the final administrative action of the Village with respect to the license
application, and shall be subject to the immediate appeal by the applicant to the Circuit Court. (Ord. G-592, 5-13-1997)
4-8-4: LICENSE FEE, TERM, CONDITIONS:
A. The fee for the license required by Section 4-8-2 of this Chapter shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year, and such license shall be valid from
January 1 to December 31.
B. Any license issued under this Chapter shall be renewable under the same terms and conditions established in this Chapter for initial issuance of a
license.
C. Any license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be applicable only to the specific licensee and location designated, and may not be sold, transferred,
or otherwise assigned. (Ord. G-592, 5-13-1997)
4-8-5: CONDITIONS AND REGULATIONS:
A. The following regulations shall govern and control the business of operating an adult use in the Village:
1. No person under twenty one (21) years of age shall be allowed on the licensed premises.
2. At all times during the hours of operation there shall be present a manager or other employee of the licensee who shall be not less than twenty one
(21) years of age.
3. Upon a change of any manager conducting business for the licensee, the licensee shall, within ten (10) regular business days, give the Village Clerk
written notice of such change by actual delivery or by registered or certified mail. The licensee shall, thereafter, as promptly as practicable, but in
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 89/438
any event within five (5) regular business days, provide the information concerning the new manager which is required in Section 4-8-3 of this
Chapter.
4. No adult use shall be located on premises for which alicense to sell alcoholic liquor has been issued, and no alcoholic liquor shall be permitted on
such premises.
5. No adult use shall be permitted unless the premises on which such business is located complies with the requirements of the zoning ordinance of
the Village.
6. No licensee or manager under the provisions of this Chapter shall knowingly permit any person to remain in or upon licensed premises who
commits any act of public indecency or obscenity as set forth respectively in Sections 6-1-14 and 6-1-15 of this Code.
7. No licensee or manager under the provisions of this Chapter shall permit any act of prostitution, solicitation for prostitution or patronization of a
prostitute on the licensed premises.
8. No sign shall be posted on the licensed premises which depicts, displays or refers to "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities", as
defined in this Chapter.
B. In addition to the requirements established in subsection A of this Section, the following regulations shall govern and control the operation of an adult
bookstore which offers any films or videotapes for viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or other such operations:
1. All "viewing areas", defined as the area where a patron or customer would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film or viewing device, shall be
visible from a continuous main aisle or public room and shall not be obscured by any curtain, door, wall or other enclosure.
2. There shall be no aperture whatsoever in any wall or partition between viewing areas.
3. Each viewing area shall be lighted at a minimum level of ten (10) foot-candles in all parts thereof.
C. In addition to the requirements established in subsection A of this Section, the following regulations shall govern and control the operation of an adult
entertainment cabaret:
1. All performers shall be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
2. All performances, exhibitions or displays shall take place on a platform raised at least two feet (2') from the level of the floor, and located at least ten
feet (10') from any patron.
3. No performer shall fondle or caress any patron or other performer, and no patron shall fondle or caress any performer.
4. No patron shall be permitted to pay or give any gratuity toany performer, and no performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to engage in the business of operating an adult use within the Village to fail to comply with the conditions
and regulations set forth in subsections A, B or C of this Section as they are applicable to the licensed business, or to suffer or permit noncompliance
with such conditions and regulations on or within the licensed premises. In this regard, any act or omission of an employee shall be deemed the act or
omission of the owner if such act or omission occurred either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the owner or as a result of the owner's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct. All conduct occurring while on the premises shall be presumed to be the responsibility of the
owner. (Ord. G-592, 5-13-1997)
4-8-6: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
Nothing in the terms of this Chapter shall preclude the right of the Village President to suspend or revoke the license of the licensee, as follows:
A. The Village President may temporarily suspend any license issued under the terms of this Chapter when he has reason to believe that the continued
operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community or create an imminent danger of violation of
applicable law. In such case, the Village President may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such determination, and without
notice or hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days; provided, that the licensee shall be given an opportunity to be
heard in a public hearing during the seven (7) day period, and further provided that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of other
business on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other businesses.
B. The Village President may suspend or revoke any license issued under the terms of this Chapter upon ten (10) days' notice to the licensee of the time
and place of a public hearing, and a public hearing at which the licensee may appear and present evidence, if the Village President determines upon
such hearing that the licensee has failed or refused to comply with the terms of this Chapter, has failed or refused to comply with other law applicable
to the business of operating an adult use, has knowingly permitted the failure of any manager or employee on the premises to comply with the terms of
this Chapter or with other law applicable to the business of operating an adult use, has knowingly furnished false or misleading information on any
application required for any license under this Chapter or has suffered or caused another to furnish or withhold such information on his behalf, or
hasbeen convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of a violation of any provision of this Chapter. (Ord. G-592, 5-13-1997)
4-8-7: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine pursuant to Section 1-3-1 of this Code. (Ord. G-592, 5-13-1997)
Chapter 9
FRAUDULENT SALES
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 90/438
4-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE: Any sale, whether described by such name or by any other name (such as, but not limited to, "closing out sale",
"liquidation sale", "lost our lease sale", "forced to vacate sale"), held in such a manner as to induce a belief that upon disposal of the stock of goods on
hand, the business will cease and be discontinued at the premises where the sale is conducted.
GOODS: Includes all goods, wares, merchandise and other personal property, excepting choses in action and money.
PERSON: Includes a person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or two (2) or more persons having a joint or common interest.
REMOVAL SALE: Any sale held in such a manner as to induce a belief that upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be
discontinued at the premises where the sale is conducted, and thereafter will be moved to and occupy another location. (Ord. G-749, 5-11-2004)
4-9-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall directly or indirectly advertise or cause to be advertised, represent or cause to be represented, or hold out to the public in any manner
that any sale of goods is an insurance, salvage, removal, going out of business, insolvent's, assigner's, or creditor's sale of goods, or that it is a sale of
goods which have been damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise within the village of Oak Brook, unless such person shall first have obtained a
license to conduct such sale under one of such descriptive names, from the village clerk of the village of OakBrook; provided however, that this shall not
apply to any sales directly ordered by any court or referee in bankruptcy, or to any person acting under the direction and supervision of state or federal
courts in the course of their official duties; provided further, that this shall not apply to any sales by a person regularly engaged in insurance or salvage
sales of goods, or sale of goods which have been damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise, who acquired the goods for the account of others as a
result of fire or other casualty. (Ord. G-749, 5-11-2004)
4-9-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Any applicant for such a license shall file an application in writing and under oath with the village clerk setting out the following facts and information
regarding such a proposed sale:
A. The name and address of the applicant for the license, who must be the owner of the goods to be sold, and in addition, if the applicant is a partnership,
corporation, firm or association, the name and position of the individual filing such application.
B. The name and style in which such sale is to be conducted and the address where such sale is to be conducted.
C. The dates and period of time during which the sale is to be conducted.
D. The name and address of the person or persons who will be in charge of and responsible for the conduct of such sale.
E. A full explanation with regard to the condition or necessity which is the occasion for such sale, including a statement of the descriptive name of the sale
and the reasons why such name is truthfully descriptive of the sale. If the application is for a license to conduct a going out of business sale, it shall
also contain a statement that the business will be discontinued at the premises where the sale is to be conducted upon termination of the sale. If the
application is for a license to conduct a removal sale, it shall also contain a statement that the business will be discontinued at the premises where the
sale is to be conducted upon termination of the sale, in addition to the location of the premises to which the business is to be moved. If the application
is for a license to conduct a sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise, it shall also contain a statement as to the time, location and
cause of such damage.
F. A full, detailed and complete inventory of the goods that are to be sold, which inventory shall:
1. Itemize the goods to be sold and contain sufficient information concerning each item, including make and brand name, if any, to clearly identify it;
2. List separately any goods which were purchased during a sixty (60) day period immediately prior to the date of makingapplication for the license;
and
3. Show the cost price of each item in the inventory together with the name and address of the seller of the item to the applicant, the date of the
purchase, the date of the delivery of each item to the applicant and the total value of the inventory at cost.
G. A statement that no goods will be added to the inventory after the application is made or during the sale and that the inventory contains no goods
received on consignment.
H. A statement that the applicant has in the past maintained a place of business within the village of Oak Brook for not less than four (4) months prior to
the time of making application for such license. However, this subsection shall not apply to any applicant who acquired a right, title or interest in the
goods as:
1. An heir, legatee or surviving joint tenant, or
2. An executor, administrator, trustee, or guardian, or
3. Pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 91/438
I. The application for license shall be subscribed and sworn to under oath by the applicant and shall, directly above the space reserved for the signature of
the applicant, contain the following legend in at least 10-point bold type:
Warning to applicant. This application must be fully and accurately completed. False or misleading statements may subject applicant to the
penalties of perjury in addition to other penalties provided by law.
(Ord. G-749, 5-11-2004)
4-9-4: LICENSE:
The village clerk, upon receipt of an application giving fully and completely the information under oath as required above and upon receipt of the fee
hereinafter provided for, shall issue a license to the applicant therefor authorizing such applicant to advertise, represent, and to sell the particular goods
so inventoried at the time and place stated in the application and in accordance with these provisions. The license shall be issued in duplicate and shall
bear a number and date of its expiration. A license issued under this chapter shall be granted and valid only for the sale of the inventoried goods which
are the property of the licensee. Such license shall apply only to the premises specified in the application, and it may not be transferred or assigned. If a
licensee is engaged in business in other locations, advertising or offering of goods on behalf of suchlocations shall not represent or imply any participation
in or cooperation with the sale on the premises specified in the license, nor shall any advertising or any other offering of goods on behalf of the premises
where the licensed sale is being conducted represent or imply any participation in or cooperation with such sale at other locations. No license shall be
issued to any person:
A. To conduct a sale in the trade name or style of a person in whose goods the applicant for the license has acquired a right or title thereto within six (6)
months prior to the time of making application for such a license;
B. To continue a sale in the name of a licensee under this chapter in whose goods such person acquired a right or title while such a sale is in progress; or
C. To conduct a sale, other than an insurance sale, a salvage sale or a sale of damaged goods, on the same premises within one year from the
conclusion of a prior sale of the nature covered by this section.
The previous sentence, including subsections A, B and C of this section, shall not apply to any person who acquired a right, title or interest in goods as
an heir, legatee or pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. G-749, 5-11-2004)
4-9-5: VILLAGE CLERK RECORDS:
The village clerk shall endorse upon each such application the date of its filing and shall preserve it, and the inventory attached to it, as a public record of
his office, and shall make a notation of it in a book to be kept for that purpose, properly indexed, showing the name of the applicant, the date of the
application, the descriptive name of the proposed sale, the place where such sale is to be conducted, its duration, the date of the license issued thereon,
and the total value of the goods thus to be sold. A copy of the inventory shall be available for public inspection in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. G-
749, 5-11-2004)
4-9-6: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, or otherwise to represent, for sale, or to sell, any goods at a bankruptcy, executor's, administrator's,
receiver's or trustee's sale, except pursuant to, and in compliance with, federal or state statutory authority or judicial process, or as an assignee's or
insolvent's sale except when there is a bona fide assignment for the benefit of creditors. (Ord. G-749, 5-11-2004)
4-9-7: TIME OF SALE:
A license to conduct a sale issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be issued or valid for a period more than sixty (60) days from the start of such date,
and such sale may be conducted only during the period set forth in such license; provided, however, that such license may be renewed once only for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days upon affidavit of the licensee that the goods listed in the inventory have not been disposed of and that no new goods
have been or will be added to the inventory previously filed pursuant to this chapter by purchase, acquisition on consignment or otherwise. The
application for renewal of the license shall be made not more than fourteen (14) days prior to the time of the expiration of the license and shall contain a
new inventory of the goods remaining on hand at the time the application for renewal is made, which new inventory shall be prepared and furnished in the
same manner and form as the original inventory. No renewal shall be granted if any goods have been added to the stock listed in the inventory since the
date of the issuance of the license. A fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) shall accompany an application for a license and for the renewal of a license.
(Ord. G-749, 5-11-2004)
4-9-8: ADVERTISEMENT:
A copy of the application for a license to conduct a sale under this chapter, including the inventory filed therewith, shall be posted in a conspicuous place
in the salesroom or place where the inventoried goods are to be sold, so that the public may be informed of the facts relating to the goods before
purchasing same; provided, however, that such copy not show the purchase price of the goods. The duplicate copy of a license issued hereunder shall be
attached to the front door of the premises where the sale is conducted in such a manner that it be clearly visible from the street. Any advertisement or
announcement published in connection with the sale shall conspicuously show on its face the number of the license and the date of its expiration. (Ord.
G-749, 5-11-2004)
4-9-9: CHANGE IN INVENTORY:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 92/438
Any substitution for or addition to goods described in an inventory filed pursuant to this chapter or any change in the time or place for a sale conducted
pursuant to this chapter shall be unlawful and shall void any license issued to conduct a sale pursuant to this chapter and such license shall cease to
apply to such sale. In the case of a sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise, or in the case of an insurance sale or a salvage sale, the
goods to be sold at such sale shall be clearly and distinctly segregated, marked or identified, and advertised, if at all, so that both on display and in
advertising such goods may be readily distinguished from other stock, and their identity readily ascertained. Any commingling of such goods with other
stock of the licensee in such a manner as to cause the goods to lose their separate identity, either on display or in advertising, shall be unlawful and shall
void any license issuedto conduct such a sale pursuant to this chapter and such license shall cease to apply to such sale.
No person in contemplation of conducting any going out of business, removal, assignee's or creditor's sale, or during the continuance of such a sale, shall
order or purchase any goods for the purpose of selling them at such sale, and any unusual purchase, or additions to the stock of such goods within sixty
(60) days before the filing of such application for a license to conduct such a sale, shall be presumptive evidence that such purchases or additions were
made in contemplation of such sale and for the purpose of selling them at such sale. (Ord. G-749, 5-11-2004)
4-9-10: PENALTY:
A. Any person, including both the applicant and an individual filing on behalf of an applicant, who shall procure from the village clerk a license to conduct a
sale under the description of one of the names set out in section 4-9-3 of this chapter which name shall be a misrepresentation of the true description
or character of such sale or of the kind or condition of goods to be sold under such license, or any such person violating any of the other provisions of
this chapter shall be treated as an infraction, and shall, upon conviction, be punishable as set forth in section 1-3-1 of this code. Each false statement
of fact in an application or inventory required to be filed hereunder shall constitute a separate offense under this chapter. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. In addition to any criminal enforcement, the village or any individual may pursue any available civil remedies deemed appropriate and necessary. (Ord.
G-749, 5-11-2004)
Chapter 10
LIMOUSINES
4-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms, for the purposes of this chapter shall have the
meanings indicated in this section:
LICENSE YEAR: The term for which a license issued pursuant to this chapter is effective, which term shall be from April 1 to March 31.
LIMOUSINE: A public passenger vehicle for hire, only at a charge or fare for each passenger per trip, or for each vehicle per trip fixed by agreement in
advance, and used to carry eight (8) or fewer passengers.
LIMOUSINE COMPANY: Every individual, trust, partnership, association, firm, company, or corporation engaged in business as a proprietor, franchisor, or
dispatcher of one or more limousines.
LIMOUSINE DRIVER: All drivers of limousines that pick up passengers in the village and providing public passenger service.
LIMOUSINE DRIVER'S LICENSE: That license issued to the driver of a limousine, pursuant to section 4-10-5 of this chapter.
LIMOUSINE LICENSE DECAL: That decal provided by the village upon issuance of a limousine license pursuant to this chapter to be displayed on each
limousine as evidence of license issuance.
OWNER: Every individual, person, trustee, partnership, association or corporation owning, leasing, operating or having the use or control of one or more
limousines in the village.
PUBLIC PASSENGER SERVICE: All services providing transportation for hire for passengers in a motor vehicle, as that term is defined in the Illinois
vehicle code, designed to carry eight (8) or fewer passengers. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the foregoing, public passenger service shall
not include services: a) devoted exclusively for funerals; b) provided by a public transit authority or other public body or agency; c) provided by interstate
carriers licensed for the transportation of passengers by the interstate commerce commission to the extent that regulation of such motor vehicles by the
village is prohibited by federal law; d) interstate carriers operating pursuant to, and in conformity with, a certificate of authority issued by the Illinois
commerce commission; and e) taxicabs regulated pursuant to chapter 2 of this title.
TAXICAB STAND: A place which has been designated by the village as reserved exclusively for the use of taxicabs. (Ord. G-1072, 2-9-2016)
4-10-2: LIMOUSINE COMMISSIONER:
A. The limousine commissioner shall perform all of the duties and functions of the limousine commissioner as provided in this chapter, including, but not
limited to, the following:
1. Convening and presiding at certain hearings and meetings required by this chapter, and
2. Approving, denying, revoking and suspending licenses pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
B. The village manager shall be the limousine commissioner. The limousine commissioner may at any time appoint a deputy commissioner, who shall
have the power to perform any of the duties of the limousine commissioner hereunder. (Ord. G-1072, 2-9-2016)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 93/438
4-10-3: LIMOUSINE COMPANY LICENSES:
A. Limousine Company License Required: No limousine company shall pick up passengers within the village unless the limousine company first obtains a
limousine company license from the village. Such limousine company licenses shall be valid for a license year, or such part thereof as remains at the
time the license is granted, and shall be effective for the license year unless sooner suspended, terminated, or revoked.
B. Limousine Company License Applications:
1. Application Forms: All applications for a new limousine company license, or to renew a limousine company license, must be made in writing, to the
village on forms provided by the village.
2. Applications For A New Limousine Company License Or To Renew A Limousine Company License That Has Been Expired For One Year Or More:
Any limousine company applying for a limousine company license for the first time, or to renew a limousine company license that has been expired
for one year or more, must submit with its application the following nonrefundable limousine company license application fee:
a. Three hundred dollars ($300.00) if the application is submitted prior to October 1 of the license year; and
b. One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) if the application is submitted on or after October 1 but prior to April 1 of the license year.
3. Applications To Renew A Limousine Company License That Has Not Yet Expired Or Has Been Expired For Less Than One Year: A limousine
company seeking to renew a limousine company license that has not yet expired, or has been expired for less than one year, may submit to the
village an application for such renewal on or after February 1 but prior to March 2 preceding the applicable license year. Applications for renewal will
not be accepted prior to February 1.
All renewal applications submitted pursuant to this subsection must be submitted with the following nonrefundable limousine company license
renewal application fee:
a. One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) if the application is submitted on or after February 1 but prior to February 16 immediately preceding the
applicable license year; or
b. Three hundred dollars ($300.00) if the application is submitted on or after February 16 but prior to March 2 immediately preceding the applicable
license year.
Applications to renew limousine company licenses pursuant to this subsection shall be due by March 1 immediately preceding the applicable
license year. Any limousine company license renewal application submitted pursuant to this subsection B3 that is received by the village after
March 1 immediately preceding the applicable license year shall be deemed late and must be accompanied with a late fee of three hundred
dollars ($300.00) in addition to the limousine company license renewal application fee required by subsection B3b of this section.
4. Application Requirements: As part of an application for a new limousine company license or to renew such license, limousine companies must
include the following as part of their application:
a. A true statement of certain facts including, but not limited to: the state of incorporation of the limousine company if the company is a corporate
entity; whether the company is organized and qualified to do business under the laws of the state if it is a corporate entity; the limousine's principal
place of business; the full names and addresses of the individuals who own the limousine company; whether the limousine company is a
corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship; and the registered agent of the corporate limousine company. The full names, dates of birth and
residential addresses of persons having an ownership interest of five percent (5%) or more in the limousine company shall be disclosed on the
application;
b. A certificate of automobile liability insurance issued by a solvent company authorized to do business in the state showing that each limousine
proposed to be licensed is insured in an amount not less than is required by the state of Illinois covering each limousine proposed to be licensed.
The policy shall be endorsed to provide a thirty (30) day advance written notice of any cancellation or expiration thereof to the village.
C. Investigation Of Applicants For Limousine Company Licenses: The village shall investigate, to the extent it deems necessary, the owner(s) of the
applicant limousine company, including each officer, general partner, sole proprietor and all persons having an ownership interest of five percent (5%)
or more of any such applicant. If this investigation reveals information showing any of the following, the application shall not be approved and no
license shall be issued or renewed to the limousine company:
1. If any owner or officer, shareholder or director of the owner, has been convicted of a felony related to the limousine business or a similar business
within the past ten (10) years;
2. The owner or an officer, shareholder or director of the owner, has been convicted of any business related felony or misdemeanor within the past five
(5) years; or
3. The owner or officer, shareholder or director of the owner, has misrepresented or omitted material facts in the application for a license.
D. Requirements On Limousine Company Licensees: All limousine company licensees shall comply with the following requirements at all times during a
license year:
1. Limousine company licensees shall license, or cause to be licensed, each individual limousine that it operates, or that is operated on its behalf, and
that picks up passengers within the village in accordance with this chapter.
2. Limousine company licensees must maintain insurance policies consistent with the requirements of subsection B4b of this section during the entire
license year.
a. In the event that a final judgment or claim has been paid by any indemnitor or insurance policy, as a result of which the amount of insurance held
by a limousine company no longer satisfies the minimum amount of coverage required to be maintained pursuant to subsection B4b of this
section, the limousine company's license, and all limousine licenses and limousine drivers' licenses issued to limousines and drivers associated
with that limousine company, shall immediately terminate.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 94/438
b. In the event that a limousine company's insurance policy terminates or expires, the limousine company's license, and all limousine licenses and
limousine drivers' licenses issued to limousines and drivers associated with that limousine company, shall immediately terminate.
c. In the event that a limousine company's license, and the limousine licenses and the limousine drivers' license associated with that limousine
company, terminate pursuant to this subsection D2, such licenses shall be subject to reinstatement by providing the village a new certificate of
insurance that satisfies all of the requirements of subsection B4b of this section.
3. All licensed limousine companies shall provide proof of automobile liability insurance for each limousine registered pursuant to this chapter. Such
proof of insurance must be carried in each individual limousine licensed pursuant to this chapter at all times and shall be made available to any
person involved in an accident at the time of such accident.
4. Limousine companies having limousines operated by independent contractors must cause each limousine driver to provide proof of automobile
liability insurance for each limousine registered pursuant to this chapter or provide the required insurance on behalf of such independent contractor.
E. Responsibility For Actions Of Limousines And Limousine Drivers: The limousine company licensee shall be responsible for the acts, omissions and
general conduct of persons operating a limousine for, on behalf of, or with the permission of, such limousine company. The limousine company shall,
periodically during the license year, determine if its limousine drivers continue to meet the qualifications set forth in this chapter and shall promptly
inform the village of the names of any such limousine drivers who fail to so qualify.
F. Changes In Principal Place Of Business: If a limousine company licensee changes its principal place of business, it shall promptly notify the village in
writing.
G. Limousine Company Licenses Nontransferable And Nonassignable: Limousine company licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are nontransferable
and nonassignable. If ownership of a limousine company license is conveyed to a new owner, the new owner must apply for a new limousine company
license in its name in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in this section. (Ord. G-1072, 2-9-2016)
4-10-4: LIMOUSINE LICENSES; VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Limousine License Required: No limousine shall pick up passengers within the village unless the village issues a limousine license to the vehicle for
the license year. Limousine licenses shall be valid for a license year, or such part thereof as remains at the time the license is granted, and shall be
effective for the license year unless sooner suspended, terminated, or revoked.
B. Limousine License Applications:
1. Application Forms: All applications for a limousine license, or to renew a limousine license, must be made in writing to the village on forms as
reasonably required and approved of by the limousine commissioner.
2. Application Fees: Anybody applying for a new limousine license or to renew such license must submit with its application the following
nonrefundable application fee:
a. Twenty five dollars ($25.00) if the application is submitted preceding the applicable license year.
b. Twenty five dollars ($25.00) if the application is submitted prior to October 1 of the license year; or
c. Fifteen dollars ($15.00) if the application is submitted on or after October 1 but prior to April 1 of the license year.
3. Application Requirements: As part of an application for a limousine license, applicants must include the following information as part of its
application:
a. The year, make, and color of the limousine;
b. Name, address and telephone number of the limousine owner; and
c. Written certification that required safety inspections of the limousine have been completed not more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the
application and that such inspections find the limousine to be safe.
C. Vehicle Inspection:
1. Every limousine operated by a limousine company shall pass mechanical inspection tests as specified by the village. The inspections must take
place not more than thirty (30) days prior to application for a limousine license or the renewal of such license. The inspections must take place at a
firm or firms designated from time to time by the village. The expense for such inspection shall be that of the licensee. No license shall be issued for
any limousine that fails to meet this inspection requirement. The limousine commissioner shall maintain a list of private firms which are authorized to
perform vehicle safety (mechanical) inspections.
2. All limousines licensed by the village are subject to periodic inspection by the village police department, as required by the limousine commissioner,
and the limousine company shall promptly upon notice from the police department make said limousine available for inspection.
D. Identification Of Limousines: Every limousine licensed by the village shall display the limousine license sticker and limousine driver's license.
1. The limousine license decal shall be affixed to the rear facing window of the vehicle.
2. A copy of the limousine driver's license shall be displayed inside the vehicle in a location visible to customers.
E. Limousine Requirements: The condition of limousines licensed by the village shall be as follows:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 95/438
1. Condition: Every limousine shall be maintained in a safe condition at all times. If any limousine shall become unsafe for operation or if its body or
seating facilities shall become damaged or deteriorated in a manner that renders the limousine unfit for public use, the limousine commissioner may,
after a hearing, suspend the license issued to the limousine company operating that vehicle or suspend that limousine license, until the vehicle is
made safe for use by the public or replaced with a vehicle that complies with this chapter.
2. Doors: All doors of every limousine shall have functional interior door handles and latches.
3. Exterior Requirements: The limousine's exterior appearance including paint, and chrome shall be in good condition and free from excessive rust.
4. Interior Requirements: The limousine's interior shall be kept clean, sanitary and the upholstery shall be in good repair.
5. Seat Belts: Each limousine shall provide seat belts for each passenger, provide entrances and exits free of interior barriers and have a sufficient
number of exits to permit every passenger and the driver to exit from the vehicle in the event that one side of the vehicle is rendered impassible as
the result of an accident, safety conditions or otherwise.
F. Limousine Licenses Nontransferable: Limousine licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are nontransferable and nonassignable. If a limousine
company substitutes another limousine for any limousine licensed with the village pursuant to this section, or adds any additional limousines to the list
of licensed limousines, the limousine company must license such substitute or additional limousines with the village pursuant to this section. (Ord. G-
1072, 2-9-2016)
4-10-5: LIMOUSINE DRIVER'S LICENSE:
A. Limousine Driver's License Required: In addition to other requirements of this chapter, no limousine driver shall pick up or solicit passengers within the
village unless the village issues a limousine driver's license to the driver for the license year. No limousine driver's license shall be issued unless the
requirements relating to limousine companies set forth in section 4-10-3 of this chapter and the requirements related to limousines in section 4-10-4 of
this chapter have been satisfied. Limousine drivers' licenses shall be valid for a license year, or such part thereof as remains at the time the license is
granted, and shall be effective for the license year unless sooner suspended, terminated, or revoked.
B. Limousine Driver's License Applications:
1. Application Forms: All applications for limousine drivers' licenses, or to renew a limousine driver's license, must be made in writing to the village on
forms as reasonably required and approved of by the limousine commissioner.
2. Application Fees: Anybody applying for a new limousine driver's license or to renew such license must submit with its application the following
nonrefundable application fee:
a. Fifty dollars ($50.00) if the application is submitted preceding the applicable license year.
b. Fifty dollars ($50.00) if the application is submitted on or after April 1 but prior to October 1 of the license year; or
c. Twenty five dollars ($25.00) if the application is submitted on or after October 1 but prior to April 1 of the license year.
3. Application Requirements: As part of an application for a limousine driver's license, applicants must include the following information as part of its
application:
a. A true statement of certain facts including, but not limited to, the name and address of the driver, the age and date of birth of the driver, the driving
convictions of the driver, the type and class of driver's license of the driver, convictions for the use, possession or sale of controlled substances,
cannabis, intoxicating compounds or alcoholic liquor, any felony or misdemeanor convictions of the driver-applicant, the home address and
telephone number of the driver. All such information shall be provided under oath.
b. The applicant's driving abstract obtained from and certified by the Illinois secretary of state's office dated not more than thirty (30) days prior to the
submittal of the application for a license.
c. A photograph of the applicant, which photo shall clearly and accurately show the applicant's face and shoulders.
C. Investigation Of Applicants For Limousine Driver's Licenses: The police chief or his designee shall investigate the applicant for a limousine driver's
license. If this investigation or the application materials reveal that the statements made as part of the application are inaccurate or reveal information
showing any of the following, the limousine commissioner shall not issue a limousine driver's license to the applicant:
1. The applicant has been convicted of a forcible felony;
2. The applicant is registered in the Illinois sex offender database or similar database in another state or country;
3. The applicant is registered in the Illinois murderer and violent offender against youth database or a similar database in another state or country;
4. The applicant has been convicted of a felony criminal offense within the past ten (10) years;
5. The applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor criminal offense within the past five (5) years;
6. The applicant has been convicted of driving under the influence of a controlled substance, cannabis, an intoxicating compound or alcoholic liquor
under Illinois law as amended from time to time or similar provision of a local ordinance or any like offense of another state or country, within the
past five (5) years;
7. The applicant has been convicted of reckless driving under Illinois law as amended from time to time or similar provision of a local ordinance or any
like offense of another state or country within the past five (5) years; or
8. The applicant's driver's license has been suspended for moving or nonmoving violations of a motor driven vehicle within the past five (5) years.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 96/438
D. Driver Qualifications: Each driver who drives any limousine in the village that is required to be licensed pursuant to section 4-10-4 of this chapter shall
at all times meet the following qualifications:
1. Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license of a classification required by state law for the transport of persons for hire;
2. Be twenty one (21) years of age or older;
3. Be in good physical condition; and shall not have any nervous, organic, or functional condition or disease which is likely to interfere with the safe
performance of his or her duties as a driver; and
4. Be able to complete the limousine driver's license application in the presence of a village employee without the assistance of a third party.
E. Limousine Driver's Licenses Nontransferable: Limousine driver's licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are nontransferable and nonassignable. (Ord.
G-1072, 2-9-2016)
4-10-6: CONDUCT OF LIMOUSINE DRIVERS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any limousine driver to conduct himself in a disrespectful or contemptuous manner toward any person, or to use abusive or
profane language while so occupied or in charge of a limousine vehicle.
B. It shall be unlawful for any limousine driver to solicit passengers for public passenger service at a taxicab stand.
C. Limousine drivers shall be obligated to render reasonable aid to any person who suffers injury or illness while a passenger of a limousine operated by
the limousine driver.
D. It shall be unlawful for any limousine driver to use, possess or be under the influence of any controlled substance, cannabis, intoxicating compound or
alcoholic liquor when operating a limousine.
E. It shall be unlawful for any limousine driver to permit any person to occupy or use a limousine for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness, or indecent
conduct, and it is unlawful for a limousine driver to direct or offer or agree to direct any person to any place or person for the purpose of prostitution,
lewdness, or indecent conduct.
F. It shall be unlawful for any limousine driver to park or store a limousine at any time on any street in a residentially zoned area within the village, except
to load or unload passengers.
G. It shall be unlawful for any limousine driver to violate any provision of this chapter. (Ord. G-1072, 2-9-2016)
4-10-7: REGISTER OF LICENSES:
The limousine commissioner shall keep a register of the name, address and photograph of each person owning or operating a limousine licensed under
this chapter, together with the license number and the description, make and model of such limousine, with the date and complete record of inspections
made of it. (Ord. G-1072, 2-9-2016)
4-10-8: BOOKS AND RECORDS OF ACCOUNT:
Every licensed limousine company shall keep accurate books and records of account and logbooks of service rendered in its dispatching or corporate
office. The Limousine Commissioner or his designee shall be permitted to examine those books and records of account and logs as they may relate to a
specific charge that is the subject of a complaint or public hearing under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. G-1072, 2-9-2016)
4-10-9: COMPLAINTS:
A. Any person may file a written complaint with the Limousine Commissioner regarding the conduct of a limousine driver or limousine company, or the
condition of a limousine.
B. The Limousine Commissioner or his designee shall investigate all complaints against limousine drivers, limousine companies, and limousines. He shall
notify the limousine driver and the limousine company of the complaint and may conduct a meeting on the matter. If the Limousine Commissioner
determines that such a meeting is necessary, the limousine driver and a representative of the limousine company shall be present. If the Limousine
Commissioner determines that any provision of this chapter has been violated, he shall take any further action consistent with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. G-1072, 2-9-2016)
4-10-10: DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LIMOUSINE LICENSES:
A. Denial; Appeal: If a license is denied under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant may file a written appeal of the decision to the Limousine
Commissioner within seven (7) days of receipt of the decision. The written appeal shall set forth the reasons why the applicant believes the decision to
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 97/438
deny the license should be reversed. The Limousine Commissioner shall respond to the appeal within fourteen (14) days either affirming or reversing
the decision to deny the license; the Limousine Commissioner's response shall be final.
B. Suspension Or Revocation: Any limousine company license, limousine license or limousine driver's license shall be subject to suspension or revocation
after hearing, by the Limousine Commissioner upon a finding that the holder thereof has violated any provision of this chapter, this Code, State Statute
or other applicable law. Upon suspension or revocation of any limousine company license, limousine license or limousine driver's license granted
hereunder, the holder or holders thereof shall be immediately and automatically barred from limousine activity and operation within the Village per the
terms of the suspension or revocation. (Ord. G-1072, 2-9-2016)
4-10-11: PENALTIES:
A. Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties contained within subsection 1-3-1A of this Code.
B. Notwithstanding the imposition of the fines aforesaid, any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the
Commissioner for the same violation that resulted in the imposed fine. (Ord. G-1072, 2-9-2016; Ord. G-1127, 3-27-2018)
Chapter 11
GAMBLING
4-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
Wherever the following words or phrases are used, they shall, for purposes of this chapter have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except
when the context otherwise indicates.
GAMBLING: Shall have the meaning set forth in section 28-1(a) of the Illinois criminal code of 1961, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1(a), as may be
amended, but shall not include:
A. Any of the activities described in section 28-1(b) of the Illinois criminal code of 1961, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1(b), as may be amended;
or
B. A raffle conducted pursuant to chapter 7 of this title.
GAMBLING DEVICE: Any clock, tape machine, slot machine or other machines or device for the reception of money or other thing of value on chance or
skill or upon the action or which money or other thing of value is staked, hazarded, bet, won or lost, including, but not limited to: any video gaming
terminal, as defined in the video gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/5; and any mechanism, furniture, fixture, equipment or other device
designed primarily for use in a gambling place. However, a "gambling device" does not include:
A. A coin in the slot operated mechanical device played for amusement which rewards the player with the right to replay such mechanical device,
which device is so constructed or devised as to make such result of the operation thereof depend in part upon the skill of the player and which
returns to the player thereof no money, property or right to receive money or property; or
B. Vending machines by which full and adequate return is made for the money invested and in which there is no element of chance or hazard.
GAMBLING HOUSE: Any building, vessel, or other structure or premises that is used in whole or in part for gambling, including, without limitation, the use
of gambling devices. (Ord. G-969, 3-27-2012)
4-11-2: GAMBLING PROHIBITED:
Gambling of any kind, including, without limitation, the use of any gambling device, is prohibited in the village. (Ord. G-969, 3-27-2012)
4-11-3: GAMBLING HOUSES:
It is hereby unlawful to set up, keep, maintain or operate, or to permit to be set up, kept, maintained or operated, a gambling house in the village. A
gambling house shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the village to the extent provided by law. (Ord. G-969, 3-27-2012)
Chapter 12
SPECIAL EVENTS
4-12-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS; STATEMENT OF POLICY:
A. Legislative Findings:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 98/438
1. The village board finds that from time to time, individuals and organizations host, sponsor, or conduct events that require the village to provide
special services.
2. The village board further finds that providing such special services affects the health, safety and general welfare of the village in that it requires the
village to reallocate its personnel, equipment and property, imposes additional costs on the village, exposes the village to additional liability,
interferes with the village's normal operations and can interfere with the safe use of the village's public ways and village property.
3. The village board further finds that persons who fail to provide the village with adequate notice about their need for special services deprive the
village of the ability to plan for the allocation of its resources and thereby jeopardize the village's ability to provide for the public health, safety and
welfare and increase the village's operational costs.
B. Statement Of Policy: It is therefore the policy of the village that any person who holds, sponsors, or conducts an event that requires the village to
provide special services shall obtain a village permit and pay the village's costs of providing such special services. It is also the policy of the village
that the allocation of the village's resources and the setting of fees and charges for their use for special events shall be done pursuant to content
neutral standards and procedures. (Ord. G-1075, 4-26-2016)
4-12-2: DEFINITIONS AND EXCLUSIONS:
A. Special Event: As used in this chapter, "special event" means an activity on village property or private property that is not sponsored in whole or in part
by the village and that requires the village to provide special services. An event organizer's use of any part of the village of Oak Brook's name in the
event does not mean that the event is sponsored in whole or in part by the village of Oak Brook or that the event is, in any way, an official village event
or endorsed or supported by the village.
B. Special Services: As used in this chapter, "special services" means the exclusive allocation of village resources, including, but not limited to, village
personnel, equipment, rights of way or property, for use in conjunction with a specific event or activity, as requested by the host or sponsor of the
event, as requested by or on behalf of any person attending the event, or as determined to be necessary by the village to protect and promote the
public health, safety and welfare. Special services shall include, but not be limited to, any of the following: street closures; requiring police officers to
stop or reroute traffic; special police protection; stationing emergency vehicles at or in the immediate vicinity of the event; exclusive use of village
streets as a staging area or for event parking; additional street cleaning and garbage removal services; special signage, such as temporary no parking
signs; the use of any village building, equipment or other property for any purpose other than the normal daily operations of the village; inspection and
safety services performed by the village, including, without limitation, inspecting tents, stages, trailers, and other structures and equipment; and
otherwise providing exclusive services.
C. Exclusions: For purposes of this chapter, the following shall not be considered special events:
1. A governmental agency, including, without limitation, the village, the Oak Brook park district, the Oak Brook Public Library, and public schools,
acting within the scope of its authority.
2. Village sponsored or village cosponsored events which have officially been approved by the village board to be sponsored or cosponsored by the
village. An event organizer's use of any part of the village of Oak Brook's name in the event does not mean that the event is sponsored in whole or
in part by the village of Oak Brook or that the event is, in any way, an official village event or endorsed or supported by the village.
3. An activity or event that occurs outside the corporate limits of the village, for which village personnel, services and/or resources are provided
pursuant to a mutual aid agreement, other intergovernmental agreement, or a custom and practice of intergovernmental cooperation in which the
participating municipalities do not charge the activity or event sponsor and do not charge each other for services provided.
4. Funeral processions.
5. Peaceful assemblies on village property or private property that do not obstruct the normal flow of vehicular traffic, obstruct the normal flow of
pedestrian traffic, or require special services, and involve fewer than twenty five (25) participants.
6. Block parties, which are regulated by section 4-12-6 of this chapter.
7. Other activities expressly authorized by Illinois or federal law.
D. Village Equipment: As used in this chapter, the term "village equipment" includes any vehicle of any type that is owned, leased or used by the village
and any equipment owned, leased or used by the village in providing firefighting, police, medical rescue, water, electric or public works services.
E. Village Personnel: As used in this chapter, the term "village personnel" includes both full time and part time employees of the village, employees of
other municipalities who provide services to or for the village pursuant to a mutual aid or other intergovernmental cooperation agreement, and
independent contractors who provide services to or for the village.
F. Village Property: As used in this chapter, the term "village property" includes any and all real or personal property owned, leased, or used by the village,
and all public streets, sidewalks and rights of way within the village. (Ord. G-1075, 4-26-2016)
4-12-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person or organization shall conduct a special event without first having obtained a special event permit from the village. (Ord. G-1075, 4-26-2016)
4-12-4: PERMIT APPLICATION AND PROCESSING:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 99/438
A. Permit Application: All applications for special event permits shall be delivered to the village manager no less than ninety (90) days prior to the
proposed special event.
B. Form And Content Of Application: The application shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by the application fee, the certificate of insurance and
the indemnification and hold harmless agreement required by this chapter. The application shall provide the following information:
1. The name, address, daytime telephone number and, if applicable, the e-mail address of the person signing the application.
2. The name, address, daytime telephone number and, if applicable, the e-mail address, pager number and fax number of the authorized and
responsible person or organization holding or sponsoring the event.
3. A description of the special event, including the street address of the event location, the date, time and duration of the event.
4. The approximate number of persons expected to participate in the event and the basis on which the estimate is made.
5. A description of the services, village personnel, village equipment and village property which the applicant requests the village to provide, including
the applicant's estimate of the number and type needed, and the basis on which the estimate is made. Applicants should be aware that the
applicant's estimate is subject to review and modification by the village and is not binding on the village.
6. A detailed description of all public rights of way and private streets for which the applicant requests the village to restrict or alter normal parking,
vehicular traffic or pedestrian traffic patterns, the nature of such restrictions or alterations, and the basis. Applicants should be aware that the
applicant's request is subject to review and modification by the village and is not binding on the village.
7. A statement signed by the applicant either agreeing to pay all fees and meet all other requirements of this chapter, or representing to the village that
the applicant is duly authorized to make such agreement on behalf of the person or organization holding or sponsoring the special event.
8. Such other and further information as the village, acting through its village manager or chief of police, or their designees, may deem reasonably
necessary in order to determine the nature and extent of special services required for the special event.
C. Application Review Procedures:
1. All completed applications shall be processed on a first come, first served basis. The village will approve an application, deny an application, or
approve an application with conditions within twenty one (21) days of receiving an application that complies with this chapter. If an application is
deemed to be incomplete, the village will make and retain a copy of the incomplete application and return the original to the applicant for completion
before it is considered.
2. The village manager shall be responsible for promptly processing all complete applications, including conferring with department heads and
applicants as necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter, and, when necessary, forwarding proposed applications to the village board
with a recommendation to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application.
3. The village manager shall promptly distribute copies of the complete application for review to the chief of police, the fire chief, the director of public
works and development services and to the head of any other department from which special services are requested or which may be impacted as
a result of the event specified in the application. Each such department shall review the application and evaluate the special services requested and
shall report to the village manager, with a recommendation that the requested special services be approved, approved with conditions or
modifications, or denied; provided, that any recommended conditions, modifications or denial shall comply with the standards and procedures of this
section.
4. Prior to denying a special event permit application or granting a special event permit subject to conditions or modifications, the village manager or
his or her designee shall confer with the applicant and/or the responsible party to attempt to agree on terms under which the permit can be issued,
which may include, but shall not be limited to, considering other dates or locations for the event, having the event's sponsors or organizers obtain
certain services from private vendors, or having the village provide other or additional special services.
D. Standards For Review And Issuance Of Permits:
1. No special event permit application shall be denied for any grounds other than those set forth in this section. The basis for denial shall be stated in
the village's written denial notice.
2. No special event permit application shall be approved with conditions or modifications unless such conditions and modifications are consistent with
the provisions of this section and the conditions or modifications, as well as the basis therefor, are stated in the permit.
E. Certificate Of Insurance: No village personnel, equipment, property or service shall be provided for a special event unless the applicant first provides
the village with a certificate of insurance, issued by a company acceptable to the village and authorized to do business in the state of Illinois. The
certificate of insurance shall be in an amount reasonably acceptable to the village, as determined by the village manager, based on the nature and
extent of village resources requested for the special event, but in no event shall the amount be less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) per
occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. The certificate of insurance shall name the village as an additional insured, using the following
language or in a form that the village determines contains substantially similar language: "The Village of Oak Brook, its corporate authorities, officers,
officials, boards, commissions, employees, attorneys, agents and representatives are made additional insured with respect to any and all claims which
arise out of, or in any way related to, the operations of [describe special event] while present in the Village of Oak Brook." The certificate of insurance
shall be accompanied by a letter from the insurer stating that there are no outstanding claims against the policy.
F. Indemnification And Hold Harmless Agreement: The permit application shall be accompanied by an indemnification agreement in which the applicant
and/or sponsor of the special event agrees to defend and hold the village, its officers, employees and agents, harmless from any loss, damage,
expense, claim and cost of every nature and kind whatsoever, including attorney fees, arising out of or in connection with applicant's use of the public
property, public right of way, public equipment or public personnel at, during or in conjunction with the special event described in the permit. The duty
to indemnify and hold harmless under this section shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising
out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 100/438
G. Reservation Of Rights: To the extent permitted by law, the village reserves the following rights:
1. To reject any incomplete application and return the original application to the applicant for completion. In such an instance, the village will retain a
copy of the incomplete application in its files but will take no action until the complete application is received. To deny a permit if: a) the application
contains false information; b) the application is not fully completed and executed; c) the applicant has not tendered the required application fee with
the application or has not tendered the required user fee, indemnification agreement or insurance certificate as required by this chapter; d) the
applicant is not legally authorized or competent to bind the responsible party; e) the responsible party is not legally competent to contract or to sue
and be sued; or f) the applicant does not otherwise comply with the terms of this chapter;
2. To deny a permit if the special event is for an activity that is illegal under federal, state or village law;
3. To order the cessation of the special event if the village manager determines that any of the terms and conditions of the permit have been violated;
4. To order the cessation of the special event if the village manager determines that the operation of the special event is creating a public nuisance or
a hazardous condition, provided that the event shall be allowed to resume upon the abatement of the nuisance or hazardous condition;
5. To deny a permit if the applicant, responsible party or the person on whose behalf the application is submitted: a) has an outstanding balance due
from a prior special event; b) has on prior occasions damaged village property and has not paid in full for such damage; c) has other outstanding
debts to the village; d) has on prior occasions made material misrepresentations regarding the nature and extent of special services required for a
special event in the village; or e) has violated the terms of a prior special event permit;
6. To deny a permit if: a) the event will substantially or unnecessarily interfere with pedestrian or vehicle traffic in the village, will interfere with access
to the fire station or fire hydrants, or will interfere with access to businesses or residences in the immediate vicinity of the event, and b) there are not
available at the time of the proposed event sufficient village resources to mitigate the disruption;
7. To deny a permit if: a) the special services required for the event will substantially or unnecessarily interfere with police, fire, water, electric, public
works or other services to the village as a whole, and b) there are not available at the time of the proposed event sufficient village resources to
mitigate the disruption;
8. To deny a permit if: a) the proposed date and time for the special event conflicts with a previously scheduled event, and b) there are not available at
the time of the proposed event sufficient village resources to provide services for both events without substantially or unnecessarily interfering with
police, fire, water, electric, public works or other services to the village as a whole;
9. To impose requirements, conditions or restrictions for the conduct of the special event other than or in addition to those provided in this chapter if
the village, acting through its village board or village manager, determines that such other or additional requirements, conditions or restrictions,
which shall be stated in the permit, are necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare; and
10. To refer an application to the village board for consideration if the request is also subject to a provision of this code that requires village board
approval or if the village manager determines that such consideration is warranted by the nature of the request or the type or extent of village
resources required to accommodate the event.
H. Authority Of Village Manager: The village manager is authorized to waive or modify the procedures, waive insurance and indemnification requirements
and reduce or waive fees in any of the following instances:
1. If the chief of police determines that the event will have a minimal impact on public services based on the event's size, location, and/or time; and
2. If the fire chief determines that the event will require the presence of a single emergency vehicle without removing that vehicle from normal service;
or
3. If the village manager, the chief of police, and the fire chief agree that the event has such a minimal impact on the village's services, equipment or
property that requiring an applicant to comply with all of the requirements of this chapter would impose an undue burden on the applicant and that
the amount of the ten percent (10%) administrative fee would be so low that it would not cover the village's cost of processing the application.
I. Appeal To Village Board: An applicant shall have the right to appeal the following decisions of the village manager to the village board:
1. The denial of a permit;
2. The revocation of a permit;
3. The amount of the user fee or supplemental user fee.
The applicant shall notify the village manager of the appeal within seven (7) days after the decision for which the appeal is sought, and the village
manager shall set the appeal on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled village board meeting.
J. Compliance With Applicable Ordinances, Regulations, Conditions And Restrictions: All special event permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with all applicable ordinances of the village and with any additional regulations, conditions or restrictions
set forth in the permit. (Ord. G-1075, 4-26-2016)
4-12-5: FEES AND CHARGES:
A. Application Processing Fee: The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application processing fee of thirty five dollars ($35.00) at the time the special
event permit application is filed. The application processing fee shall not be credited against the user fee established in subsection D of this section.
B. Late Fee: If the permit application is submitted between sixty (60) days and ninety (90) days before the event, a nonrefundable late fee of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be added to the application processing fee. If a permit application is submitted between fifty nine (59) days and thirty (30)
days before the event, a nonrefundable late fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be added to the application processing fee. If a permit
application is submitted less than thirty (30) days before the event, a nonrefundable late fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) shall be added to
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 101/438
application processing fee. The late fees set forth in this subsection shall not be credited against the user fees established in subsection D of this
section. The fees set forth in this subsection shall not modify, restrict, or otherwise limit any remedies the village may seek for a party's failure to
submit an application in accordance with the time frames set forth in subsection 4-12-4A of this chapter.
C. Fee Deposit: The applicant shall pay a fee deposit at least five (5) days before the special event. For special events that occur on an annual basis, the
deposit shall be equal to ten percent (10%) of the total fee charged for the event in the prior year, or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), whichever is
less. In all other instances, the fee deposit shall be the sum of the following amounts:
1. The charges set as provided in this chapter for providing the detail or personnel requested by the applicant, or two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00),
whichever is less; and
2. The charges set as provided in this chapter for providing the equipment requested by the applicant, or two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), whichever
is less; and
3. The charges set as provided in this chapter for the use of the village property or rights of way requested by the applicant, or two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00), whichever is less.
D. User Fee: Upon completion of the special event, the village shall prepare a detailed account of all special services provided for the special event and
shall set the final user fee using the rates, fees and charges established as provided in this chapter, plus a ten percent (10%) nonrefundable
administrative fee. The village shall provide the authorized and responsible person identified in the application with a copy of the detailed account of
services and an invoice for the user fee, less the fee deposit. The balance of the user fee shall become due and payable immediately upon its receipt.
E. Use Of Village Personnel: The rates charged for the use of village personnel shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the village board.
F. Use Of Village Equipment: The rates charged for the use of village equipment shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the village board.
G. Use Of Village Property Or Rights Of Way: The rates charged for the use of village property shall be at the rates set forth in this section, based on the
extent of interference with or disruption of the normal use and operation of the village property or right of way.
1. For any use of the public safety building, public works building or utility facility at any time, or for use of any other public building during regular
business hours, the cost shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day.
2. For use of any public building other than the public safety building, public works building or utility facility outside of regular business hours, the cost
shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. (Ord. G-1075, 4-26-2016)
4-12-6: BLOCK PARTIES:
A. Temporary Use: A block party involving temporarily closing a public street or other right of way shall be considered a temporary use and not a special
event. It shall be unlawful to conduct or attend any block party unless a block party permit has been issued in accordance with this section.
B. Application: A person seeking to hold a block party must submit a block party permit application on forms provided by the village and provide all
information requested by the village, including, without limitation:
1. Location of the block party.
2. Proposed block party date and proposed alternate date in case of inclement weather.
3. Hours during which the block party will be held.
4. Name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address of the permit applicant.
5. Signatures from at least seventy five percent (75%) of the residents residing on the block on which the block party will occur consenting to the
proposed block party.
6. A signed acknowledgment that the permit applicant is: a) personally responsible and liable for payment of any special services the village
determines to be necessary for the block party; b) personally responsible and liable for any damage to village equipment and property, including
village barricades; and c) will remove all refuse, litter, personal property, and village equipment and property, including barricades, from the street
upon the block party's conclusion.
7. A thirty five dollar ($35.00) application fee.
C. Review: Block party permit applications must be submitted to the village manager's office at least seven (7) days prior to the proposed block party date.
The village manager or his designee(s) will review the block party permit application to determine if the proposed block party will endanger the public
health, safety, or welfare, or unduly interfere with the flow of pedestrian or vehicle traffic. The village manager is authorized to: 1) approve a block party
permit application; 2) approve a block party permit application with conditions, including the provision of special services; or 3) deny a block party
permit application; and 4) otherwise interpret and administer this section. The village manager, using his sole discretion, may also refer any block party
permit application to the village board for consideration.
D. Conditions:
1. No block party shall conclude later than eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 102/438
2. The portion of the public right of way occupied by the block party will be delineated by barricades provided by the village. The permit applicant must
remove the barricades from the street at the conclusion of the block party.
3. No alcoholic liquor shall be sold at any block party.
4. The permit applicant is responsible for removing all litter, refuse, or personal property located in the public right of way as a result of the block party.
5. The permit applicant will be responsible for any costs incurred by the village for providing "special services" for the block party, as that term is
defined in section 4-12-2 of this chapter.
6. The block party shall comply with all provisions of the village's code, rules, and regulations, as amended.
E. Penalties: Any party that violates any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 4-12-7 of this chapter. (Ord. G-1075,
4-26-2016)
4-12-7: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. Penalties And Fines: Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, who makes a false statement in obtaining a permit under this chapter, or
who violates any condition of any permit issued under this chapter, shall be subject to a penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation, and each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation.
B. Revocation Of Permit: The village manager may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, if any term or condition of the special event permit,
this chapter, applicable village ordinance or state law is violated. The permit revocation shall not preclude the village from seeking fines or pursuing
any other available remedy for any such violation. The revocation may be appealed to the village board in accordance with subsection 4-12-4I of this
chapter.
C. Liability For Violations: A permit holder shall be subject to penalties for a violation of this chapter, or of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, by any
officer, director, manager, employee, agent or representative of the permit holder as if the violation had been committed by the permit holder
personally. A person who hosts a special event shall be subject to penalties for violations of this chapter by the sponsor of the event or by any officer,
director, manager, employee, agent or representative of the host or sponsor, as if the violation had been committed by the host personally.
D. Cumulative Remedies: The remedies provided in this chapter, and in section 1-3-1 of this code shall be cumulative and shall be in addition to the
village's right to collect all fees that are assessed under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. G-1075, 4-26-2016)
Title 5
MUNICIPAL TAXES
Chapter 1
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity for use or consumption and not for
resale; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services
and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of
the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever. The term "gross receipts"
shall not include that portion of the consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas or electricity to or for school districts or units
of local government.
PERSONS: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal corporation or
political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
VILLAGE: Village of Oak Brook, DuPage and Cook Counties, Illinois. (Ord. G-704, 10-8-2002)
5-1-2: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges:
A. Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the village,
and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom.
B. Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the
village, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom. The tax imposed under this subsection shall not apply with
respect to gross receipts pertaining to bills for the distribution, supply, furnishing or sale of electricity where the use or consumption of electricity is
subject to the tax imposed under chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. G-704, 10-8-2002)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 103/438
5-1-3: EXCEPTIONS TO TAX:
No tax is imposed by this chapter with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under
the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof, nor shall any persons
engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity, be subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter for
such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the municipal retailers' occupation tax act. (Ord. G-704, 10-8-2002)
5-1-4: TAX ADDITIONAL TO OTHER MUNICIPAL TAXES:
The tax under this chapter shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to this village by the taxpayer as
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes
or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. (Ord. G-704, 10-8-2002)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1155 - UTILITY TAX . Go to new ordinance.
5-1-5: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX:
The tax provided for in this chapter shall be based on the "gross receipts", as herein defined, actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after
October 1, 1991, through and including December 31, 2019. (Ord. G-1134, 10-9-2018)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1155 - UTILITY TAX . Go to new ordinance.
5-1-6: TAXPAYER'S REPORT REQUIRED:
A. On or before November 30, 1991, each taxpayer shall make a return to the Village Treasurer for the month of October 1991, stating:
1. Name;
2. Place of business;
3. Gross receipts during that month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
4. Amount of tax; and
5. Such other reasonable and related information as the Corporate Authorities may require.
B. On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the Village Treasurer for the month preceding. The last
such return shall be for the month of December 2019, which shall be due January 31, 2020.
C. The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the Village Treasurer the amount of tax herein
imposed, provided, that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if the taxpayer so elects, report and pay an amount based on the total billings
of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of
later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. (Ord. G-704, 10-8-2002; Ord. G-732, 10-14-2003;
Ord. G-763, 10-26-2004; Ord. G-790, 10-25-2005; Ord. G-816, 11-14-2006; Ord. G-841, 10-9-2007; Ord. G-873, 10-28-2008; Ord. G-902, 10-27-2009;
Ord. G-936, 10-12-2010; Ord. G-950, 9-27-2011; Ord. G-987, 12-11-2012; Ord. G-1010, 10-8-2013; Ord. G-1038, 10-14-2014; Ord. G-1060, 10-13-
2015; Ord. G-1088, 9-27-2016; Ord. G-1115, 10-24-2017; Ord. G-1134, 10-9-2018)
5-1-7: MAINTAINING BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Each taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the
transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability or exemption. All such books and records shall be kept in the English language and,
upon not less than fourteen (14) days' prior written notice, shall be subject to and available for inspection by the Village Treasurer or his/her designee, at
all times during business hours of the day. (Ord. G-704, 10-8-2002)
5-1-8: MISTAKES AND ERRORS:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this chapter, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or
an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this chapter from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
If a taxpayer under this chapter is unable to use a credit authorized by this section solely because the tax imposed by this chapter has been replaced by
the tax imposed under chapter 4, "Municipal Electricity Tax", of this title then the taxpayer may apply such credit against any tax due under chapter 4 of
this title. (Ord. G-704, 10-8-2002)
5-1-9: RECOVERY LIMITATION:
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 104/438
amount. (Ord. G-704, 10-8-2002)
5-1-10: PENALTY:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this Code, and in addition shall be liable in
a civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord. G-704, 10-8-2002)
Chapter 2
MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
5-2-0: SUSPENSION:
Effective January 1, 2001, this chapter, entitled municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee, is suspended in its entirety until the village
board, by ordinance, removes this section from this code, thereby lifting the suspension and reinstating sections 5-2-1 through 5-2-11 of this chapter. This
suspension shall be effective for services billed on or after January 1, 2001; provided, however, that any amounts due or payable for any tax periods
ending prior to January 1, 2001, are to remain payable as if this suspension had not been adopted. (Ord. G-663, 10-24-2000)
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the
village, and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and
when paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within the village, charges for the channel
mileage between each channel point within the village and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel provided within the village.
However, "gross charges" shall not include:
A. Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made under: 1) the fee imposed by this section; 2) additional charges added to a
purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act; 3) amounts collected under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-17; 4) the tax
imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act; 5) 911 surcharges; or 6) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
B. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the village;
C. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
D. Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
E. Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
time specified by the village;
F. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its whollyowned
subsidiaries or between wholly-owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and whollyowned
subsidiaries or between wholly-owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit
other than a regulatory required profit for the corporation rendering such services;
G. Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable Federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt
deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is
made);
H. Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications devices; or
I. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided to the Village.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any municipal street, alley, water or public right of way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility
easements wherein the Village has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
"Public right of way" shall not include any real or personal Village property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include
Village buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public right of way.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 105/438
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term): Includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of
Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent
or other representative operating within this State under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or
agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this State.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly-owned subsidiaries or between wholly-owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime
systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the customers primary use of the telecommunications
equipment as defined by the location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide-area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include "wireless telecommunications" as
hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not include value-added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form,
content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable
services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended
or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village through an open video system as defined in the Rules
of the Federal Communications Commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any telecommunications retailer; and any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns,
operates or controls equipment in the public right of way that is used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER: Includes every person engaged in the business of making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined in this Section. The Village may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby
imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction of the Village, furnishes adequate security to ensure
collection and payment of the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the fee upon all of thegross charges for
telecommunications in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within the Village.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal wireless services as defined in section 704(C) of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 USC section 332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile
radio services, and paging services. (Ord. G-604, 11-25-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
5-2-2: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS:
A. Every "telecommunications provider" as defined by this Chapter shall register with the Village within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this
Chapter or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a form to be provided by the Village; provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to Section 5-2-4 of this Chapter shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this
Section.
B. Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the Village pursuant to subsection A of this Section has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by subsection 5-2-4C of this Chapter, as the case may be, to the Village within thirty (30) days
from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent
return on file with the Village. (Ord. G-604, 11-25-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
5-2-3: MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE:
A. A Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one percent
(1%) of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service addresses within the Village for telecommunications originating or
received in the Village.
B. Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee authorized in this Chapter, the Village infrastructure maintenance fee authorized
hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all public rights of way within the Village by telecommunications retailers. Imposition of
the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this Chapter does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or imposition of
any fees otherwise authorized by law.
C. The Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized by this Section shall be collected, enforced and administered as set forth in
Section 5-2-4 of this Chapter. (Ord.G-604, 11-25-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
5-2-4: COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF FEES:
A. A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the Village infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 106/438
B. Unless otherwise approved by the Village Manager, the infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the
Village not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that the
telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent (2%) of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to
reimburse itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
C. Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the Village shall be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the Village Manager, which
shall contain such information as the Village Manager may reasonably require.
D. Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant to this Chapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the telecommunications retailer to the Village. The charge imposed under subsection A of
this Section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this Chapter shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such services.
E. If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this Chapter, whether as a
result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this Chapter, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous payment; provided, however, the Village Manager may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three (3)
years after the date of the erroneous payment unless: 1) the credit is used only to offset a claim of underpayment made by the Village within the
applicable statutory period of limitations; and 2) the credit derives from an overpayment made by the same telecommunications retailer during the
applicable statutory period of limitations.
F. Amounts paid under this Chapter by telecommunications retailers shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described
immediately below:
1. Gross charges for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act;
2. Gross receipts for purposes of the municipal utility tax as prescribed in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2;
3. Gross charges for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax as prescribed in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-17;
4. Gross revenue for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of public utilities prescribed in section 2-202 of the Public Utilities Act.
G. The Village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this Chapter to determine
whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the Village for the Village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the
amount of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee due to the Village by the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the Village plus five percent
(5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs incurred by the Village in conducting the audit, in an amount not
to exceed five percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit. Said sum shall be paid to the Village within twenty one
(21) days after the date of issuance of an invoice for same.
H. The Village Manager, or his designee, may promulgate such further or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this
Chapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered
pursuant to Section 5-2-2 of this Chapter of such regulations. (Ord. G-604, 11-25-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
5-2-5: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall excuse any person or entity from obligations imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:
A. Generally applicable taxes; and
B. Standards for construction on, over, under or within, use of or repair of the public rights of way, including standards relating to freestanding towers and
other structures upon the public rights of way, as provided; and
C. Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under or within, use of
or repair of the public rights of way; and
D. Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code concerning uses or structures not located on, over or within the right of way. (Ord. G-604, 11-
25-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
5-2-6: EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES:
Any franchise, license or similar agreements between telecommunications retailers and the Village entered into before the effective date of this Chapter
regarding the use of public rights of way shall remain valid according to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other compensation to
the extent waived. (Ord. G-604, 11-25-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
5-2-7: PENALTIES:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 107/438
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject
to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions in Section 1-3-1 of this Code. (Ord. G-604, 11-25-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
5-2-8: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this Chapter. (Ord.
G-604, 11-25-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
5-2-9: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions hereof. (Ord. G-604, 11-25-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
5-2-10: CONFLICT:
This Chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. (Ord. G-604,
11-25-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
5-2-11: WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION:
A. The Village hereby waives all fees, charges and other compensation that may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the Village by a
telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing Village franchise, license or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the time
the Village imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee. This waiver shall only be effective during the time the infrastructure
maintenance fee provided for in this Chapter issubject to being lawfully imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by the
telecommunications retailer from the customer.
B. The Village Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each telecommunications retailer with whom the Village
has a franchise.
C. The Village infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this Chapter shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not less than
ninety (90) days after the Village provides written notice by certified mail to each telecommunications retailer with whom the Village has an existing
franchise, license or similar agreement that the Village waives all compensation under such existing franchise, license or similar agreement during
such time as the fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected by the retailer and remitted to the Village. The infrastructure maintenance fee
shall apply to gross charges billed on or after the effective date as established in the preceding sentence. (Ord. G-604, 11-25-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
Chapter 3
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
5-3-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A simplified municipal telecommunications tax, effective on or after January 1, 2009, is hereby imposed upon the act or privilege of originating in the
village or receiving in the village intrastate or interstate telecommunications by a person under the provisions of the simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act1, at a rate of 6.0 percent of the gross charges for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. (Ord. G-866, 8-
26-2008)
5-3-2: COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The simplified municipal telecommunications tax shall be collected and enforced by the department of revenue of the state of Illinois. The Illinois
department of revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. G-866, 8-26-2008)
Footnote 1: 35 ILCS 636/5-1 et seq.
Chapter 4
MUNICIPAL ELECTRICITY TAX1
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 108/438
EXEMPT PURCHASER: School districts or units of local government.
PERSON: Any natural, individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
PERSONS MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or
other affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or
other representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall include the use of
electricity by a public utility, as defined insection 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code2, directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale
of electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail (other than an
exempt purchaser).
TAX COLLECTOR: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
VILLAGE: Village of Oak Brook, DuPage and Cook Counties, Illinois. (Ord. G-686, 10-9-2001)
5-4-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A. Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code3 and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or
consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the village at the following rates, calculated
on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.517 cents per kilowatt-hour;
For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.367 cents per kilowatt-hour;
For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.332 cents per kilowatt-hour;
For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.323 cents per kilowatt-hour;
For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.308 cents per kilowatt-hour;
For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.307 cents per kilowatt-hour;
For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.233 cents per kilowatt-hour;
For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.200 cents per kilowatt-hour;
For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.167 cents per kilowatt-hour; and
For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000kilowatt-hours in a month; 0.133 cents per kilowatt-hour.
B. The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the village, the state of Illinois or any other political subdivision of the
state.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would violate
the constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution of the state of Illinois.
D. The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or after
October 1, 1998; and with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to such
customers for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the public utilities act4, or the first bill issued to such customers on or after
January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner. (Ord. G-686, 10-9-2001)
5-4-3: COLLECTION OF TAX:
A. Subject to the provisions of section 5-4-5 of this chapter regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this chapter shall be
collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall
constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the same
manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
B. Any tax required to be collected by this chapter, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the village by the person delivering the
electricity, provided that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity, the charges for which are
written off as uncollectible, and provided further that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such
tax.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 109/438
C. Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect to reimburse
them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the village
upon request. For purposes of this chapter, any partial payment of a billed amount not specificallyidentified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for
the delivery of electricity. (Ord. G-686, 10-9-2001)
5-4-4: TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN:
A. Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in a form prescribed by the village treasurer, which shall include: 1) the tax collector's name; 2)
its principal place of business; 3) its kilowatt-hour usage during the month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed; and 4) the amount of the tax.
The return and accompanying remittance shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax is collected or is
required to be collected under section 5-4-3 of this chapter.
B. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under section 5-4-3 of this chapter,
then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the village treasurer and pay the tax directly to the village in care of the village treasurer
on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed. (Ord. G-686, 10-9-2001)
5-4-5: RESALES:
A. Electricity that is delivered to a person in this village shall be considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person receiving the
electricity has an active resale number issued by the village treasurer and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies
to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale for resale.
B. If a person who receives electricity in the village claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the village treasurer for a
resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this chapter on any purchases of electricity and shall
furnish such additional information as the village may reasonably require.
C. Upon approval of the application, the village treasurer shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
D. The village treasurer may cancel the resale number of any person if the person fails to pay any tax payable under this chapter for electricity used or
consumed by the person, or if the number: 1) was obtained through misrepresentation, or 2) is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.
E. 1. If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use orconsumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this chapter directly
to the village treasurer pursuant to subsection 5-4-4B of this chapter on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect
the tax pursuant to section 5-4-3 of this chapter and remit the tax pursuant to subsection 5-4-4A of this chapter on the amount of electricity delivered
by the reseller to a purchaser.
2. Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the village
treasurer the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the village may reasonably require. (Ord. G-686, 10-
9-2001)
5-4-6: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every tax collector and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this chapter, shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity,
including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this chapter. The
books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection at all times during business hours of the day. (Ord. G-686, 10-9-2001)
5-4-7: CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, in order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the village, no person shall be entitled to a
refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this chapter unless the person files a claim for refund or credit within one year after the date on which the tax
was paid or remitted to the village in care of the village treasurer. (Ord. G-686, 10-9-2001)
5-4-8: PENALTY5:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section 1-3-1 of this code, and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the
amount of tax due. (Ord. G-686, 10-9-2001)
5-4-9: UNCONSTITUTIONALITY:
In the event that public act 90-561 is declared unconstitutional, or if this chapter is voided by court action, the provisions of chapter 1 of this title
(commonly known as the gross receipts utility tax) shall remain in effect in all respects as if it had never been amended by this chapter and any amounts
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 110/438
paid to the village by any person delivering electricity pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to have been paid pursuant to the gross receipts utility tax
as it existed prior to the passage of this chapter. (Ord. G-686, 10-9-2001)
Chapter 5
MUNICIPAL HOTEL TAX
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RENTAL RECEIPTS: The total amount of consideration for occupancy, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all
receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, including, but not limited to, amounts charged for the making, servicing or facilitating
reservations.
HOTEL: Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The
term includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses and apartment houses.
HOTEL AND TOURISM DISTRICT: The public rights-of-way and adjacent properties contained within the following boundary: beginning at the point of
intersection of the Village's eastern and northern boundaries, then westward along the northern corporate boundary of the Village to Illinois Route 83, then
south along Illinois Route 83 to 31st Street, then west along 31st Street to Midwest Road, then south along Midwest Road to 35th Street, then east to
Illinois Route 83, then south along Illinois Route 83 to the southern boundary of the Village, then east to the Village's eastern boundary, then north along
the Village's eastern boundary to the point of intersection of the Village's eastern and northern boundaries.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who occupies or has the right to occupy any room or rooms in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, business, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, or a receiver,
executor, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.
ROOM OR ROOMS: Any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. (Ord. G-1131, 7-10-2018)
5-5-2: TAX REQUIRED; AMOUNT:
There is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of engaging in the business of leasing, renting, making, facilitating or servicing the leasing
or renting of a hotel or motel room in the Village, a tax of three percent (3%) on the gross rental receipts (not including taxes or other nonroom rental
charges added to the hotel or motel bill) for each such hotel or motel room rented for every twenty four (24) hour period, or any fraction thereof, excluding,
however, from the gross rental receipts, the proceeds of such renting or leasing or letting to permanent residents of that hotel or motel. The tax levied
herein shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges. (Ord. G-1131, 7-10-2018)
5-5-3: EXEMPTION:
A taxpayer subject to the tax imposed by this chapter may claim an exemption for gross rental receipts subject to said tax, if gross rental receipts are
derived from binding and guaranteed room contract(s) entered into on or before September 1, 1986. In order to claim this exemption, the taxpayer must
submit written proof of said binding and guaranteed contract in a form satisfactory to the Corporate Authorities on the monthly tax return required in
section 5-5-4 of this chapter during the month in which said exempt gross receipts are received by the taxpayer. Failure by the taxpayer to claim said
exemption in the month in which said gross receipts are received shall constitute an automatic waiver and bar to receipt of said exemption. (Ord. G-1131,
7-10-2018)
5-5-4: TAX RETURN:
A. Each person or other entity that is subject to the tax imposed by this chapter shall make a tax return as required by this section to the Village Treasurer
on or before the last day of each succeeding calendar month stating:
1. Name;
2. Principal place of business;
3. Gross receipts during the prior month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
4. Amount of tax;
5. Period for which return is filed; and
6. Such other reasonable and related information as the Village Treasurer may require.
B. Each person making the return shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the Village Treasurer the amount of tax herein imposed.
C. If a person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter has an average monthly tax liability of sixty dollars ($60.00) or less, the Village Treasurer may
authorize the person to file the returns to be filed on a quarter annual basis, with the return for January, February, and March of a given year being due
on April 30 of such year, with the return for April, May, and June of a given year being due by July 31 of such year, with the return for July, August, and
September of a given year being due by October 31 of such year, and with the return for October, November, and December of a given year being due
by January 31 of the following year. (Ord. G-1131, 7-10-2018)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 111/438
5-5-5: REIMBURSEMENT OF TAX:
Persons subject to the tax imposed by this chapter may reimburse themselves for their tax liability for such tax by separately stating such tax as an
additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a single amount, with the State Tax imposed under the "Hotel Operators Occupation Tax
Act". (Ord. G-1131, 7-10-2018)
5-5-6: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
A. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter shall keep separate books or records of his business so as to show the rents and occupancies
taxable under this chapter separately from his transactions not taxable hereunder. If any such person fails to keep such separate books or records, he
shall be liable to the tax at the rate designated in section 5-5-2 of this chapter upon the entire proceeds from his hotel.
B. The Village Treasurer, or his authorized representative, may enter the premises of any hotel or motel for inspection and examination of records in order
to effectuate the proper administration of this chapter, and to assure the enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed. It shall be unlawful for any
person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the Village Treasurer, or his authorized deputy or representative, in the discharge of his duties in the
performance of this chapter. It shall be the duty of every person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter to keep accurate and complete books and
records to which the Village Treasurer, or his authorized representative, shall at all reasonable times have full access, which records shall include a
daily sheet showing the number of hotel or motel rooms rented during the twenty four (24) hour period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel or
motel room where such shall occur, and the actual hotel or motel tax receipts collected for the date in question. (Ord. G-1131, 7-10-2018)
5-5-7: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
A. Late payment, underpayment or nonpayment of any tax due hereunder shall be subject to interest and penalties as set forth in chapter 6, "Locally
Imposed And Administered Tax Rights And Responsibilities", of this title. Any person violating any other provision of this chapter, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than the maximum amount permitted by section 1-3-1 of this Code for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed to be committed on each day during which a violation exists, occurs, or continues.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the Village may have relating to the enforcement of this
chapter, or the collection of the amount of any tax due hereunder.
C. Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the Village Attorney shall, on the request of the Village Treasurer, bring or cause to
be brought an action to enforce the payment of the tax on behalf of the Village in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. G-1131, 7-10-2018)
5-5-8: APPLICATION OF PROCEEDS:
A. The amounts collected by the Village from the tax levied by this chapter will be expended by the Village solely to promote tourism and conventions
within the Village or otherwise to attract nonresident overnight visitors to the Village.
B. Two-thirds (2/3) of the amounts collected from the tax levied pursuant to this chapter will be dedicated to promote tourism and conventions or overnight
stays within the Village by providing funds to the Village's beautification initiative in the Hotel and Tourism District, including, without limitation, the
installation and maintenance of improvements in the Hotel and Tourism District such as landscape and hardscape features. One-third (1/3) of the
amounts collected from the tax levied pursuant to this chapter will be dedicated for general purposes to promote tourism and conventions within the
Village or otherwise to attract nonresident overnight visitors to the Village, regardless of whether the project is located within the Hotel and Tourism
District. (Ord. G-1131, 7-10-2018)
Chapter 6
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
5-6-0: TITLE AND SCOPE:
A. Title: This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY
ORDINANCE.
B. Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village's procedures in connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered
taxes. (Ord. G-668, 1-9-2001)
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
ACT: The local government taxpayers' bill of rights act.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village's president and board of trustees.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 112/438
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village's finance director is charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered
taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the local administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by
the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village that is collected or administered by the village, not an agency
or department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the property tax code or fees collected by the village other
than infrastructure maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of
such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax
to the village.
VILLAGE: The village of Oak Brook, DuPage and Cook Counties, Illinois. (Ord. G-668, 1-9-2001)
5-6-2: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
A. First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
B. Personal service or delivery. (Ord. G-668, 1-9-2001)
5-6-3: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date, or b) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark
dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village with adequate postage prepaid. (Ord. G-668, 1-9-2001)
5-6-4: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second to the
interest due for theapplicable period; and c) third to the penalty for the applicable period. (Ord. G-668, 1-9-2001)
5-6-5: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
A. The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and
administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to
have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
B. The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four (4) years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made.
The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the amounts
directly to the village.
C. The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
1. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
a. The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
b. The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
c. The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or receipt for the payment;
d. The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
e. A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and, as
applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid, provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the
taxpayer owes any monies to the village.
2. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
a. Grant the claim; or
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 113/438
b. Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statementas to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
3. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear
interest at the rate of four percent (4%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed, from the
date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit. (Ord. G-668, 1-9-2001)
5-6-6: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any locally administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
A. Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
1. The tax;
2. The time period of the audit; and
3. A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor.
B. Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.
C. The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more than
thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator have agreed to some other convenient time. In the
event the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days,
approved in writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
D. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
E. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer fails to provide the
documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the tax
administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability.
F. If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of
overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
G. In the event a tax payment was submitted to an incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the correct local government
entity of this error. (Ord. G-668, 1-9-2001)
5-6-7: APPEAL:
A. The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a
claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information:
1. The reason for the assessment;
2. The amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. The obligations of the village during audit, appeal, refund and collection process.
B. The taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax
administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition for
hearing may be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and assessment.
C. If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written notice
to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing, unless the
taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
D. If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a
final bill due and owing without further notice.
E. Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date
of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 114/438
filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened orextended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five (45) day
period. (Ord. G-668, 1-9-2001)
5-6-8: HEARING:
A. Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing under section 5-6-7 of this chapter, the local tax
administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
B. No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
C. At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or
assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
D. At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing.
The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision. (Ord. G-668, 1-9-2001)
5-6-9: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
specified.
A. Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be six
percent (6%) based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed.
B. Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty
of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%) of
the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing a
notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the total tax due
for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty
is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. G-668, 1-9-2001)
5-6-10: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local tax
administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. (Ord. G-668, 1-9-2001)
5-6-11: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer
fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local
administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. G-668, 1-9-2001)
5-6-12: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.
A. No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the applicable
period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
B. If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the village, the
tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years after the end of the calendar year in
which return for the applicable period was due, or end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
C. No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. G-668, 1-9-2001)
5-6-13: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, orassessment from the local
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 115/438
tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a
voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior to the
filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the application. Except for the amount of tax and interest due under this
section, a taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date
the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax
along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the
application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest required under this section must be made by no later than ninety (90) days
after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. G-668, 1-9-2001)
5-6-14: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCE:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published and copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village
clerk's office. The posting of a tax ordinance on the internet shall satisfy the publication requirements of this section. (Ord. G-668, 1-9-2001)
5-6-15: UNPAID TAXES:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the
local tax administrator shall:
A. Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
B. Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
C. Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. G-668, 1-9-2001)
5-6-16: CONFLICTING TAX PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered tosupplement all of the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling. (Ord. G-668, 1-9-2001)
5-6-17: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, paragraph or provision of this chapter shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of such
section, paragraph or provision shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this chapter. (Ord. G-668, 1-9-2001)
Chapter 7
MUNICIPAL SALES TAXES
5-7-1: NONHOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than on an item of tangible personal property which
is titled and registered by an agency of this state's government, at retail in the municipality, in the amount of one-half (1/2) of one percent (1%) of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business. This tax does not apply to the sale of food for human consumption that is to be consumed
off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and
prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. This
tax will be collected and enforced by the state department of revenue. (Ord. G-744, 3-23-2004; Ord. G-837, 7-10-2007)
5-7-2: NONHOME RULE SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of making sales of service within the village of Oak Brook, in the amount of one-half (1/2) of
one percent (1%) of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in
the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of service. This tax does not apply to the sale of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off the
premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and
nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. This tax will be
collected and enforced by the state department of revenue. (Ord. G-744, 3-23-2004; Ord. G-837, 7-10-2007)
Chapter 8
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 116/438
5-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
A. Gross revenues shall include the following:
1. Recurring charges for cable or video service.
2. Event based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
4. Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair charges.
5. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service termination
charges.
6. Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed torecover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments.
7. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or
exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the
relevant regional or national compensation arrangement.
8. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with
respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's
network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to this subsection.
9. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
10. The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b).
B. Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
1. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
2. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued authorization
to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service.
3. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received
from services not classified as cableservice or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services,
information services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books
and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
4. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
5. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
6. Security deposits collected from subscribers.
7. Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of
the cable service or video service.
C. Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the
affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 117/438
service areas within its territorialjurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and
which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet
protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section
332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other
services offered over the public internet. (Ord. G-847, 11-27-2007)
5-8-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
A. Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
C. Notice To The Village: The holder shall notify the village at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the village.
D. Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the
first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.
E. Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the
fee.
F. Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with
the village in which a fee is paid.
G. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. G-847, 11-27-2007)
5-8-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
A. PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to the
fee imposed pursuant to subsection 5-8-2A of this chapter.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the
percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village or its designee for PEG access support in the village.
C. Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The
holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth in subsection 5-8-2D of this chapter.
D. Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the
calculation of the fee.
E. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining
term of the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the
previous sentence may be credited against the fees that operator owes under subsection B of this section. (Ord. G-847, 11-27-2007)
5-8-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. G-847, 11-27-2007)
5-8-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 118/438
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to bepaid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any
telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local
unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. G-847, 11-27-2007)
5-8-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
A. Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an
audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of
the village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
B. Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the village's submission of an invoice for the
sum. (Ord. G-847, 11-27-2007)
5-8-7: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by this village pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of
rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. G-847, 11-27-2007)
Title 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
6-1-1: NOISE:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue to cause to be made or continue any loud, unnecessary, prolonged or unusual noise which
disturbs the peace of others.
B. Any person who shall, without prior authorization by the president and board of trustees, operate or cause, permit or allow to be operated upon any
public street in the village any mechanically operated piano, phonograph or other musical instrument, radio or similar mechanical or electrical device or
wind instrument or noisemaking device of any character whatsoever, for the purpose of advertising any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles for
sale, barter or exchange, or for the purpose of attracting attention, or of inviting the patronage of any person to any business whatsoever, shall be
deemed guilty of an offense against the village. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
6-1-2: USE OF HEAVY EQUIPMENT, TOOLS; RESTRICTIONS:
Except as provided in the exceptions of this section no person or entity shall perform construction activities, perform any activity requiring a building
permit, or operate heavy equipment, except as follows:
Location
Day Of
The Week
Permitted Time
Residential zone districts - interior or exterior:
Hand tools may be used at any time within the interior of a fully enclosed structure provided that
there is no construction related sound heard at the property line
Monday -
Friday
Heavy equipment - between
7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M.
Other tools - between 7:00 A.M.
and 8:00 P.M.
Saturday Heavy equipment - between
9:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M.
Other tools - between 8:00 A.M.
and 7:00 P.M.
Sunday Heavy equipment - not
permitted
Other tools - between 9:00 A.M.
and 6:00 P.M.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 119/438
All other zone districts - exterior* Any Heavy equipment - between
6:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M.
Other tools - between 6:00 A.M.
and 8:00 P.M.
*Exception: Any property that shares a lot line with a residential zone district, within 500 feet of
the residential zone district
Any Heavy equipment - same as
residential zone districts
All other zone districts - interior Any Other tools - any
Hand tools - any
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section:
HAND TOOLS: Tubing cutters, volt-ohm meters, manual pipe benders, pliers, wrenches, screwdrivers, paint brushes, rollers, torches, brooms, and
similar tools that are substantially silent in operation. "Hand tools" shall not include hammers or any other item used as a striking implement.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT: Gasoline or diesel powered air compressors, gasoline or diesel powered saws, bulldozers, jackhammers, pile drivers, power
hammers, graders, riveters, earthmovers, tree and stump grinders, trenchers, cement mixers, tractors, power hoists or derricks, demolition balls,
power shovels, dump trucks, and power equipment on wheels or traction chains, or other similar equipment, but shall not include garbage trucks,
which are governed by separate agreement within the village, nonconstruction delivery vehicles, trucks operating on designated truck routes, or snow
removal equipment.
OTHER TOOLS: Any construction tool that is neither defined herein as "hand tools" or "heavy equipment". Other tools shall include, but not be limited
to: electric compressors, nailers, hammers, cord connected electric saws, drills, or similar equipment. It is anticipated that "other tools" will create a
sound level that can be heard at the property line.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICT: Shall include all zone districts R1, R2, R3, R4 and R5 with the additional inclusion of any contiguous street, right of
way, or public owned property.
B. Exceptions:
1. Emergencies: The limitations stated in this section shall not apply in any situation which requires heavy equipment or other tools in emergencies to
assist or avoid a problem related to health or to safety of persons or property, or to sewer, water, power, utility, or telephone interruptions.
2. Work By Public Agencies: The limitations stated in this section may be waived by the board of trustees by resolution for work undertaken by any
public body or agency for the benefit of the public. The board of trustees may attach to any such waiver all conditions it deems necessary to protect
the public health, safety or welfare.
3. Waiver: The limitations stated in this section may be waived by the building official in areas of the village zoned for nonresidential uses pursuant to
the village zoning ordinance; provided, however, that no such waiver shall be granted unless the building official finds that:
a. The party seeking the waiver will suffer a unique or unusual hardship unless the waiver is granted; and
b. The granting of a waiver will not cause a substantial or undue adverse impact upon adjacent property or upon the public health, safety and
welfare.
c. The village manager may attach to such waiver all conditions he deems necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare.
4. Building Permits: Work undertaken pursuant to any permit issued by the village shall be subject to the provisions of this section. (Ord. G-1087, 10-
11-2016)
6-1-3: SEARCHLIGHTS:
A. It shall be unlawful to install, to operate, or to maintain, anywhere in the village, a searchlight.
B. A "searchlight" is defined, for purposes of this section, as an apparatus for projecting a powerful beam of light of approximately parallel rays, usually
devised so that it can be swiveled about; also the beam of light projected by it.
C. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, searchlights may be employed by police, fire or civil defense personnel for authorized emergency
operations or training missions. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
6-1-4: OFFENSES RELATING TO PUBLIC PROPERTY:
A. Obstructing Streets Or Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful for any person without prior authorization by the village manager or his designee to engage in
any game, sport, amusement, business or exhibition upon the streets or sidewalks, which shall collect any crowd of persons so as to interfere with the
passage of vehicles or of persons passing along the streets or sidewalks. This prohibition shall not apply to noncommercial solicitation for a charitable
organization by village law enforcement personnel, firefighters, or other persons employed by the village to protect the public safety as specifically
permitted pursuant to title 4, chapter 4, article B of this code.
B. Posting Bills: It shall be unlawful for any person to affix any handbill, sign, poster, advertisement on any curbstone, flagstone or other part of any
sidewalk, or upon any tree, fence, lamppost, hitching post, telephone or power pole, or hydrant within the streets or alleys or upon any village property;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 120/438
provided, however, that this subsection shall not be construed so as to prohibit the posting of legal notices.
C. Throwing Articles In Streets; Littering: It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, place or leave in or on any road, street, alley, sidewalk, public
place in the village any handbills, posters, dodgers, boxes, paper or any stone, missiles, nails, glass, iron or metal, trash, snow, garbage, or any other
article or thing, except gravel, bituminous material, concrete or cinders or chemical compound, either for street improvement or ice and snow removal,
and leaves to the edge of the pavement, between October 1 and November 30, provided the leaves do not obstruct the right of way.
D. Spitting On Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon any public sidewalk or upon the floor of any hall, assembly room or public
building in the village.
E. Damage To Village Property: No person shall destroy, injure, remove or deface any public or private property within the village without the owner's
consent. Said offense shall include, but is not limited to, actions by operating vehicles, cutting, tearing, breaking, digging, throwing, shooting, marking,
painting or drawing when such actions have the effect of causing damage to public property. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996; Ord. G-974, 7-10-2012)
6-1-5: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
A. Definitions:
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY: Includes any real estate including improvements thereon, and tangible personalty.
B. General Violation: It shall be a violation of this section for any person to knowingly damage any property of another person without his consent.
C. Defacing Trees Or Buildings: It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, injure, mark or deface any building, structure or property not his own, or any
tree, grass, shrub, or pathway, street, public park or public property.
D. Damaging Shrubbery: It shall be unlawful for any person to cut down, dig up, damage or destroy any fruit or ornamental tree or cultivated plant,
standing or growing on the land or premises of another, or pick, destroy, or carry away therefrom, any part, bud, flower or fruit of any cultivated tree,
plant, vine or bush, without permission from the owner or occupant of said land or premises, or shall without lawful authority cut down, uproot, damage
or destroy any fruit or ornamental tree or shrubbery, planted or growing on any street, highway, public thoroughfare, park or public grounds.
E. Depositing Refuse, Garbage, Junk Or Compostable Materials On Property Of Another: No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited refuse,
garbage, junk or compostable materials on the property of another, including deposit inside containers, dumpsters, trash cans or barrels intended for
the deposit of those items by occupants of the property. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
6-1-6: TRESPASSING1:
A. Whoever enters upon the land or any part thereof of another after receiving, immediately prior to such entry, notice from the owner or occupant that
such entry is forbidden or remains upon the land of another after receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart shall be deemed guilty of an
offense against the village.
B. A person has received notice from the owner or occupant, within the meaning of subsection A of this section, if he has been notified personally, either
orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such land
or the forbidden part thereof.
C. A person commits the offense of trespass to a residence when, without authority, he knowingly enters or remains within any residence. For purposes of
this section, in the case of a multi-unit residential building or complex, "residence" shall only include the portion of the building or complex which is the
actual dwelling place of any person and shall not include such places as common recreational areas or lobbies.
D. This section does not apply to any person, whether a migrant worker or otherwise, living on the land, with permission of the owner or of his agent
having apparent authority to hire workers on such land and assign them living quarters or a place of accommodations for living thereon, nor to anyone
living on such land at the request of, or by occupancy, leasing or other agreement or arrangement with, the owner or his agent, nor to anyone invited
by such migrant worker or other person so living on such land to visit him at the place he is so living upon the land. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
6-1-7: TAMPERING WITH MOTOR VEHICLE:
It shall be unlawful for:
A. A person, without authority to do so, to damage a vehicle or to damage or remove any part of a vehicle;
B. A person, without authority to do so, to tamper with a vehicle or go in it, on it, or work or attempt to work any of its parts, or set or attempt to set it in
motion. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 121/438
6-1-8: DISCHARGING FIREARMS, AIR RIFLES, ARROWS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, air rifle, paint gun, stun gun or similar device or to fire any arrow within the corporate limits
of the village. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to:
1. Law enforcement officials of this or any other jurisdiction, while engaged in the operation of their official duties.
2. Duly enrolled members of any organized club, team or society or participants in classes or activities conducted by a governmental entity using an
indoor or outdoor range, including archery ranges, solely for target practice and in actual connection with the activities of said club, team, society or
governmental entity.
B. As used in subsection A of this section, the term "firearm" means any device, by whatever name known, which is designated to expel a projectile or
projectiles by the action of an explosion, expansion of gas or escape of gas; excluding, however:
1. Any device used exclusively for signaling or safety and required or recommended by the United States coast guard or the interstate commerce
commission, or
2. Any device used exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges, explosive rivets or similar industrial ammunition.
The term "air rifle" means and includes any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun, pellet gun, paint gun, stun gun or any implement that
is not a firearm, which impels a pellet constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead or other hard materials with a force that reasonably is expected to
cause bodily harm. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996; Ord. G-857, 4-8-2008)
6-1-9: OFFENSES RELATING TO DRUGS:
A. Definitions:
CANNABIS: Includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa, whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally
occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical
synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such
stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative mixture, or preparation of such mature
stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
DELIVER OR DELIVERY: The actual, constructive or attempted transfer of possession, with or without consideration, regardless of whether there is
an agency relationship between the deliverer and deliveree.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are peculiar to and marketed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled
substance. It includes, but is not limited to:
1. Kits peculiar to and marketed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled
substance;
2. Isomerization devices peculiar to and marketed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled
substance;
3. Testing equipment peculiar to and marketed for private home use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis
or controlled substances;
4. Diluents and adulterants peculiar to and marketing for cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;
5. Objects peculiar to and marketed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the
human body including, where applicable, the following items:
Air driven pipes;
Bongs;
Carburetion tubes and devices;
Carburetor pipes;
Chillums;
Electric pipes;
Ice pipes or chillers;
Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
Smoking and carburetion masks;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 122/438
Water pipes;
6. Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for use in violation of this section.
PRODUCT CONTAINING A SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUG: Any product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or
psychedelic/hallucinogen, as those terms are defined herein. The following products have been determined to contain a synthetic cannabinoid,
stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen, but the list below is not exhaustive and violations of this section described in subsection E of this section are
not limited to the possession, sale, delivery or use of products listed herein:
2010
8-Ball
Aztec Gold
Aztec Midnight Wind
Back Draft
Bad 2 the Bone
Banana Cream Nuke
Bayou Blaster
Black Diamond
Black Magic Salvia
Black Mamba
Blueberry Hayze
Bombay Blue
Buzz
C3
C4
Caneff
Cherry Bomb
Chill Out
Chill X
Chronic Spice
Citrus
Colorado Chronic
D-Rail
Da Block
Dark Night II
Demon
Diamond Spirit
Dragon Spice
Dream
Earthquake
Eruption Spice
Euphoria
Ex-SES Platinum
EX-SES Platinum Blueberry
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 123/438
EX-SES Platinum Cherry
EX-SES Platinum Vanilla
Fire Bird Ultimate
Forest Humus
Freedom
Fully Loaded
Funky Monkey
Funky Monkey XXXX
G Four
G Greenies Caramel Crunch
Genie
Gold Spirit Spice
Green Monkey Chronic
Greenies Strawberry
Heaven Improved
Heavenscent Suave
Humboldt Gold
Jamaican Gold
K Royal
K1 Gravity
K1 Orbit
K2
K2 (unknown variety)
K2 Amazonian Shelter
K2 Blonde
K2 Blue
K2 Blueberry
K2 Citron
K2 Cloud 9
K2 Kryptonite
K2 Latte
K2 Mint
K2 Orisha Black Magic Max
K2 Orisha Max
K2 Orisha Regular
K2 Orisha Super
K2 Orisha White Magic
K2 Peach
K2 Pina Colada
K2 Pineapple Express
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 124/438
K2 Pink
K2 Pink Panties
K2 Sex
K2 Silver
K2 Solid Sex on the Mountain
K2 Standard
K2 Strawberry
K2 Summit
K2 Summit Coffee Work
K2 Summit Space
K2 Thai Dream
K2 Ultra
K2 Watermelon
K3
K3 Blueberry
K3 Cosmic Blend
K3 Dusk
K3 Grape
K3 Heaven Improved
K3 Heaven Legal
K3 Kryptonite
K3 Legal
K3 Legal - Earth (silver)
K3 Legal - Sea (silver)
K3 Legal - Sun (Black)
K3 Mango
K3 Original
K3 Original Improved
K3 Strawberry
K3 Sun
K3 Sun Improved
K3 Sun Legal
K3 XXX
K4 Bubble Bubble
K4 Gold
K4 Silver
K4 Summit Remix
Kind Spice
Kryptonite
Legal Eagle
Legal Eagle Apple
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 125/438
Love Potion 69
Love Strawberry
Magic Dragon Platinum
Magic Gold
Magic Silver
Magic Spice
Mega Bomb
Mellon K2
Mid-Atlantic Exemplar
Midnight Chill
MNGB Almond/Vanilla
MNGB Peppermint
MNGB Pinata Colada
MNGB Spear Mint
MNGB Tropical Thunder
Moe Joe Fire
Mojo
Mr. Smiley's
MTN-787
Mystery
Naughty Nights
New Improved K3
New Improved K3 Cosmic
New Improved K3 Dynamite
New K3 Earth
New K3 Heaven
New K3 Sea Improved
New-Kron Bomb
Nitro
Ocean Blue
p.e.p. pourri Love Strawberry
p.e.p. pourri Original Spearmint
p.e.p. pourri Twisted Vanilla
p.e.p. pourri X Blueberry
Paradise
Pie K4 Purple Haze
Pineapple
Pink Tiger
Platinum Strawberry
Potpourri
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 126/438
POW
Pulse
Rasta Citrus Spice
Rebel Spice
Red Bird
S1. S Werve
Samurai Spirit
Sativah
Scope Vanilla
Scope Wildberry
Sense
Shanti Spice
Shanti Spice Blueberry
Silent Black
Skunk
Smoke
Smoke Plus
Space
Spice Artie Synergy
Spice Diamond
Spice Gold
Spice Silver
Spice Tropical Synergy
Spicey Regular XXX
Spicey Ultra Strong XXX
Spicey XXX
Spicylicious
Spike 99
Spike 99 Ultra
Spike 99 Ultra Blueberry
Spike 99 Ultra Cherry
Spike 99 Ultra Strawberry
Spike Diamond
Spike Gold
Spike Maxx
Spike Silver
Stinger
Strength Cinnamon
Summer Skyy
Super Kush
Super Summit
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 127/438
Swagger Grape
SYN Chill
SYN Incense LemonLime
SYN Incense Smooth
SYN Incense Spearmint
SYN Lemon Lime
SYN Lemon Lime #2
SYN Smooth
SYN Spearmint
SYN Spearmint #2
SYN Suave
SYN Swagg
SYN Vanilla
SYN Vanilla #2
Texas Gold
Tezcatlipoca
Time Warp
Tribal Warrior
Ultra Cloud 10
Unknown cigarette
Utopia
Utopia-Blue Berry
Voo Doo Remix (black)
Voo Doo Remix (orange)
Voodoo Child
Voodoo Magic
Voodoo Remix
Who Dat
Who Dat Herbal Incense
Wicked X
Winter Boost
Wood Stock
XTREME Spice
Yucatan Fire
Yucatan Fire Smoke
Zombie World
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID: Any laboratory created compound that functions similar to the active ingredient in marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC), including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog
(including isomers, esters, ethers, salts, and salts of isomers) containing a cannabinoid receptor agonist, such as:
1. JWH-007 (1-pentyl-2-methyl-3-(l-naphthoyl)indole)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 128/438
2. JWH-015 ((2-Methyl-l-propyl-lH-indol-3-yl)-l-naphthalenylmethanone)
3. JWH-018 (l-pentyl-3-(l-naphthoyl)indole)
4. JWH-019 (l-hexyl-3-(naphthalen-l-oyl)indole)
5. JWH-073 (naphthalen-l-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl)methanone)
6. JWH-081 (4-methoxynaphthalen-l-yl-(l-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone)
7. JWH-098 (4-methoxynaphthalen-l-yl-(l-pentyl-2-methylindol-3-yl)methanone)
8. JWH-122 (l-Pentyl-3-(4-methyl-l-naphthoyl)indole)
9. JWH-164 (7-methoxynaphthalen-l-y1-(l-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone
10. JWH-200 (l-(2-morpholin-4-ylethypindol-3-y1)-naphthalen-lylmethanone)
11. JWH-203 (2-(2-chloropheny1)-l-(l-pentylindol-3-y)thanone
12. JWH-210 (4-ethylnaphthalen-l-y1-(I-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone
13. JWH-250 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetypindole)
14. JWH-251 (l-pentyl-3-(2-methylphenylacetypindole)
15. JWH-398 (l-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-l-naphthoypindole)
16. HU-210((6aR,10aR)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-y1)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-l-ol)
17. HU-211 ((6aS,10aS)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-y1)-6a,7,10,l0a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-l-ol)
18. HU-308 ([(lR,2R,5R)-242,6-dimethoxy-4-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)pheny1]-7,7-dimethyl-4-bicyclo[3.1.1]hept-3-enyl] methanol)
19. HU-331 ((3-hydroxy-2-[(lR,6R)-3-methyl-6-(1-methylethenyl)-2-cyclohexen-1-y1]-5-pentyl-2,5-cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione)
20. CP 55,940 (2-[(lR,2R,5R)-5-hydroxy-2-(3-hydroxypropyl)cyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol)
21. CP 47,497 (2-[(lR,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2yl)phenol) and its homologues
22. WIN 55,212-2 ((R)-(+)-[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-morpholinylmethyl) pyrrolo [1,2,3-de)-1,4-benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-nepthalenylmethanone)
23. RCS-4 ((4-methoxyphenyl)(l-pentyl-1H-indol-3-yl)methanone)
24. RCS-8(1-(1-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-lH-indol-3-yl)-2-(2-methoxyphenypethanone)
SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELIC/HALLUCINOGEN: Any compound that mimics the effects of any federally controlled schedule I substance, including,
but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog (including salts,
isomers, esters, ethers and salts of isomers) containing substances which have apsychedelic/hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system
and/or brain, such as:
1. 2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-ethylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-E);
2. 2-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-D);
3. 2-(4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-C);
4. 2-(4-lodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-I);
5. 2-(4-(Ethylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-T-2);
6. 2-(4-(Isopropylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-T-4);
7. 2-(2,5-Dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-H);
8. 2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-nitro-phenyl)ethanamine (2C-N);
9. 2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-P).
SYNTHETIC STIMULANT: Any compound that mimics the effects of any federally controlled schedule I substance such as cathinone,
methcathinone, MDMA and MDEA, including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation,
substance and their analog (including salts, isomers, and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a stimulant effect on the central
nervous system, such as:
1. 3-Fluoromethcathinone
2. 4-Fluoromethcathinone (other name: flephedrone)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 129/438
3. 3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (other name: methylone, MDMC)
4. 3,4-Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (other name: MDPV)
5. 4-Methylmethcathinon (other names: mephedrone, 4-MMC)
6. 4-Methoxymethcathinone (other names: methedrone, bk-PMMA, PMMC)
7. 4-Ethylmethcathinone (other name: 4-EMC)
8. Ethcathinone
9. Beta-keto-N-methylbenzodioxyolylpropylamine (other names: butylone, bk-MBDB)
10. Napthylpyrovalerone (other names: naphyrone, NRG-I)
11. N,N-dimethylcathinone (other name: metamfepramone)
12. Alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: aipha-PPP)
13. 4-methoxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MOPPP)
14. 3,4-methylenedioxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MDPPP)
15. Alpha-pyrrolidinovalerophenone (other name: alpha-PVP)
16. 6,7-kihydro-5H-indeno(5,6-d)- 1,3-dioxal-6-amine) (other name: MDAI)
17. Any compound that is structurally derived from 2-amino-1 -phenyl-l-propanone by modification or substitution in any of the following ways:
a. In the phenyl ring to any extent with alkyl, alkoxy, alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl, or halide substituents, whether or not further substituted in the
phenyl ring by one or more other univalent substituents;
b. At the 3-position with an alkyl substituent;
c. At the nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkyl, benzyl, or methoxybenzyl groups; or
d. By inclusion of the nitrogen atom in a cyclic structure.
B. Cannabis: It shall be a violation of this section for any person knowingly to possess any quantity of any substance containing cannabis, except that the
effect of this section shall be limited to persons knowingly possessing less than thirty grams (30 g) of any substance containing cannabis.
C. Drug Paraphernalia: It shall be a violation of this section for any person to knowingly possess any drug paraphernalia.
D. Inhaling Or Drinking Certain Substances: No person shall possess, inhale, breathe or drink any compound liquid or chemical containing nitric oxide,
toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl acetate, methyl ethyl acetone, trichloroethane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl ketone,
methylcellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone, or any other substance for the purpose of inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis,
irrational behavior, or in any manner to change, distort or disturb the audio, visual or mental processes. For the purpose of this section, any such
condition so induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any
person who inhales, breathes or drinks such material or substances pursuant to the direction or prescription of any doctor, physician, surgeon, dentist
or podiatrist authorized to so direct or prescribe.
E. Product Containing A Synthetic Alternative Drug: No person shall:
1. Knowingly possess a product containing a synthetic alternative drug, including, without limitation, the products listed in subsection A of this section;
2. Sell, offer for sale or deliver any product containing a synthetic alternative drug, including, without limitation, the products listed in subsection A of
this section;
3. Be under the influence of a product containing a synthetic alternative drug, including, without limitation, the products listed in subsection A of this
section. (Ord. G-971, 5-22-2012)
6-1-10: THEFT:
A. Theft Prohibited: No person shall commit theft. A person commits theft when he knowingly:
1. Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
2. Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
3. Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
4. Obtains control of stolen property knowing the property to have been stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce
him to believe that the property was stolen and:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 130/438
a. Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property; or
b. Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
c. Uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing such use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit.
B. Attempted Theft Prohibited: No person shall commit attempted theft. A person commits an attempted theft when, with the intent to commit a theft, he
does any act which constitutes a substantial step toward the commission of that offense. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
6-1-11: RETAIL THEFT:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the words and phrases defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless a
contrary meaning is clear from the context.
CONCEAL: To "conceal" merchandise means that, although there may be some notice of its presence, the merchandise is not visible through ordinary
observation.
FULL RETAIL VALUE: The merchant's stated or advertised price of the merchandise.
MERCHANDISE: Any item of tangible personal property.
MERCHANT: An owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee or
independent contractor of such owner or operator.
PREMISES OF A RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, the retail mercantile establishment; any common use areas
in shopping centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf of a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of the
patrons of such retail mercantile establishment.
RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Any place where merchandise is displayed, held, stored or offered for sale to the public.
SHOPPING CART: Those push carts of the type or types which are commonly provided by grocery stores, drugstores or other retail mercantile
establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in stores and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the
store.
UNDER-RING: To cause the cash register or other sales-recording device to reflect less than the full retail value of the merchandise.
B. Retail Theft Prohibited: No person shall commit retail theft. A person commits the offense of retail theft when he knowingly:
1. Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or transferred any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale
in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of
thepossession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or
2. Alters, transfers or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally
or in consort with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
3. Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which such
merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
4. Under-rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the merchandise;
5. Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart.
6. Represents to a merchant that he or another is the lawful owner of property, knowing that such representation is false, and conveys or attempts to
convey that property to a merchant who is the owner of the property in exchange for money, merchandise credit or other property of the merchant;
or
7. Uses or possesses any theft detection shielding device or theft detection device remover with the intention of using such device to deprive the
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in the retail mercantile
establishment without paying the full retail value of such merchandise.
C. Attempted Retail Theft Prohibited: No person shall commit attempted retail theft. A person commits attempted theft when, with the intent to commit a
theft, he does any act which constitutes a substantial step toward the commission of that offense.
D. Presumptions: If any person:
1. Conceals upon his or her person or among his or her belongings, unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail
mercantile establishment; and
2. Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station for receiving payments for the merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment,
such person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred such merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with the
intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 131/438
6-1-12: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A person commits disorderly conduct when he does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke, make or aid in
making, a breach of the peace. Acts which shall be deemed to be disorderly conduct, and are prohibited, include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Abusive Words Or Gestures: Uttering profane, obscene or abusive words or performing profane, obscene or abusive gestures directed to and within
the view or hearing of another, with the intent to provoke a breach of the peace.
B. Disturbing Passersby: Disturbing passersby on any street, sidewalk or other place open to the public by placing any obstruction upon or across the
same, or by throwing missiles of any kind, or by jeering at or deriding in any other manner, with intent to disturb any person in the lawful and orderly
use of such street, sidewalk or place open to the public.
C. Disturbing Public Assemblies: Disturbing any orderly assembly of any kind.
D. Fighting: Engaging in or encouraging a fight in any street, park or other place open to the public.
E. Keeping A Disorderly Place: Causing or permitting any room, house, shop, building or place of any description (while having the control thereof) to
become the gathering place of disorderly persons, or causing or permitting therein any unreasonable noise which breaches the peace.
F. Loud Noises: Making unreasonable noises that alarm or disturb another.
G. Obstructing Entrances: Obstructing (or remaining about) any sidewalk, entrance to any school, church, club, or other room or building used for public
assemblies, or entrance to other places open to the public after being requested by a police officer or any person in charge of such place to move on.
H. Unlawful Assembly: Assembling with two (2) or more persons for purposes of disturbing the public peace.
I. Urinating In Public: Urinating or depositing excrement upon streets, alleys, parks, or other places open to the public. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
6-1-13: TRANSMISSION OF OBSCENE MESSAGES:
No person shall send messages or use language or terms which are obscene, lewd or immoral with the intent to offend by means of or while using a
telephone or telegraph facility, equipment or wires of any person, firm or corporation engaged in the transmission of news or messages between states or
within the State of Illinois. The use of language or terms which are obscene, lewd or immoral is prima facie evidence of the intent to offend. (Ord. G-577,
10-22-1996)
6-1-14: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
A. A person commits the offense of public indecency if he knowingly or intentionally, in a public place:
1. Engages in sexual intercourse;
2. Engages in deviate sexual conduct;
3. Appears in a state of nudity; or
4. Fondles the genitals of himself or another person.
B. For the purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, female breast with less than a full opaque covering any part of the nipple, the
covered male genitals in a discernably turgid state or that portion of the buttocks which would be covered by a properly worn "thong" type bikini
bottom.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any location frequented by the public, or where the public is present or likely to be present, or where a person may reasonably be
expected to be observed by members of the public. Public places include, but are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, beaches, business or
commercial establishments, (whether for profit or not-for-profit and whether to the public at large or where entrance is limited by a cover charge or
membership requirement), hotels, motels, restaurants, nightclubs, country clubs, cabarets, and meeting facilities utilized by religious, social, fraternal
or similar organizations. Premises used solely as a private residence, whether permanent or temporary in nature, shall not be deemed a public place.
Public place shall not include enclosed single-sex public restrooms, enclosed single-sex functional showers, locker and/or dressing room facilities,
enclosed motel rooms and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping accommodations, doctors' offices, churches, synagogues or similar places
when used for circumcisions, baptisms or similar religious ceremonies, portions of hospitals and similar places in which nudity or exposure is
necessarily and customarily expected outside of the home; nor shall it include a person appearing in a state of nudity in a modeling class operated by:
1) a proprietary school licensed bythe State; a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 2) a private college or
university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferrable to a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation or an accredited private college.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 132/438
C. A person convicted of the offense of public indecency shall be fined not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense and may be
enjoined from continuing the conduct determined to be public indecency.
D. A person who knowingly or intentionally encourages or facilitates another person's commission of the offense of public indecency shall be deemed to
have committed a public nuisance.
E. This section is patterned after and shall be interpreted in the same manner as the Indiana Public Indecency Statute upheld by the United States
Supreme Court in Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560, Ill. S.Ct. 2456 (1991).
F. The definition of "public place" set forth in subsection B of this section shall be interpreted to be no more broad than the definition of "public place" set
forth in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-9 as upheld by the Illinois Supreme Court in People v. Garrison, 82 Ill.2d 444, 412 N.E.2d 483 (1980). (Ord.
G-577, 10-22-1996; Ord. G-590, 5-13-1997; Ord. G-1127, 3-27-2018)
6-1-15: OBSCENITY:
A. Elements Of The Offense: No person shall commit obscenity in the Village. A person commits obscenity when, with knowledge of the nature or content
thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof, he:
1. Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver or provide any obscene writing, picture, record or other representation or embodiment
of the obscene; or
2. Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene; or
3. Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything obscene; or
4. Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition of his or her body for gain; or
5. Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material with intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal laws or
regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
6. Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented or held out by him or her to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
B. Obscene Defined: A thing is obscene if, when considered as a whole by the average person applying contemporary community standards:
1. Its predominant appeal is to prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion, and it goes substantially beyond
customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters; and
2. It depicts in a patently offensive way beyond the customary limits of candor, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or
perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; and
3. The work or exhibition as a whole is utterly without redeeming social importance.
C. Interpretation Of Evidence: In determining whether an object, act or exhibition is obscene, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to other
logically relevant factors:
1. Circumstances of production, presentation, sale, dissemination, distribution or publicity which indicate that material is being commercially exploited
for the sake of its prurient appeal.
2. The character of the audience for which the material was designed or to which it was directed.
3. What the predominant appeal of the material would be for ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would probably have on
the behavior of such people.
4. The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other merits of the material, or absence thereof.
5. The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in the State.
6. Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising or other promotion of the material.
7. Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or disseminator.
D. Forfeiture Of Property:
1. Obscenity is a far-reaching and extremely profitable crime, which persists despite the threat of prosecution and successful prosecution because
existing sanctions do not effectively reach the money and other assets generated by it. The State has, therefore, determined it to be necessary to
supplement existingsanctions by mandating forfeiture of money and other assets generated by such crime, to diminish the financial incentives which
encourage and sustain obscenity and secure for the State, local government and prosecutors a resource for prosecuting obscenity crimes.
2. The Village shall assist the County State's Attorney and the Attorney General of the State in investigating and prosecuting crimes of obscenity and
in obtaining forfeiture of property pursuant to State law, and specifically pursuant to the procedures set forth in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
20.
E. Prima Facie Evidence Of Intent To Disseminate: The creation, purchase, procurement or possession of a mold, engraved plate or other embodiment of
obscenity specially adapted for reproducing multiple copies, or the possession of more than three (3) copies of obscene material, shall be prima facie
evidence of an intent to disseminate.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 133/438
F. Affirmative Defense: It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity that the dissemination:
1. Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than children under eighteen (18) years of age; or
2. Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other special justification for possession of such material. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
6-1-16: TELEPHONE HARASSMENT:
No person shall engage in harassment by telephone. Harassment by telephone is use of telephone communications for any of the following purposes:
A. Making any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent with an intent to offend; or
B. Making a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, with intent to abuse, threaten or harass any person at the called number; or
C. Making or causing the telephone of another repeatedly to ring with the intent to harass any person at the called number; or
D. Making repeated telephone calls, during which conversation ensues, solely to harass any person at the called number; or
E. Knowingly permitting any telephone under one's control to be used for any of the purposes mentioned herein. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
6-1-17: OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS:
A. Renting Hotel Or Motel Rooms: No person shall rent a hotel or motel room from the proprietor or agent for the purpose of or with the knowledge that
such room shall be used for the consumption of alcoholic liquor by persons under the age of twenty one (21) years.
B. Curfew For Minors:
1. Curfew Hours: It shall be unlawful for any person less than seventeen (17) years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly, building,
place or street at the following times:
Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Saturday;
Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Sunday;
Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following day.
2. Defense To A Violation: It is a defense to a violation under this chapter that the minor is engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
a. Accompanied by the minor's parent, legal guardian, or adult acting in loco parentis.
b. Accompanied by an adult at least eighteen (18) years of age approved by the minor's parent or guardian ("authorized adult");
c. On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
d. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
e. Married or has been married or is an emancipated minor under the Emancipation of Minors Act;
f. Participating in, going to, or returning from any of the following without any detour or stop:
(1) Employment which the laws of this State authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to perform;
(2) An authorized school or recreational activity;
(3) A religious event;
(4) A recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored bya government or governmental agency, or a civic organization that takes
responsibility for the minor;
(5) An emergency involving the protection of a person or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
(6) An activity involving the exercise of the minor's rights protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or article 1,
sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Constitution of the State of Illinois, or both; or
(7) An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity that provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the supervision of
one or more adult(s).
3. Before Enforcement Action: Before taking enforcement action, a law enforcement officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being
in the public place. A citation for subsection B1 of this section may be issued by a police officer only if he or she reasonably believes that a violation
has occurred and none of the defenses enumerated in subsection B2 of this section apply.
4. Knowingly Permitting Minors Out Past Curfew: It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, or authorized adult to knowingly permit a person under the
age of seventeen (17) in his or her custody or control to violate the provisions of subsection B1 of this section. If a parent, legal guardian or
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 134/438
authorized adult has custody of a person under the age of seventeen (17) and the person under the age of seventeen (17) is present at any public
assembly, or is in or upon any building, business, street or other public place or public way there shall exist a rebuttable presumption that such
presence is in violation of subsection B1 of this section, and none of the defenses enumerated in subsection B2 of this section apply.
5. Violation; Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of subsection B1 of this section, shall be fined upon conviction two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for the first violation in any twelve (12) month period; four hundred dollars ($400.00) for a second violation in any 12-month period; and
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a third or subsequent violation in any twelve (12) month period.
C. Social Hosting:
1. Definitions: For the purposes of this subsection C, the terms herein are defined as follows:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and
mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer,and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and which contains onehalf
of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.
CONVEYANCE: Any vehicle, trailer, watercraft or container operated for the transportation of persons or property.
EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of two (2) or more persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
HOST: To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or permit a gathering or event.
ILLICIT DRUG: Any drug, substance or compound prohibited by law, as defined in the Illinois Controlled Substance Act, 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 570/100 et seq., or the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., including drugs prescribed by a physician
which are in the possession of or used by someone other than the person to whom the drug was prescribed.
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile: a) as a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent; b) as a legal guardian; or c) as a
person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, parks, businesses or parking lots.
RELIGIOUS CEREMONY: The possession, consumption and dispensation of alcohol or an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of conducting any
bona fide rite or religious ceremony.
RESIDENCE OR PREMISES: Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or
meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a
dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.
UNDERAGE INDIVIDUAL: Any individual under twenty one (21) years of age.
2. Public Nuisance: It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and unlawful for any person to permit, allow, or host an event or gathering at his or
her place of residence or other private property, public place, any other premises under his or her control, or in any conveyance where illicit drugs,
alcohol or alcoholic beverages are consumed by an underage individual, if such person either knows or reasonably should know that anunderage
individual is consuming any illicit drugs, alcohol or alcoholic beverages. For purposes of this subsection C2:
a. A person who permits, allows or hosts an event or gathering shall be deemed to have known or should have known that an underage individual is
consuming illicit drugs, alcohol or alcoholic beverages if the person is not taking all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of illicit drugs,
alcohol or alcoholic beverages by underage individuals in the person's residence or on the premises;
b. A person who permits, allows, or hosts an event or gathering shall be rebuttably presumed to have known or reasonably should have known that
underage individuals have consumed illicit drugs, alcohol or alcoholic beverages if such person is present at the premises of the event or
gathering at the time any underage individual consumes illicit drugs, alcohol or alcoholic beverages;
c. A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at the event or gathering to be liable under this chapter.
3. Exceptions: A person is not in violation of this subsection C if:
a. The conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages by an underage individual occurs at a religious ceremony or exclusively between an
underage individual and his or her parent or legal guardian, as permitted by Illinois State law; or
b. The person seeks assistance from the Police Department or other law enforcement agency to remove any underage individual who refuses to
abide by the person's performance of the duties imposed by this subsection, or terminates the event or gathering because the person has been
unable to prevent underage individuals from consuming illicit drugs, alcohol or alcoholic beverages despite having taken all reasonable steps to
do so, as long as such request is made before any other person makes a complaint about the event or gathering.
4. Violation; Penalty: Any person who violates subsection C2 of this section shall be fined the maximum amount permitted in section 1-3-1A of this
Code. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996; Ord. G-797, 1-10-2006; Ord. G-1029, 7-22-2014; Ord. G-1127, 3-27-2018)
6-1-18: FIREWORKS:
A. Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, store, use, explode or possess any fireworks as defined in the Fireworks Use Act2, in the Village,
except as may be necessary for the performance of a licensed public exhibition ofpyrotechnics as hereinafter provided. Any such storage must be
under the supervision of and subject to the approval of the Village Chief of Police, Village Fire Chief, and the State Fire Marshal.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 135/438
B. Public Displays: Public exhibitions of fireworks and pyrotechnics may be given if application is made per the rules and regulations for such applications
and a permit is granted by the Fire Chief. Such exhibitions shall be given subject to the supervision of the Village Fire Chief or some person
designated by him.
C. Sparklers: No person may sell or use sparklers on public property. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996; Ord. G-693, 2-26-2002)
Footnote 1: 720 ILCS 5/21-3.
Footnote 2: 425 ILCS 35/1.
Chapter 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms herein are defined as follows:
ANIMAL: Any animal, other than man, which may be affected by rabies.
APPROVED POUND: Any facility for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals or any veterinary
hospital or clinic authorized by the village.
AT LARGE: Being off the premises of the owner and not under control by leash or other physical restraints.
BITE: To be seized with teeth or jaws so that the person or companion animal has been nipped, gripped, wounded or pierced and saliva of the biting
animal has contacted the resulting break or abrasion of the skin.
CAT: Any member of the domestic Felis catus species.
COMPANION ANIMAL: An animal that is commonly considered to be, or is considered by the owner to be, a pet, including, but not limited to, canines,
felines, ferrets, and equines.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot, jaguar, cheetah, margay, mountain lion, lynx, bobcat, jaguarundi, bear, hyena, wolf or coyote, or
any poisonous or life threatening reptile or any other mammal (with the exception of dogs), amphibian, reptile or fowl which is of a species which, due to
size, vicious nature or other characteristics would constitute a danger to human life, physical well being or property.
DANGEROUS DOG: A dog that:
A. Is anywhere other than upon the property of the owner or custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its owner or custodian
that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical injury or death
to a person or a companion animal;
B. Without justification, bites a person and does not cause serious physical injury; or
C. Has been deemed to be a dangerous dog under the animal control act by the appropriate state or county official designated under said act.
DOG: Any member of the domestic canine species.
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and
suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of a vicious dog. Such
enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal from
escaping from the enclosure.
IMPOUNDED: Taken into the custody of a public pound.
LEASH: A cord, rope, strap or chain which shall be securely fastened to the collar or harness of a dog or other animal and shall be of sufficient strength to
keep such animal under control.
OWNER: Any person having a right of property in an animal or who keeps or harbors an animal or who has in his care or acts as its custodian or who
knowingly permits a domestic animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him/her.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity.
RUNNING AT LARGE: An animal that is not restrained by a competent person and is present somewhere other than the owner's property.
SERVICE DOG: Any guide dog, signal dog, or other dog trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including,
without limitation, guiding individuals with impaired vision, alerting individuals with impaired hearing to sounds, and pulling a wheelchair or fetching
dropped items for individuals with mobility impairments.
VICIOUS DOG: A dog that:
A. Without justification attacks a person and causes serious physical injury, or death;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 136/438
B. Has been found to be a dangerous dog upon three (3) separate occasions; or
C. A dog which has been declared or deemed a vicious dog under the Illinois animal control act by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. G-1014, 11-
26-2013)
6-2-2: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to inhumanely or cruelly beat, injure or otherwise abuse any animal.
A. Cruel Treatment: No person or owner may beat, cruelly treat, torment, starve, overwork or otherwise abuse any animal. No owner may abandon any
animal where it may become a public charge or may suffer injury, hunger or exposure.
B. Confinement Of Animals In Motor Vehicles: No owner or person shall confine any animal in a motor vehicle in such a manner that places it in a life or
health threatening situation by exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat or cold, without proper ventilation or other protection from such heat or
cold. In order to protect the health and safety of an animal, a law enforcement officer/community service officer who has probable cause to believe that
this section is being violated shall have authority to enter such motor vehicle by any reasonable means under the circumstances after making a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or person in apparent control of the vehicle.
C. Teasing, Striking Or Tampering With Police Dogs Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously taunt, torment, tease, beat,
strike, or administer or subject any desensitizing drug, chemical or substance to any dog used by a law enforcement officer in the performance of his
functions or duties, or when placed in a kennel off duty, or to interfere or meddle with any such dog used by a law enforcement department or agency
or any handler thereof in the performance of the functions or duties of said department or agency.
D. Injury Or Killing Police Dogs Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously torture, mutilate, injure, disable, poison or kill any
dog used by a law enforcement department or agency in the performance of the functions or duties of such department or when placed in a kennel off
duty. However, a police officer or veterinarian may perform euthanasia in emergency situations when delay would cause the dog undue suffering and
pain. (Ord. G-589, 5-13-1997)
6-2-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful:
A. To permit the animal to enter upon the premises of another within the village without the consent of the owners of the premises;
B. To permit any animal, whether licensed or not, to enter any public body of water, pond, fountain or stream except in any dog park where it is permitted
to do so by the owner, lessee, and/or operator of said dog park;
C. To bring or cause to be brought any animal into any public hall, restaurant, shop, store or retail place of business wherein the public is invited to do
business, or establishment where food or beverages are sold during such hours as the public is so invited or to bring or cause to be brought into any
public building at any time any animal, unless said animal is under a person's control and is brought for the purpose of conducting business wherein
the physical presence of the animal is required;
D. To permit, by action or inaction, any dog to bite any person or companion animal, other than its owner or the owner's immediate family;
E. To permit any animal to damage or destroy any property;
F. To permit any dog to chase, run after or jump at vehicles using the public thoroughfares;
G. To permit any dog to habitually snap, jump upon or otherwise threaten persons lawfully using any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway,
bypath, play area, park or any place where people congregate or walk;
H. To permit any dog that is unmuzzled or unleashed while off the owner's or custodian's property to growl, snarl, snap at or jump upon, or otherwise
threaten persons in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses an unjustified imminent threat of injury to a person or a companion
animal;
I. To permit any dog, cat, or other animal to howl, yelp, whine or meow, bark or make noise in such a manner as to disturb any person or neighborhood, or
to possess any female animal in heat which causes other animals to howl, yelp, whine or meow, bark or make noise in such a manner as to disturb
any person or neighborhood;
J. To allow any place where any animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unsanitary or become offensive to those residing in the vicinity;
K. To fail to report to the chief of police an animal bite to a person or companion animal within twenty four (24) hours of said bite;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 137/438
L. To keep, harbor or maintain any animal which may endanger the safety of persons or property;
M. To permit any dog to run at large in the village at any time except in a designated dog park. Dogs which are on any street, sidewalk, alley or other
public place without being held securely on a leash shall be deemed running at large. Dogs which are running at large shall be taken up and
impounded by the police department;
N. For the owner or custodian of a dog that has been deemed to be a dangerous dog to fail to report to the chief of police within twenty four (24) hours of
any such finding or determination by the state or county official designated under the animal control act, and to fail to file a copy of any such written
finding and order with the chief of police within said twenty four (24) hours;
O. For the owner or custodian of a dog that has been adjudicated and deemed to be a vicious dog to fail to report to the chief of police within twenty four
(24) hours of the entry of a court order making any such determination or declaration, and to fail to file a certified copy of said order with the chief of
police within said twenty four (24) hours irrespective of whether the time to appeal said order has run;
P. To bury any dead animal at any place within the village;
Q. To kill or wound, or attempt to kill or wound, any bird within the village, or enter upon any private enclosure or public grounds belonging to the village
for the purpose of killing or wounding or attempting to kill or wound any bird; and
R. To permit any animal to defecate on any property other than that of the owner or custodian of the animal unless such owner causes the excrement to
be removed immediately and disposed of in a sanitary manner. (Ord. G-1014, 11-26-2013)
6-2-4: RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED:
A. Required: Every owner of a dog four (4) months or more of age within the corporate limits of the village shall cause such dog or cat to be inoculated
against rabies by a licensed veterinarian at such intervals as may hereafter be established by regulations pursuant to the animal control act, 510
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 and following. The owner of any such inoculated dog or cat shall cause a rabies inoculation tag to be affixed to the collar
or harness of such dog or cat.
B. Time: Any dog or cat acquired by a resident of the village shall be vaccinated for rabies by a licensed veterinarian within thirty (30) days after such
acquisition, except as provided in subsection A of this section.
C. Intervals: The owner or keeper of any dog or cat within the village which is subject to vaccination in accordance with the provisions of this section shall
have such dog or cat vaccinated against rabies at such intervals and with such vaccine as may be determined by a licensed veterinarian to be
effective in order to maintain protection against rabies. (Ord. G-1014, 11-26-2013)
6-2-5: SUSPICION OF RABIES:
Any animal exhibiting signs of rabies or coming into contact with animals exhibiting signs of rabies shall be taken up by the police department or other
village personnel and placed and impounded in an approved pound. (Ord. G-1014, 11-26-2013)
6-2-6: IMPOUNDING ANIMALS:
A. Impoundment Procedures:
1. The village shall keep a record of the breed, color and sex of the animal and name and address of the owners, if known, and subsequent disposition
of the animal coming into its custody.
2. If the owner of the animal is known, the village shall notify the owner of the impoundment and the procedure whereby the animal may be redeemed.
The village shall also inform the pound wherein the animal is impounded of the date that such notification has been given to the animal's owner.
3. If the identity of the owner becomes known while the animal is impounded, the village shall at the time give the notification in accordance with
subsection A2 of this section.
B. Redemption: In the event that the owner of any impounded animal desires to make redemption thereof, the owner shall do so on the following
conditions:
1. The owner must present proof of valid rabies inoculation.
2. The owner shall pay to the village a ten dollar ($10.00) impounding fee, which shall be in addition to any fine or other penalty provided under this
subsection and in addition to any costs of the pound.
3. The owner shall pay to the pound any daily kennel costs and the cost of any veterinary services provided.
C. Disposal Of Unredeemed Animals: When an animal is not redeemed by the owner as provided in subsection B of this section, the animal shall become
the property of the pound to be disposed of in a humane manner or made available for adoption according to procedures established by said pound
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 138/438
provided:
1. In any case where the identity of the owner is known or becomes known, the animal may not be disposed of unless the animal is unredeemed by
the owner within seven (7) days after notice of impoundment is given.
2. In any case where the identity of the owner is not known, the animal may be disposed of only if the owner fails to redeem it within five (5) days of
the date of impoundment.
D. Impounding Provisions Not To Stop Prosecution Of Owners: Nothing contained in this chapter shall operate as an estoppel of the prosecution of the
owner of an animal found running at large for the violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. G-1014, 11-26-2013)
6-2-7: DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
A. Prohibition: No person shall have a right of property in, keep, harbor, care for, act as custodian of or maintain in his possession any dangerous animal
except at a properly maintained zoological park, federally licensed exhibit, circus, scientific or educational institution, research laboratory, veterinary
hospital or animal refuge in an escapeproof enclosure.
B. Domestication No Defense; Seizure And Confiscation: It is no defense to a violation of subsection A of this section that the person violating such
subsection has attempted to domesticate the dangerous animal. If there appears to be imminent danger to the public, any dangerous animal found not
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter may be subject to seizure and may immediately be placed in an approved facility. Upon the conviction
of a person for a violation of subsection A of this section, the animal with regard to which the conviction was obtained, may be seized and placed in an
approved facility. The owner shall be responsible for all costs connected with the seizure and confiscation of such animal. Approved facilities include,
but are not limited to, a zoological park, Federally licensed exhibit, the DuPage County Animal Control Facility, Humane Society, veterinary hospital or
animal refuge. (Ord. G-1014, 11-26-2013)
6-2-8: VICIOUS DOGS:
A. Keeping Or Maintaining: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any vicious dog, unless such dog is at all times kept in an enclosure
sufficient to restrain the animal from leaving the enclosure. The only times that a vicious dog may be allowed out of the enclosure are: 1) if it is
necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary care for the vicious dog; or 2) to comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction,
provided that said vicious dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a tensile strength of three hundred (300) pounds and not
exceeding three feet (3') in length, and shall be under the direct control and supervision of the owner or keeper of the vicious dog.
B. Sell Or Give Away: No owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall sell or give away any vicious dog. (Ord. G-1014, 11-26-2013)
6-2-9: EXCEPTIONS TO CHAPTER:
A. Service dogs, and sentry and guard dogs are exempt from this chapter, provided that any attack or injury to a person or companion animal occurs while
the dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this section each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies.
B. All police owned dogs are exempt from this chapter. (Ord. G-1014, 11-26-2013)
6-2-10: PENALTIES:
Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties contained within subsection 1-3-1A of this Code. (Ord.
G-1127, 3-27-2018)
6-2-11: PROSECUTION OF OWNERS:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall operate as an estoppel of the prosecution of the owner of an animal for the violation of any provision of this
chapter. (Ord. G-1014, 11-26-2013)
Chapter 3
AUTOMATIC BURGLAR ALARMS
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section.
ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER: Any person who sells, leases or installs automatic alarm systems which transmit alarms upon receipt of a stimulus
from a detection apparatus.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity requiring
urgent attention and to which the Police Department is expected to respond.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 139/438
ALARM USER: The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind in control of any building, structure or facility
or portion thereof wherein an alarm system is maintained.
AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING ALARM SYSTEM: Any alarm system which upon being activated automatically transmits by telephone or telephone
line to the Oak Brook Police Department a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for emergency response.
CENTRAL STATION ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system in which the operation of electrical protection circuits and devices are signaled automatically to,
recorded in, and maintained and supervised from a central station other than the Village of Oak Brook.
DIRECT CONNECT: An alarm system which has the capability of transmitting system signals to and receiving them at the Village communications center.
FALSE ALARM: A visual and/or audible signal transmitted by an alarm system which indicates the existence of an emergency situation, when in fact, no
such emergency exists, and shall include any activation of an alarm system by whatever means, but shall not include alarms resulting from any of the
following causes:
A. Criminal activity;
B. Earthquake causing structural damage to the protected premises;
C. Winds causing structural damage to the protected premises;
D. Flooding of the protected premises due to overflow of natural drainage;
E. Lightning causing physical damage to the protected premises;
F. Fire causing structural damage to the protected premises verified by the Fire Department;
G. Telephone line malfunction verified in writing by an authorized telephone company supervisor within seven (7) days of the occurrence; or
H. Electrical service interruption verified in writing by the local power company manager within seven (7) days of the occurrence.
If the alarm, when communicated to the village before an officer is dispatched to investigate, is clearly identified to the village as resulting from authorized
entry, authorized system test, or other noncriminal cause through use of a preassigned code number, it shall not be considered a false alarm. If police
units, responding to an alarm and checking the protected premises, according to standard department operating procedures, do not discover any
evidence of unauthorized entry or criminal activity, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the alarm is false. Entries in the police department "daily
log" shall be prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein with regard to alarms and responses. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
6-3-2: PERMITS REQUIRED:
A. No person shall install, operate or maintain any automatic telephone dialing or direct connect alarm system without first obtaining a permit as required
by this section.
B. Applications for permits to install, maintain and operate automatic telephone dialing and direct connect alarms shall be filed with the chief of the police
department on forms supplied by the village and shall be accompanied by an application fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). The application shall state
the name, address and telephone number of the applicant's property to be serviced by alarm, the name, address and telephone number of the installer
as well as a description of the system and the location wherein it is proposed to be installed.
C. The village manager shall approve such application if he finds that:
1. The use of the alarm service in question will not interfere with the orderly conduct of village business; and
2. The alarm equipment supplier installing the system maintains a service organization capable of properly and effectively repairing, maintaining and
otherwise servicing the alarm system sold or leased by him.
Notwithstanding the above, the village manager may impose reasonable conditions on the issuance and exercise of permits relating to the ability of
the police department to respond to such alarms based upon the location of the alarm system and access thereto. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
6-3-3: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
The village manager may revoke or suspend any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and may cause an alarm user, whose permit is
revoked or suspended, to be disconnected from the authorized alarm panel located in the village's communications center, after giving written notice to
the permit holder and an opportunity for the permit holder to be heard, upon a determination that the alarm system covered by the permit has been
installed, maintained or operated in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any term or condition of the permit, or for failure to pay any
applicable service fee or charge. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
6-3-4: INSPECTIONS:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 140/438
The police department shall have the right to inspect any alarm system installed pursuant to this chapter both prior to and subsequent to the issuance of a
permit therefor, at any reasonable time to determine whether a permit should be issued, or, if issued, whether the alarm system is being used in
conformity with the terms of the permit and the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
6-3-5: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING ALARM SYSTEMS:
No person shall install, maintain or operate any automatic telephone dialing alarm system except to such telephone numbers as are designated by the
permit issued therefor. Each holder of a permit for an automatic telephone dialing alarm system shall pay to the village, on or before July 1 of each year, a
service fee in the amount of fifteen dollars ($15.00) to reimburse the village for the cost of providing special telephone lines to receive calls from such
alarm systems and other expenses of operations relating thereto. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
6-3-6: SERVICE CHARGES:
A. False Alarm Service Charge: An alarm user shall be charged a service charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each false alarm in excess of one in any three
(3) month period transmitted by any alarm system. Such service charge shall be remitted to the village by the alarm user upon receipt of the statement
for such service charge. This service charge shall be in addition to any other fee or fine which may be imposed for violation of this chapter.
B. Security Service Monitoring Charge: Each person subscribing to a security service which is monitored by the village shall pay a monthly charge
effective October 1, 2009, of twenty dollars ($20.00) to the village, with a three percent (3%) yearly escalation increase starting January 1, 2011. Said
charge may be paid to the agency supplying the monitoring board, provided that said agency promptly remits the monthly fee to the village. (Ord. G-
577, 10-22-1996; Ord. G-898, 9-8-2009)
6-3-7: LIABILITY OF VILLAGE LIMITED:
The village assumes no liability for:
A. Any defects in the operation of an alarm system.
B. Failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm.
C. Failure or neglect of any person in connection with the installation, operation or maintenance of an alarm system.
D. The transmission of alarm signals, prerecorded alarm messages or the relaying of such signals and messages. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
Chapter 4
ABANDONED VEHICLES
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section.
ABANDONED VEHICLE: All vehicles in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition or any vehicle which has not
been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY: Any real property within the Village which is not a street or highway.
VEHICLE: A machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and
transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon. (Ord.
G-577, 10-22-1996)
6-4-2: STORAGE OF UNLICENSED VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful to leave or possess on any open premises in the Village any trailer, semi-trailer, truck, automobile or major parts thereof, which
vehicle, or parts thereof, is not currently licensed by the State of Illinois or other state. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
6-4-3: DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES:
No person in charge or control of any property within the Village whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any abandoned
vehicle to remain on such property longer than seven (7) days. Provided, however, that this Section shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed
building, a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business
enterprise, or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by theVillage. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 141/438
6-4-4: IMPOUNDING:
The Chief of Police or any member of his Department designated by him is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place
within the Village which reasonably appears to be in violation of this Chapter or lost, stolen or unclaimed. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully
claimed or disposed of in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-201 and 5/4-214. (Ord. G-577, 10-22-1996)
Chapter 5
IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
6-5-1: VIOLATIONS AUTHORIZING IMPOUNDMENT:
A motor vehicle, operated with the permission, express or implied, of the owner of record, which is used in connection with the following violations, may
be subject to seizure and impoundment by the village if the violation prevents the driver from lawfully operating the vehicle, or if a police officer authorized
to make arrests in the village determines that impoundment of the vehicle is reasonably necessary as a community caretaking function so that the vehicle
does not jeopardize public safety and the efficient movement of vehicular traffic. The owner of record of said vehicle shall be liable to the village for an
administrative penalty in addition to any towing and storage fees as hereinafter provided. (Ord. G-875, 11-25-2008)
6-5-2: OFFENSES:
A. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission or attempted commission of any offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and forfeited
pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36-1 et seq., shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
B. Driving under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compounds, in violation of section 7-1-100 of this code, or 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-501, shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
C. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with the commission or attempted commission of any felony offense in violation of the provisions of
the Illinois cannabis control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1, shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
D. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with the commission or attempted commission of any offenses in violation of the Illinois controlled
substance act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100, shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
E. Driving while driver's license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-303, shall
subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00); except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or impoundment if
the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving), or due to failure to comply with emissions testing.
F. Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance as defined by the
Illinois cannabis control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/2, or the Illinois controlled substance act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et
seq., shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
G. Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois vehicle code,
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit due to a person's age,
shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
H. Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant has been issued by a circuit court in Illinois for failing to answer charges that
the driver violated the offenses of: driving while license is revoked or suspended, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-303, operating a motor vehicle
without a valid driver's license, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101 and/or driving under the influence of alcohol, other drugs, intoxicating
compound(s), or any combination thereof, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501, shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
I. Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license, if the period of expiration is greater than one year, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/6-101, shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
J. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, a theft, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16, or retail theft, 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16, shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
K. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor or felony offense in violation of 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/, when so provided by local ordinance, shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. G-965, 2-28-2012)
6-5-3: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. This chapter shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing state or federal laws or village ordinances pertaining to vehicle seizure, towing and
impoundment, and the owner shall be subject to the penalties provided in this chapter in addition to any penalties that may be assessed by a court for
any criminal charges.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 142/438
B. This chapter shall not apply if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities
within twenty four (24) hours after the theft was discovered.
C. Fees for towing and storage of a vehicle under this chapter shall be those approved by the chief of police for all tow companies authorized to tow for
the police department. (Ord. G-875, 11-25-2008)
6-5-4: NOTICE:
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to towing and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the police officer
shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility authorized by the chief of police. Before or at a time the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify
the owner of the impoundment, and of the owner's right to request a preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing to be conducted pursuant to section 6-5-5
of this chapter. The vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of the hearing provided for in section 6-5-5 of this chapter, unless the owner of the
vehicle posts with the village a cash bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and pays the accrued towing and storage charges.
Before the time a vehicle is towed, if in the judgment of the police officer then present, a person authorized by the owner or operator of the vehicle is
present and able to provide for the lawful immediate removal of the vehicle, the vehicle will be released to that person and if prompt removal of the vehicle
is effected, no administrative penalty shall be imposed. (Ord. G-875, 11-25-2008)
6-5-5: PRELIMINARY HEARING:
If the owner of record of a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter desires to appeal the impoundment, said owner must make a request for hearing
within twenty four (24) hours of the impoundment, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and village holidays. Said request shall be in writing and filed with the
chief of police, or his designee, who shall conduct such preliminary hearing within forty eight (48) hours after receipt of the request, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and village holidays. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing.
The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by
reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. If, after the hearing, the chief of police or his designee determines there is probable cause to
believe that the vehicle is subject to impoundment pursuant to this chapter, he shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle as provided in this
chapter unless the owner of the vehicle posts with the village a cash bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and pays the tower any
applicable towing and storage fees. If the chief of police or his designee determines that there is no such probable cause, the vehicle will be returned
without penalty or other fees. (Ord. G-875, 11-25-2008)
6-5-6: HEARING:
Within ten (10) days after a vehicle is impounded pursuant to this chapter, the village shall notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, the owner of
record of the date, time and location of a plea hearing that will be conducted, pursuant to this chapter. The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer,
designated by the village manager. The owner will appear at a plea hearing and enter a plea of guilty or not guilty. If a plea of guilty is entered, the cause
will be disposed of at that time. If the owner pleads not guilty, a hearing shall be scheduled and held, unless continued by the hearing officer, no later than
ninety (90) days after the vehicle was impounded. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. At any time
prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. The formal
rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent
persons in the conduct of their affairs.
If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the vehicle was used in connection with a violation set forth
in this chapter, the hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record of the vehicle civilly liable to the village for an administrative fee in the
amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and requiring the vehicle to continue to be impounded until the owner pays the administrative fee to the village
plus fees to the tower for the towing and storage of the vehicle. If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer shall enter a default
order in favor of the village. If the hearing officer finds no such violation occurred, the hearing officer shall order the immediate return of the owner's
vehicle or cash bond without fees. (Ord. G-875, 11-25-2008; Ord. G-920, 3-9-2010)
6-5-7: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
If an administrative fee is imposed pursuant to this chapter, such fee shall constitute a debt due and owing the village. If a cash bond has been posted
pursuant to this chapter the bond shall be applied to the fee. If a vehicle has been impounded when such a fee is imposed, the village may seek to obtain
a judgment on the debt and enforce such judgment against the vehicle's owner as provided by law. Except as provided otherwise in this section, a vehicle
shall continue to be impounded until the fee is paid to the village and any applicable towing fees and storage fees are paid to the tower, in which case
possession of the vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle or the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to
satisfy a judgment to enforce a lien as provided by law. If the administrative fee and other applicable fees are not paid within thirty (30) days after an
administrative fee is imposed against an owner of record who defaults by failing to appear at the hearing, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and
shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles. In all other cases, if the administrative fee and applicable fee
are not paid within thirty (30) days after the expiration of time at which administrative review of the hearing officer's determination may be sought, or within
thirty (30) days after an action seeking administrative review has been resolved in favor of the village, whichever is applicable, the vehicle shall be
deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles under the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord.
G-875, 11-25-2008)
6-5-8: VEHICLE POSSESSION:
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lienholder or other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a vehicle
impounded under this section until the administrative fee and fees applicable under this chapter have been paid. However, whenever a person with a
lien of record against an impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be given to that person if he or
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 143/438
she agrees in writing to refund the village the amount of the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts required to pay all lienholders of
record, not to exceed the administrative fee, plus the applicable fees.
B. For purposes of this chapter, the "owner of record" of a vehicle is the record titleholder as registered with the secretary of state of the state of Illinois.
(Ord. G-875, 11-25-2008)
6-5-9: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
Any owner, lienholder or other person with a legal interest in the vehicle, who is not satisfied with the decision of the hearing officer, shall have the right to
appeal the decision to circuit court, pursuant to the administrative review act, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. (Ord. G-875, 11-25-2008)
Title 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
TRAFFIC CODE
7-1-100: ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF THE ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE BY REFERENCE:
A. The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference to be applied within the
corporate limits of the Village of Oak Brook to the extent permitted by law.
B. All references in applicable sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code to "this Code" shall be to the applicable section of the Illinois Vehicle Code. References
to a State employee or official may be to a corresponding Village employee or official where such reference is applicable or necessary. Any provisions
of the Illinois Vehicle Code adopted herein may be cited by placing "7-1-100" before the appropriate Illinois Vehicle Code section, i.e., ordinance
speeding is cited as 7-1-100-5/11-601, Village of Oak Brook Municipal Code.
C. The burden of proof for any offense classified as a "petty" offense or "business" offense of the Illinois Vehicle Code adopted herein shall be by a
preponderance of the evidence. Offenses classified therein as "misdemeanor" offenses shall be proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
D. Any provision of this chapter that is inconsistent with the Illinois Vehicle Code as adopted by reference herein, shall control and that inconsistent part of
the Illinois Vehicle Code hereby adopted by reference is amended to make it consistent with the terms of this chapter. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999; Ord. G-
745, 3-23-2004; Ord. G-752, 7-27-2004; Ord. G-801, 2-13-2006)
7-1-101: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this title shall, for the purpose of this title, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section,
except when the context otherwise requires and except where another definition set forth in another chapter of this title and applicable to that chapter or a
designated part thereof is applicable:
BICYCLE PATH OR BIKEWAY: That portion of a trail or path improved and so designated as a bicycle trail exclusively used by bicycles and pedestrian
traffic.
PUBLIC BUILDING: A building used by any municipality, any county, any park district, school district, the state of Illinois, or the United States government.
RESIDENT: Every natural person who resides in the village of Oak Brook shall be deemed a resident of the village.
VILLAGE: The village of Oak Brook. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
7-1-201: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this title relating to the operation of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon highways except:
A. Where a different place is specifically referred to in a given section.
B. The provisions of sections 7-1-913 and 7-1-1004 of this chapter shall apply upon highways and elsewhere throughout the village. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-
1999)
7-1-202: REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC LAWS:
It is unlawful and, unless otherwise declared in this title with respect to particular offenses, it is an offense against the village for any person to do any act
forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this title. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 144/438
7-1-303.1: SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS:
The owners of private property within a nonresidential district containing one or more private roads or driveways from which vehicles may enter onto a
public highway or street shall post a stop sign pursuant to the village manual and specifications at such place as is designated on such private road or
driveway by the chief of police or his agent. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
7-1-319: TRAFFIC CONTROL INTERSECTIONS:
The intersections hereinafter described in section 7-2-1, schedule XVI of this title, shall be designated as intersections controlled by traffic control signal
lights and said schedule XVI of this title by this reference is made a part hereof. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
7-1-401: ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES; COMPLIANCE WARNING TICKETS:
A. Any person, pursuant to the issuance of a compliance warning ticket, who is accused of a violation of certain sections of this title as hereinafter
described may settle and compromise that ticket by making a payment to the village in the amount of seventy five dollars ($75.00) no later than thirty
(30) days from the date that such alleged violation was committed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any fee paid pursuant to this section shall be
reduced to fifty dollars ($50.00) if the payment is made within ten (10) days from the date that the compliance warning ticket is issued. This section
shall not apply to any offense for which a court appearance is required pursuant to article 551 of the Illinois supreme court rules, that is classified as a
violation governing the movement of vehicles, is a reportable offense under section 6-204 of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/6-204, or is a violation of section 7-1-1301.1, "Parking Spaces For Persons With Disabilities", of this chapter.
B. The issuance of compliance warning citations shall be at the discretion of the issuing police officer in lieu of instituting a prosecution in court for the
alleged offense. If the person accused of the violation does not settle the claim, a notice to appear, as proscribed in title 1, chapter 15, "Code Hearing
Department", of this code, will be issued for the violation and that person shall be subject to the general penalties set forth by the applicable
ordinances of Oak Brook.
C. The following violations of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq., as adopted by reference herein, shall be subject to the
alternative penalty compliance procedures described in this section:
Section Of
The Illinois
Vehicle Code Violation1
3-404 No bill of lading or manifest/dispatch record
3-411(a) Failure to carry registration card or reciprocity permit - second division vehicle
3-413(a), (b) Improper display of license plates
3-413(f) Operation of vehicle with expired registration plate or sticker
3-417(a) Failure to immediately apply for replacement registration card, plate or sticker
3-701(1) No valid registration - no valid plate or sticker obtained
3-701(2) No valid registration - reciprocity, prorate or apportionment
5-201(h) No in-transit plates
5-202(e) Failure to display the requisite tow-truck plates
11-1406 Obstruction to driver's view or control
11-1407 Improper opening of door into traffic
11-1410 Coasting on downgrade
11-1411 Following fire apparatus
11-1419.01 Failure to display Illinois motor fuel tax identification card
11-1419.02 Failure to display external Illinois motor fuel tax identification device
11-1507(a) Operation of bicycle without lamp and reflector
11-1507.1 Operation of motorized pedacycle without lamp and reflector
12-101(a) Operation of vehicle with unsafe equipment
12-201(a) Operation of motorcycle without lighted headlamp
12-201(b) Driving vehicles without two lighted headlamps and tail lamps when required
12-201(c) No white rear registration light
12-202(a), (b) Insufficient clearance, identification or side marker lamps and reflectors - second division vehicle
12-203(a) Failure to use parking lights while vehicle is standing on highway
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 145/438
12-204 Improper lamp or flag on projecting load
12-205 Improper use of lamps on towing and towed vehicles
12-207(a) Improper use of more than one spot lamp
12-207(b) Improper use of more than three auxiliary driving lamps
12-208(a) No stop signal lamp or device
12-209(c) Defective backup lights
12-210(a) Failure to dim headlights/auxiliary driving lamps within 500 feet on approach of vehicle
12-210(b) Failure to dim headlights/auxiliary driving lamps within 300 feet of vehicle in same direction
12-211(a) Improper lighting on vehicles other than motorcycles - only one headlamp
12-211(b) Improper use of more than four lighted headlights/auxiliary driving lamps
12-212(a) Improper use of red light visible from front of vehicle
12-212(b) Unlawful use of flashing lights
12-215 Unlawful use of oscillating, rotating or flashing lights
12-301 Use of defective brakes
12-401 Unlawful use of metal studded tire or other prohibited tire restrictions
12-405(d) Use of unsafe tire
12-501(a) Operation of vehicle without windshield
12-502 Operation of vehicle without rear reflecting mirror
12-503(a) Obstructed view of windshield
12-503(a-5), (b) Unlawful application of tinted film to window(s) immediately adjacent to driver
12-503(c) Obstructed view of any window by stationary or suspended object(s)
12-503(d) Operation of vehicle without windshield cleaning device; operation of vehicle with view obstructed by snow, ice or
moisture
12-503(e) Obstructed view due to defective condition or repair of any window
12-601(a) Operation of vehicle with defective horn
12-601(b) Unlawful possession or use of siren
12-602 Operation of vehicle with defective or modified exhaust system
12-603(b) Operation of vehicle without two front seat safety belts - vehicles of 1965 or later model years
12-603.1 Failure to use seat safety belt
12-604.1(a) Operation of vehicle with television receiver visible to driver
12-606 Operation of tow truck without:
12-606(a) Identifying sign attached on each side
12-606(b) Required equipment - one broom, shovel, trash can and fire extinguisher
12-606(c) Removing roadway debris and spreading dirt or sand on oil/grease deposits
12-606(d) Insurance policy in cab
12-607(a) Operation of vehicle with unlawfully altered vehicle suspension system - body lifted in excess of three inches from
chassis
12-607.1(a) Operation of first division vehicle with frame in excess of 22 inches above ground
12-607.1(b) Operation of second division vehicle with frame in excess of specified limits above ground
12-608(a) Operation of vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 9000 pounds or less or a recreational vehicle without
two bumpers
12-608(a) Operation of vehicle with unlawful bumper height
12-610(a) Operation of vehicle while wearing headset receiver
12-702(a) Operation of second division vehicle without carrying flares/warning devices
12-702(c), (d), (e), (f),
(g)
Failure to use flares/warning devices when secondary division vehicle is disabled
12-703 Vehicles for oiling roads operated on highways
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 146/438
12-710 Improper or no rear fender splash guards
12-711 Operation of garbage truck, roll-off hoist or roll-on container without audible backing warning system
12-806 Failure to cover school bus sign
12-808 Operating school bus without fire extinguisher
12-809 Operating school bus without first aid kit
15-101 Improper size, weight and/or load
15-102 Improper width
15-103 Improper height
15-105 Load projecting in any excess beyond left fenders or six inches beyond right fenders of first division vehicle
15-106 Failure to fasten loose projecting member
15-107 Improper length of vehicle
15-108 Failure to plank edge of pavement for any vehicle in excess of 8000 pounds
15-109(a) Spilling load on highway
15-109(b) Operating loaded vehicle without securely fastened covering
15-109.1 Operating second division vehicle with load falling, blowing or dropping to highway
15-111 Exceeding wheel and axle loads and gross weights
15-112 Failure to submit to vehicle and load weighing
15-301 Failure to have permits for excess size and weight
15-316 Use of vehicle on highway restricted by village ordinance
18C-4701(1) Operating without trade name, license and registration number of carrier painted or affixed to both doors of power unit
Note:
1. The descriptions of the violations listed are for ease of reference only, and each respective violation is fully set forth in the corresponding provision of
the Illinois vehicle code.
(Ord. G-963, 2-14-2012; Ord. G-979, 9-11-2012)
7-1-913: PROHIBITED TURNS:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn left or right at any place where such turns are prohibited by ordinance as listed in section 7-2-1,
schedule IX of this title. Such prohibition shall be indicated by appropriate signs. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
7-1-1004: PEDESTRIANS WITH DISABILITIES:
Any blind person who is carrying in a raised or extended position a cane or walking stick, which is white in color or white tipped with red, or who is being
guided by a dog, shall have the right of way in crossing any street or highway, whether or not traffic on such street or highway is controlled by traffic
signals, anything in this title to the contrary notwithstanding. The driver of every vehicle approaching the place where a blind person, so carrying such a
cane or walking stick or being so guided, is crossing a street or highway shall bring his vehicle to a full stop and before proceeding shall take such
precautions as may be necessary to avoid injury to the blind person. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a blind person who is not so carrying
such a cane or walking stick or who is not guided by a dog, but the other provisions of this title relating to pedestrians shall then be applicable to such
person. However, the failure of a blind person to so use or carry such a cane or walking stick or to be guided by a guide dog when walking on streets,
highways or sidewalks shall not be considered evidence of contributory negligence. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
7-1-1301: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING:
A. Upon any highway or street, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the roadway when it is
practicable to stop, park or so leave such vehicle off such part of the roadway, but in every event an unobstructed width of roadway opposite a
standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of two
hundred feet (200') in each direction upon such highway.
B. The village, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction or for the maintenance of which it is responsible, may place signs prohibiting or restricting
the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on any highway where, in its opinion, such stopping, standing or parking is dangerous to those using the
highway or while the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic thereon. Any such regulations
adopted by the village regarding the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles upon any specified street, streets or highways become effective at the
time of the erection of appropriate signs indicating such regulations.
C. This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the roadway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible
to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 147/438
7-1-1301.1: PARKING SPACES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
The following restrictions shall apply to the unauthorized use of parking places reserved for persons with disabilities:
A. It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle that is not properly displaying registration plates, a decal or other device issued to a person with
disabilities or a disabled veteran by the secretary of state, in a parking place or adjacent aisle, including any public or private off street parking facility,
that is specifically reserved, by the posting of an official sign, for persons with disabilities and motor vehicles displaying such registration plates, a
decal or other device.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person with a vehicle to display or use registration plates, a decal or other device issued to a person with disabilities or a
disabled veteran by the secretary of state, if: 1) the person using such registration plates, a decal or other device is not the authorized holder thereof
or is not transporting the authorized holder to or from the parking location; and 2) the person is using the registration plates, a decal or other device to
exercise any privileges granted through such registration plates, a decal or other device under this section.
C. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of subsection A of this section shall be fined no less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Any
person found guilty of violating the provisions of subsection B of this section shall be fined no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
D. It shall not be a defense to a charge that a person has violated the provisions of this section, that either the sign posted or the intended handicapped
accessible parking place does not comply with the technical requirements of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-301, state regulations, or local
ordinance, if a reasonable person would be aware, by a sign or other notice, on or near the parking place, that the place is reserved for a person with
disabilities. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999; Ord. G-825, 1-9-2007)
7-1-1308: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING PLACES RESERVED FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLES:
It shall be prohibited to park a non-electric vehicle in an electric vehicle charging station designated for use by electric vehicles, including an electric
vehicle charging station on any private or public off street parking facility. A person may park only an electric vehicle in an electric vehicle charging station
space designated for use by electric vehicles. (Ord. G-1140, 12-11-2018)
7-1-1312: TIME LIMIT PARKING:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a period of time in excess of the amount of time designated and so posted. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
7-1-1313: LOADING ZONES:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of
passengers in any place as a loading zone and marked as such, or in any of the following designated places:
A. At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb before the entrance to any motel or hotel at any time.
B. At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb line before the entrance to a public building between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) P.M., except on a Sunday.
C. Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time that the theater is open. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
7-1-1314: ALL NIGHT PARKING:
In order to facilitate police protection, street cleaning, leaf and snow removal, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park said vehicle, or for
the owner of said vehicle to permit said vehicle to be parked, on any street in the village, between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. of any day, except for emergency vehicles. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
7-1-1315: CAB STANDS AND BUS ZONES:
No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a cab stand; and no vehicle other than a bus shall be
parked in a place so designated as a bus loading zone. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
7-1-1316: PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property without the consent of the owner of the property. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
7-1-1317: VEHICLES FOR SALE:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 148/438
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any street from which
merchandise is peddled or sold. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
7-1-1318: PARKING ON MUNICIPALLY OWNED OR LEASED PROPERTY:
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle upon Municipally owned or leased property in violation of any specific restrictions or regulations set forth on
a sign installed by the Village on that property. (Ord. G-956, 12-13-2011)
7-1-1319: NO ATHLETIC EVENT PARKING:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle along any street or on any other Municipally owned or leased property within the corporate limits of the Village of
Oak Brook for the purpose of attending any athletic event where signs prohibiting same are so posted. (Ord. G-956, 12-13-2011)
7-1-1320: PARKING FINES:
A. The Police Department is authorized to place violation notices on every vehicle parked in violation of this title and to cause summonses or warrants to
be issued to commence prosecution against violators, except that the Police Department need not cause such proceedings to commence against any
person for any violation of the provisions of this title if such person renders payment to the Village in accordance with subsections B and C of this
section. If said payments are not made within thirty (30) days from the date that notice of the alleged violation is issued and in the amounts as
prescribed in subsections B and C of this section, the Police Department is authorized to issue appropriate summonses, warrants or notices to appear
so as to commence proceedings either before the Oak Brook Code Hearing Department if authorized by section 1-15-4 of this Code, or in the Circuit
Court for the 18th Judicial Circuit, DuPage County, Illinois, and proceed with the matter in the same manner as other violations of this title pursuant to
the penalty provisions set forth in the applicable section, or where no penalty is specifically set forth, pursuant to the general penalty provisions of
section 1-3-1 of this Code.
B. Any person may settle and compromise a violation notice issued pursuant to subsection A of this section by paying to the Village a fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) no later than thirty (30) days from the date that the violation notice was issued. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any payment made pursuant to
this subsection shall be reduced to twenty five dollars ($25.00) if the fee is paid no later than ten (10) days from the date that the violation notice was
issued. This subsection shall not apply to any violation notice issued for violating sections 7-1-1301.1 and 7-1-1308 of this chapter.
C. Any person may settle and compromise a violation notice issued pursuant to section 7-1-1301.1 of this chapter by paying to the Village a fee of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) no later than thirty (30) days from the date that the violation notice was issued.
D. Any person may settle and compromise a violation notice issued pursuant to section 7-1-1308 of this chapter by paying to the Village a fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) no later than thirty (30) days from the date that the violation notice was issued. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any payment
made pursuant to this subsection shall be reduced to seventy five dollars ($75.00) if the fee is paid no later than ten (10) days from the date that the
violation notice was issued. (Ord. G-979, 9-11-2012; Ord. G-1140, 12-11-2018)
7-1-1429: U-TURNS:
(Rep. by Ord. G-1127, 3-27-2018)
7-1-1430: FRIGHTENING HORSES:
No person in a motor vehicle or operating a motor vehicle shall frighten or cause to frighten any horse, and at a signal from a person in charge of the
frightened horse, the driver of the motor vehicle shall bring his motor vehicle to a stop in a safe position and maintain said position until said horse has
passed. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
7-1-1431: RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS:
All motorized vehicles are prohibited on any posted bicycle path. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
7-2-206: BICYCLE EQUIPMENT:
A. Every bicycle, when in use during the period when lighted lamps are required under section 12-201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code1, shall be equipped with
the following: on the front with a lamp which shall be emitting a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet (500') to the front and
with a clear reflex reflector on the front visible to the front conforming to specifications prescribed by the State Department of Transportation, and on
the rear and visible to the rear with a red reflex reflector conforming to specifications prescribed by such department. A lamp emitting a red light visible
to the rear may also be used. No person shall sell a new bicycle that is not equipped with a red reflex reflector on the rear conforming to specifications
prescribed by the department and that is not equipped with a clear reflex reflector conforming to specifications prescribed by the department on the
front of the bicycle.
B. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 149/438
C. The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any provisions of this
section.
D. No person shall sell a new bicycle or pedal for use on a bicycle that is not equipped with a reflex reflector conforming to specifications prescribed by
the state department of transportation, on each pedal, visible from the front and rear of the bicycle during darkness from a distance of two hundred feet
(200').
E. No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not equipped with side reflectors. Such reflectors shall be visible from each side of the bicycle
from a distance of five hundred feet (500') and shall be red to the rear of the center of the bicycle and amber to the front of the center of the bicycle.
Such reflectors shall also conform to specifications prescribed by the department. No persons shall sell or offer for sale bicycle side reflectors that do
not conform to specifications prescribed by the department. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
7-3-101: TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to operate a truck upon any street where truck operation is prohibited by ordinance and where such signs of prohibition are posted,
except that a truck may be driven on such street for not more than the minimum distance necessary for the purpose of making deliveries or picking up
loads. Schedule XIII of this title, by this reference made a part hereof, lists all streets on which truck traffic is prohibited. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
7-3-102: BUSES PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any bus on Canterberry Lane other than a bus designated and licensed to carry sixteen (16) or fewer passengers. (Ord. G-
844, 10-23-2007)
7-3-103: MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLES:
A. These regulations applicable to motor driven cycles shall apply whenever a motor driven cycle is upon any street or highway.
B. No person shall exercise any degree of physical control of a motor driven cycle on any street or highway within the corporate limits of this village,
unless such person has a valid driver's license issued under the provisions of the state of Illinois driver's license act.
C. It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor driven cycle upon private property without the written consent of the owner or lessee thereof.
D. The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this section. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
7-4-101: PENALTIES AND RELATED PROVISIONS:
A. Any person violating any provision of this title shall be fined in accordance with section 1-3-1 of this code unless otherwise provided herein below.
B. A violation of any provision of this chapter unless otherwise specified or a violation of any offenses classified as "petty" offenses under the aforesaid
provisions of the Illinois vehicle code shall be punishable by a fine of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense.
C. Offenses classified as "misdemeanors" under the provisions of the Illinois vehicle code adopted by reference pursuant to this chapter shall be subject
to a fine and/or imprisonment for a determinate term according to the following limitations:
1. For a class A misdemeanor, imprisonment for any term less than one year and/or fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not to
exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), except as provided in subsection D of this section.
2. For a class B misdemeanor, imprisonment for not more than six (6) months and/or fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not to
exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), except as provided in subsection D of this section.
3. For a class C misdemeanor, imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days and/or fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not to exceed one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), except as provided in subsection D of this section.
D. The court, upon making a finding of guilty for any offense under chapter 7-1-100-5/11-501 of this code, in addition to any sentencing alternative elected
by the court, shall impose a fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for
each such offense. (Ord. G-801, 2-13-2006)
7-6-101: REGULATION OF TRAFFIC ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
A. Oakbrook Center Mall: The provisions of this title shall be applicable to that property generally known as the Oakbrook Center Mall as more specifically
described in the agreement authorizing enforcement of such regulations dated September 23, 2014, as approved by the president and board of
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 150/438
trustees of the village, and as recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of DuPage County, Illinois, on September 25, 2014, as document R2014-
088415.
B. Briarwood Lakes Subdivision:
1. This subsection B applies to the following private roadways within the Briarwood Lakes Subdivision: Briarwood Avenue, Briarwood Circle, Briarwood
Central, Briarwood South, Briarwood Lane, Briarwood Loop, Briarwood Pass, and Briarwood North (permanent parcel nos. 06-27-407-115, 06-27-
407-116, 06-27-407-117, 06-27-407-120, 06-27-407-122, 06-27-407-123, 06-27-203-056, 06-27-202-116, 06-27-202-117, 06-27-202-118).
2. The village shall enforce all of the regulations of this title within the Briarwood Lakes Subdivision, but only to the extent and in the manner set forth
in this subsection B.
3. Where any owner or user of a vehicle shall use or permit the use of a vehicle on the private roadways identified in subsection B1 of this section in a
manner contrary to the regulations of this title, the village will enforce the regulations of this title against such person as if the action had taken place
on a public highway.
4. The Briarwood Lakes Community Association, or any successor in interest thereto, shall, at its sole cost and expense, erect and maintain any and
all signs necessary for the enforcement of the regulations of this title within the Briarwood Lakes Subdivision.
5. The Briarwood Lakes Community Association, or any successor in interest thereto, shall not deny the village access to the private roadways
identified in subsection B1 of this section or erect or maintain any gate or other control device in a manner that prevents the village from accessing
such private roadways to enforce the regulations of this title. If the Briarwood Lakes Community Association, or any successor in interest thereto,
violates this subsection B5, then the village shall have no obligation to enforce any of the regulations of this title on the private roadways identified in
subsection B1 of this section.
6. The Briarwood Lakes Community Association, or any successor in interest thereto, shall, at its sole cost and expense, maintain general liability
insurance in the minimum amount of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) that names the village as a party insured for any claims arising out of the
enforcement by the village of the regulations of this title on the private roadways identified in subsection B1 of this section. During any time that the
Briarwood Lakes Community Association, or any successor in interest thereto, does not maintain the insurance required by this subsection B6, the
village shall have no obligation to enforce any traffic regulations under this subsection B.
7. The Briarwood Lakes Community Association, or any successor in interest thereto, may rescind its request for the village to enforce the regulations
of this title on the private roadways identified in subsection B1 of this section by filing a written request with the village president; provided, however,
that no such rescission request may be filed prior to twelve (12) months after the date that the Briarwood Lakes Community Association filed its
written request for the village to enforce the regulations of this title. After receipt of such rescission request, the village president and board of
trustees will repeal this subsection B, which repeal will be effective on the January 1 immediately following the action by the village president and
board of trustees to repeal this subsection B.
C. Saddle Brook Chase Subdivision:
1. This subsection C applies to the following private roadways within the Saddle Brook Chase Subdivision (also known as the Midwest Chase
Subdivision): Livery Court, Livery Circle, Roslyn Road, Polo Lane and Ascot Lane (the private roadways dedicated on the Jorge Second Subdivision
plat recorded with the DuPage County recorder in book 149, page 80 on October 18, 1990, as R90-140741; the private roadways dedicated on the
Sense Resubdivision plat recorded with the DuPage County recorder on March 29, 2012, as R2013-045169; and the private roadways dedicated on
the Saddle Brook Chase plat recorded with the DuPage County recorder on August 30, 1977, in book 81, page 62 as R77-76836).
2. The village shall enforce all of the regulations of this title within the Saddle Brook Chase Subdivision, but only to the extent and in the manner set
forth in this subsection C.
3. Where any owner or user of a vehicle shall use or permit the use of a vehicle on the private roadways identified in subsection C1 of this section in a
manner contrary to the regulations of this title, the village will enforce the regulations of this title against such person as if the action had taken place
on a public highway.
4. The Saddle Brook Chase Private Roadway Association, or any successor in interest thereto, shall, at its sole cost and expense, erect and maintain
any and all signs necessary for the enforcement of the regulations of this title within the Saddle Brook Chase Subdivision.
5. The Saddle Brook Chase Private Roadway Association, or any successor in interest thereto, shall not deny the village access to the private
roadways identified in subsection C1 of this section or erect or maintain any gate or other control device in a manner that prevents the village from
accessing such private roadways to enforce the regulations of this title. If the Saddle Brook Chase Private Roadway Association, or any successor
in interest thereto, violates this subsection C5, then the village shall have no obligation to enforce any of the regulations of this title on the private
roadways identified in subsection C1 of this section.
6. The Saddle Brook Chase Private Roadway Association, or any successor in interest thereto, shall, at its sole cost and expense, maintain general
liability insurance in the minimum amount of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) that names the village as a party insured for any claims arising out
of the enforcement by the village of the regulations of this title on the private roadways identified in subsection C1 of this section. During any time
that the Saddle Brook Chase Private Roadway Association, or any successor in interest thereto, does not maintain the insurance required by this
subsection C6, the village shall have no obligation to enforce any traffic regulations under this subsection C.
7. The Saddle Brook Chase Private Roadway Association, or any successor in interest thereto, may rescind its request for the village to enforce the
regulations of this title on the private roadways identified in subsection C1 of this section by filing a written request with the village president;
provided, however, that no such rescission request may be filed prior to twelve (12) months after the date that the Saddle Brook Chase Private
Roadway Association filed its written request for the village to enforce the regulations of this title. After receipt of such rescission request, the village
president and board of trustees will repeal this subsection C, which repeal will be effective on the January 1 immediately following the action by the
village president and board of trustees to repeal this subsection C.
D. Heritage Oaks Subdivision:
1. This subsection D applies to the following private roadways within the Heritage Oaks Subdivision: Heritage Oaks Lane, Heritage Oaks Court, and
Heritage Oaks Circle.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 151/438
2. The village shall enforce all of the regulations of this title within the Heritage Oaks Subdivision, but only to the extent and in the manner set forth in
this subsection D.
3. Where any owner or user of a vehicle shall use or permit the use of a vehicle on the private roadways identified in subsection D1 of this section in a
manner contrary to the regulations of this title, the village will enforce the regulations of this title against such person as if the action had taken place
on a public highway.
4. The Heritage Oaks Private Roadway Association, or any successor in interest thereto, shall, at its sole cost and expense, erect and maintain any
and all signs necessary for the enforcement of the regulations of this title within the Heritage Oaks Subdivision. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in this title, when signs are posted giving notice thereof, the maximum speed limit is twenty (20) miles per hour on the private roadways
listed in subsection D1 of this section.
5. The Heritage Oaks Private Roadway Association, or any successor in interest thereto, shall not deny the village access to the private roadways
identified in subsection D1 of this section or erect or maintain any gate or other control device in a manner that prevents the village from accessing
such private roadways to enforce the regulations of this title. If the Heritage Oaks Private Roadway Association, or any successor in interest thereto,
violates this subsection D5, then the village shall have no obligation to enforce any of the regulations of this title on the private roadways identified in
subsection D1 of this section.
6. The Heritage Oaks Private Roadway Association, or any successor in interest thereto, shall, at its sole cost and expense, maintain general liability
insurance in the minimum amount of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) that names the village as a party insured for any claims arising out of the
enforcement by the village of the regulations of this title on the private roadways identified in subsection D1 of this section. During any time that the
Heritage Oaks Private Roadway Association, or any successor in interest thereto, does not maintain the insurance required by this subsection D6,
the village shall have no obligation to enforce any traffic regulations under this subsection D.
7. The Heritage Oaks Private Roadway Association, or any successor in interest thereto, may rescind its request for the village to enforce the
regulations of this title on the private roadways identified in subsection D1 of this section by filing a written request with the village president;
provided, however, that no such rescission request may be filed prior to twelve (12) months after the date that the Heritage Oaks Private Roadway
Association filed its written request for the village to enforce the regulations of this title. After receipt of such rescission request, the village president
and board of trustees will repeal this subsection D, which repeal will be effective on the January 1 immediately following the action by the village
president and board of trustees to repeal this subsection D.
E. Steeplechase Subdivision:
1. This subsection E applies to the following private roadways within the Steeplechase Subdivision: Red Fox Lane and Coventry Lane (which private
roadways were dedicated on the Steeplechase Subdivision plat dated September 29, 1977, and recorded with the DuPage County recorder as R77-
88226)2.
2. The village shall enforce all of the regulations of this title within the Steeplechase Subdivision, but only to the extent and in the manner set forth in
this subsection E.
3. Where any owner or user of a vehicle shall use or permit the use of a vehicle on the private roadways identified in subsection E1 of this section in a
manner contrary to the regulations of this title, the village will enforce the regulations of this title against such person as if the action had taken place
on a public highway.
4. The Steeplechase Community Association Of Oak Brook, or any successor in interest thereto, shall, at its sole cost and expense, erect and
maintain any and all signs necessary for the enforcement of the regulations of this title within the Steeplechase Subdivision.
5. The Steeplechase Community Association Of Oak Brook, or any successor in interest thereto, shall not deny the village access to the private
roadways identified in subsection E1 of this section or erect or maintain any gate or other control device in a manner that prevents the village from
accessing such private roadways to enforce the regulations of this title. If the Steeplechase Community Association Of Oak Brook, or any successor
in interest thereto, violates this subsection E5, then the village shall have no obligation to enforce any of the regulations of this title on the private
roadways identified in subsection E1 of this section.
6. The Steeplechase Community Association Of Oak Brook, or any successor in interest thereto, shall, at its sole cost and expense, maintain general
liability insurance in the minimum amount of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) that names the village as a party insured for any claims arising out
of the enforcement by the village of the regulations of this title on the private roadways identified in subsection E1 of this section. During any time
that the Steeplechase Community Association Of Oak Brook, or any successor in interest thereto, does not maintain the insurance required by this
subsection E6, the village shall have no obligation to enforce any traffic regulations under this subsection E.
7. The Steeplechase Community Association Of Oak Brook, or any successor in interest thereto, may rescind its request for the village to enforce the
regulations of this title on the private roadways identified in subsection E1 of this section by filing a written request with the village president;
provided, however, that no such rescission request may be filed prior to twelve (12) months after the date that the Steeplechase Community
Association Of Oak Brook filed its written request for the village to enforce the regulations of this title. After receipt of such rescission request, the
village president and board of trustees will repeal this subsection E, which repeal will be effective on the January 1 immediately following the action
by the village president and board of trustees to repeal this subsection E. (Ord. G-1020, 2-11-2014; Ord. G-1031, 8-12-2014; Ord. G-1033, 9-23-
2014; Ord. G-1037, 10-14-2014; Ord. G-1051, 7-14-2015)
7-6-102: PENALTY:
(Rep. by Ord. G-801, 2-13-2006)
7-6-103: ARRESTS:
Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of this title shall be released upon proper bail being furnished as required by law. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-
1999)
7-6-104: PRIMA FACIE PROOF:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 152/438
The fact that an automobile which is illegally operated or parked is registered in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that such
person was in control of the automobile at the time of such violation. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
Chapter 2
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1153 - REQUIRED TO STOP . Go to new ordinance.
7-2-1: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES:
Schedules found in this chapter, are incorporated as part of this title as if fully set forth in the pertinent sections of this title. Said schedules may be
amended by the village president and board of trustees as from time to time they may deem appropriate. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
SCHEDULE I, ALTERED MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS
In accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-601, and when signs are posted giving notice thereof, the maximum speed limit is twenty five (25)
miles per hour on all municipal streets except as follows:
Name Of Street From To
Maximum
Speed Limit
Adams Street Southern village limits Spring Road 30 mph
B&T Drive Oak Brook Road Northern terminus 15 mph
Butterfield Road Camden Court IL Route 83 40 mph
Butterfield Road West edge of Summit East edge of 2115 Butterfield 40 mph
Butterfield Road Western village limits Camden Court 45 mph
Harger Road Spring Road York Road 30 mph
IL Route 83 22nd Street Northern village limits 40 mph
IL Route 83 Southern village limits 2400 South 55 mph
IL Route 83 2400 South 22nd Street 45 mph
Jorie Boulevard 22nd Street 31st Street 40 mph
Meyers Road Oak Brook Road Southern village limits 40 mph
Midwest Road Southern village limits Northern village limits 35 mph
Oak Brook Road Eastern village limits Western village limits 45 mph
St. Paschal Drive 31st Street 35th Street 30 mph
Spring Road 22nd Street Northern village limits 30 mph
Timber Edge Drive Western village limits Eastbound "S" curve 40 mph
York Road Northern Spring Road Oak Brook Road 35 mph
York Road Oak Brook Road Wood Glen Lane 40 mph
16th Street Spring Road IL Route 83 30 mph
22nd Street Eastern village limits Western village limits 40 mph
35th Street Fairview Avenue Meyers Road 30 mph
35th Street Meyers Road Midwest Road 25 mph
35th Street Midwest Road Adams Street 30 mph
(Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999; Ord. G-655, 1-25-2000; Ord. G-674, 2-27-2001; Ord. G-735, 11-11-2003; Ord. G-848, 11-27-2007)
SCHEDULE II, THROUGH STREETS
Street From To
Adams Road South right of way
Spring Road
Southern village limits
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 153/438
Baybrook Lane West right of way lane
Midwest Road
East right of way lane
Meyers Road
Harger Road York Road Spring Road
IL Route 83 Northern village limits Southern village limits
Jorie Boulevard 22nd Street 31st Street
Madison Street South right of way
Spring Road
Southern village limits
Meyers Road Northern village limits Southern village limits
Midwest Road Northern village limits Southern village limits
Mockingbird Lane West right of way
Regent Drive
East right of way
Midwest Road
Regent Drive South right of way
Kingston Drive
North right of way
31st Street
St. Paschal Drive South frontage 35th Street
Spring Road 16th Street 22nd Street
Spring Road 31st Street York Road
Timber Edge Drive Spring Road York Road
Washington Street Spring Road Southern village limits
York Road Northern village limits Southern village limits
16th Street Spring Road Western village limits
22nd Street Eastern village limits Western village limits
31st Street Eastern village limits Western village limits
35th Street Cass Avenue Meyers Road
35th Street Meyers Road Western village limits
35th Street St. Paschal Drive Midwest Road
(Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
SCHEDULE III, STOP INTERSECTIONS
All traffic shall come to a complete stop before proceeding through the following intersections:
B&T Drive and Maintenance Drive.
Forest Gate Road and Forest Gate Circle.
Harger Road and Yorkshire Woods.
Kensington Road and Kensington Court.
Windsor Drive and Sheffield Lane. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999; Ord. G-982, 9-25-2012)
SCHEDULE IV, STOP STREETS
Traffic On Will Stop At
Acorn Hill Lane Spring Road
Adams Road Spring Road
Avenue Loire Eastbound traffic on westerly
approach
Avenue Loire Meyers Road
B&T Drive NE Maintenance Drive
B&T Drive Oak Brook Road
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 154/438
B&T Drive SE Maintenance Drive
B&T Drive Sports Core Circle
Baybrook Lane Meyers Road
Birchwood Road Adams Road
Bliss Drive Windsor Drive
Breckenridge Farm Adams Road
Brougham Lane Fairview Avenue
Canterberry Lane York Road
Cass Court 35th Street
Castle Drive 16th Street
Cheval Drive Adams Road
Clearwater Drive Northbound Clearwater Drive at
the T-intersection
Clearwater Drive Southbound exit to west parking
lot at 2000 Clearwater Drive
Clearwater Drive Westbound Clearwater Drive at
the T-intersection
Clearwater Drive York Road
Clearwater Drive 22nd Street
Coolidge Street Oak Brook Road
Covington Court 35th Street
Dover Drive Windsor Drive
Frederick Drive Madison Street
Gateway Lane York Road
Golf Drive York Road
Grant Street Oak Brook Road
Hambletonian Drive 38th Street
Harger Road York Road
Heritage Oaks Lane Meyers Road
Hunt Club Drive Oak Brook Road
Ivy Lane Mockingbird Lane
Kimberley Lane Midwest Road
Lincoln Road Oak Brook Road
Luthin Road York Road
Madison Street Spring Road
McDonalds Drive Commerce Drive
Meyers frontage road Meyers Road
Mockingbird Lane Midwest Road
Natoma Drive Spring Road
Oak Brook Drive Oak Brook Road
Oak Brook Hills Road Oak Brook Road
Oak Court York Road
Pine Hill Lane Adams Road
Red Stable Way Fairview Avenue
Regent Drive Oak Brook Road
Robinhood Ranch York Road
Saddle Brook Drive 35th Street
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 155/438
St. Joseph Drive Midwest Road
St. Paschal Drive Oak Brook Road
St. Stephens Green 35th Street
Salt Creek Circle Spring Road
Spring Road Oak Brook Road
Spring Road 16th Street
Timber Edge Drive Roosevelt Ramp
Trinity Lane 35th Street
Twin Oaks Drive Timber Edge Drive
Village commons Oak Brook Road
Washington Street Spring Road
Wennes Court York Road
White Oak Lane Meyers Road
Windsor Drive York Road
Wood Road Washington Street
York Lake Court York Road
22nd Street Clearwater Drive
31st Street frontage road Oak Brook Road
35th Street frontage road Adams Road
35th Street, westbound only Midwest Road
38th Street Meyers Road
SCHEDULE V, YIELD STREETS
Traffic On Will Yield To
B&T Drive Oak Brook Drive
Briarwood Lakes, westbound Regent Drive
Cambridge Drive Concord Drive
Camelot Drive Mockingbird Lane
Camelot Drive Regent Drive
Concord Drive Mockingbird Lane
Crabapple Lane Timberview Drive
Crabapple Lane Walnut Lane
Croydon Lane,
south intersection
Windsor Drive
Forest Glen Lane Wood Glen Lane
Green Leaf Drive Twin Oaks Drive
Green Leaf Drive Woodland Drive
Heather Lane Regent Drive
Ivy Lane Concord Drive
Kimberley Circle Kimberley Lane
Kingston Drive Kimberley Lane
Merry Lane Forest Trail Drive
Mockingbird Lane Regent Drive
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 156/438
Regent Drive, eastbound Northbound Regent Drive
Regent Drive, northbound Kingston Drive
Stafford Drive Dover Drive
Timber Trail Drive Forest Trail Drive
Timberview Drive Forest Trail Drive
Timberview Drive Twin Oaks Drive
Trinity Lane entrance "T",
southbound
Eastbound/westbound
Trinity Lane/St. Francis Circle
Twin Oaks Drive, southbound Timber Trail Drive
Village hall (west drive) Northbound village
entrance drive
Walnut Lane Forest Trail Drive
Walnut Lane, northbound Twin Oaks Drive
Walnut Lane, southbound Twin Oaks Drive
Windsor Drive Swift Drive
Woodland Drive Timberview Drive
Woodridge Drive Wood Glen Lane
Woodside Drive Wood Glen Lane
(Ord. G-1090, 10-11-2016)
SCHEDULE VI, ONE-WAY STREETS
Reserved
SCHEDULE VII, PARKING PROHIBITED
ON CERTAIN STREETS
A. Parking prohibited at all times:
Street From To
Adams Road Southern right of way
of Spring Road
Southern village limits
Birchwood Road Adams Road West West terminus
Bliss Drive Windsor Drive East East terminus
Camden Court 22nd Street South South terminus
Canterberry Lane York Road East
(Parking prohibited where
signs are posted)
East terminus
Clearwater Drive York Road 22nd Street
Commerce Drive Spring Road East East cul-de-sac
Enterprise Drive 22nd Street North North terminus
Forest Gate Road
(north side)
(Parking prohibited where
signs are posted)
Forest Gate Road
(south side)
Entire length
Grant Street Entire length
IL Route 56
(Butterfield Road)
Western village limits Eastern village limits
IL Route 83 Northern village limits Southern village limits
Jorie Boulevard 22nd Street 31st Street
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 157/438
Kensington Court Entire length
Kensington Road Entire length
Madison Street Southern right of way
of Spring Road
Southern village limits
McDonalds Drive 22nd Street Commerce Drive
Meyers Road Northern village limits Southern village limits
Midwest Road Northern village limits Southern village limits
Oak Brook Road Eastern village limits Western village limits
Roosevelt Road Eastern village limits Western village limits
St. Paschal Drive Entire length
Spring Road Northern village limits 16th Street
Spring Road 22nd Street (FAU 9877) 16th Street
Spring Road 31st Street South to York Road
Swift Drive Northern cul-de-sac Southern cul-de-sac
Tower Drive 22nd Street South South terminus
Washington Street Spring Road Glendale
Windsor Drive Swift Drive 22nd Street
Wood Road
(north side)
Entire length
York Road Northern Spring Road Oak Brook Road
York Road Oak Brook Road Wood Glen Lane
York Road Wood Glen Lane Northern village limits
16th Street Spring Road Western village limits
22nd Street Eastern village limits Western village limits
31st Street Eastern village limits Western village limits
35th Street St. Paschal Drive Meyers Road
B. Parking prohibited at certain times:
Street From To Times Prohibited
Regent
Drive
(north
side)
The eastern parking lot driveway of
Brook Forest Elementary School
The western main circle drive of Brook
Forest Elementary School
On school days between the hours of 7:00 A.M. to
8:00 A.M. and 3:00 P.M. to 4:00 P.M.
(Ord. G-1058, 9-8-2015)
SCHEDULE VIII, LIMITED LOAD STREETS
Reserved
SCHEDULE IX, PROHIBITED TURNS
A. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle traveling in a northerly direction on Spring Road during the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. on Monday through and including Friday of the week to make other than a right turn onto Oak Brook Road (31st Street) so as to
travel other than in an easterly direction on said Oak Brook Road at such time and place.
B. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make any turn or other traffic maneuver so as to travel in a southerly direction onto Spring Road
between Oak Brook Road and Adams Road between the hours of three o'clock (3:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. Monday through Friday.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 158/438
C. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle at the intersection of York Road and Wood Glen Lane to make a southbound or northbound left turn.
(Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999; Ord. G-653, 12-14-1999; Ord. G-691, 1-22-2002)
SCHEDULE X, U-TURNS
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to make a U-turn as follows:
Forest Gate Road.
Jorie Boulevard, northbound, at Kensington Road.
Jorie Boulevard, northbound, at 3003 Jorie Boulevard.
Midwest Road and Kimberly Lane, southbound to northbound.
Midwest Road, northbound, at north of St. Joseph Drive.
York Road at Clearwater Drive.
York Road at the I-88 exit.
16th Street, eastbound and westbound, between Illinois Route 83 and Spring Road.
22nd Street and Spring Road at the I-88 exit. (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999; Ord. G-648, 11-23-1999; Ord. G-654, 1-25-2000; Ord. G-703, 8-27-2002;
Ord. G-982, 9-25-2012; Ord. G-986, 11-13-2012)
SCHEDULE XI, CAB STANDS AND BUS ZONES
Reserved
SCHEDULE XII, REGULATION OF TRAFFIC IN SHOPPING CENTER
Reserved
SCHEDULE XIII, PROHIBITED TRUCK TRAFFIC
In accordance with section 7-3-101 of this title, truck traffic is prohibited in the following subdivisions: Brook Forest, Forest Glen, Ginger Creek, Saddle
Brook, Timber Trails, Trinity Lakes, Woodside Estates and York Woods as well as:
Street From To
Adams Road Spring Road Southern village limits
Avenue Loire Meyers Road Village limits
Frontage Road Harger Road Northern village limits
Madison Street Spring Road Southern village limits
St. Paschal Drive Northern terminus Southern terminus
Spring Road 16th Street Northern village limits
Spring Road 31st Street York Road
Timber Edge frontage road North Spring Road York Road
White Oak Lane Meyers Road End
16th Street IL Route 83 End
35th Street Adams Road Midwest Road
35th Street Cass Avenue Meyers Road
(Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
SCHEDULE XIV, MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS
Reserved
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 159/438
SCHEDULE XV, FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS
Adoption Of The International Fire Code
In lieu of using any section, or in addition to any section of this title, the officer issuing a citation may issue it by using any of the sections of the
currently adopted international fire code, as amended, which is incorporated and adopted by reference as a part of this title. All citations issued for
these violations shall be in the name of the village and may refer to the numbered sections of either the Illinois vehicle code, or this title, but shall
also be referred to as an ordinance violation in the traffic ticket or complaint. (Ord. G-1084, 9-27-2016)
SCHEDULE XVI, TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL INTERSECTIONS
It shall be unlawful for any driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions of any traffic control signal light at the following intersections:
Butterfield Road and Meyers Road
Butterfield Road and Midwest Road
Butterfield Road and Trans Am
Butterfield Road and 22nd Street
Illinois State Route 83 and Hodges
Illinois State Route 83 and 16th Street
Illinois State Route 83 and 22nd Street
Jorie Boulevard and Forest Gate Road
Jorie Boulevard and Jorie Plaza
Jorie Boulevard and Kensington Road
Midwest Road and Baybrook Lane
Oak Brook Road (31st Street) and Concord Drive
Oak Brook Road (31st Street) and Illinois State Route 83
Oak Brook Road (31st Street) and Jorie Boulevard
Oak Brook Road (31st Street) and Meyers Road
Oak Brook Road (31st Street) and Midwest Road
Oak Brook Road (31st Street) and York Road
Spring Road and Commerce Drive
Spring Road and Harger Road
York Road and Dover Drive
York Road and Spring Road
York Road and Tollway Exit
York Road and Wood Glen Lane
16th Street and Oak Brook Bank (designated as "3" South)
22nd Street and Enterprise Drive (Jorie Boulevard)
22nd Street and McDonald's Drive
22nd Street and Midwest Road
22nd Street and Oakbrook Shopping Center East (designated as "1" South)
22nd Street and Oakbrook Shopping Center West (designated as "2" South)
22nd Street and Parkview
22nd Street and Spring Road
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 160/438
22nd Street and Windsor Drive
22nd Street and York Road
35th Street and Meyers Road
35th Street and Midwest Road (Ord. G-642, 8-24-1999)
SCHEDULE XVII, RESIDENT ONLY PARKING
It shall be illegal for any person to park a vehicle on the following streets other than a resident of the street where the vehicle is parked:
Luthin Court
Wennes Court (Ord. G-931, 7-27-2010)
Title 8
PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter 1
PUBLIC WORKS REGULATIONS
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
CERTIFICATED AREA OF OAK BROOK UTILITY COMPANY: Those areas of land that have received certificates of convenience and necessity from the
Illinois commerce commission for water service from the Oak Brook utility company.
DAY: A calendar day.
INFECTIOUS DISEASE: Dutch elm disease, elm yellows, oak wilt, pine wilt or any other disease infecting deciduous or coniferous trees.
LANDSCAPE WATERING: Outdoor use of water for sprinkling, watering, or irrigating shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground covers, plants, vines,
gardens, vegetables, flowers or any other vegetation.
LOT: A designated parcel of land in a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or for building development as a complete and
individual unit.
NOXIOUS WEEDS: Marijuana, giant ragweed, common ragweed, Canada thistle, perennial sowthistle, musk thistle, perennial members of the Sorghum
genus, including Johnsongrass, Sorghum alum, and Kudzu, or other weeds of a like kind.
PARKWAY: That part of a public way between the paved roadway portion and right of way line, in the case of a public right of way, or in the case of a
private street, the easement line.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any land dedicated to the public for access and utility purposes including, but not limited to, streets and alleys.
PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENT: Any designated parcel of land on, over or under which a liberty, privilege, or advantage for use of land is granted to the
village of Oak Brook and those public or private utility companies operating under franchise or agreement from the village of Oak Brook.
PUBLIC WAY: Public rights of way, public street areas by common usage, public bicycle or pedestrian paths, or access easement areas granted to the
village. Public ways do not include right of way under the jurisdiction of the state of Illinois or DuPage County.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
UTILITY FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials of utility providers (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic
cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, manholes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, sewers, cables,
transformers and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within public ways. For purposes of this title, the term
"utility facility" shall not include any utility facility owned or operated by the village.
UTILITY PROVIDER: The individual or entity owning or operating any utility facility.
WATER: For the purpose of this chapter, the term "water" shall mean water provided by the village of Oak Brook water system.
WATER SERVICE: That part of the water system consisting of a water service connection and water service extension.
WATER SERVICE CONNECTION: That part of the water system consisting of a service pipe extending from the water main to and including a shutoff
valve or curb stop (b-box).
WATER SERVICE EXTENSION: That part of the water system consisting of a service pipe from the water service pipe shutoff valve or curb stop to the
water meter located on the premises being served.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 161/438
WORK: Any construction, access to construction site,installation, alteration, excavation, maintenance or repair. Work includes planting, cutting, pruning or
removing trees or shrubs. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999; Ord. G-759, 9-28-2004; Ord. G-846, 11-13-2007)
8-1-2: PURPOSE; SCOPE; JURISDICTION:
The purpose of this title is to set forth rules, regulations and standards to regulate and control work in public ways and public utility easements and all
sewer, water distribution, utility, street and driveway approach construction in the village in order to promote the public health, safety, convenience and
general welfare within the village.
The regulations and requirements herein are established in order to provide for the orderly and harmonious development of the village, for the
coordination of construction, and to secure a uniform system of utilities, improvements and services, constructed to standards intended to provide safe
and dependable service to the public. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-1-3: PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
The village board may adopt, from time to time, public works construction standards upon the recommendation of the village engineer and village
manager. The public works construction standards shall contain construction regulations and standards, and engineering permit instructions and
conditions. All work in public ways shall be designed and constructed substantially in compliance with the public works construction standards.
The village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering the public works construction standards and the village engineer may vary the
public works construction standards upon the approval of the village manager in specific cases which are in harmony with the spirit of the standards and
when deemed appropriate. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the village to regulate its public ways for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999; Ord. G-846, 11-13-2007)
8-1-4: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS; PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Applicability: Within the village, all work within public ways and public utility easements shall meet the requirements of and be carried out in compliance
with this title and other pertinent village ordinances.
B. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to proceed with any work within public ways and public utility easements or with any water service extension
construction without first having secured a permit therefor from the village.
C. Application For Permit: Application for a permit under this title shall be on forms furnished by the village for that purpose and shall include a description
of the nature and location of the work to be done and such other information as required by the village. No work shall commence until such permit has
been issued by the village.
A copy of the permit issued under this title and a copy of the approved plans and specifications shall be kept at the location of the work at all times
while such work is in progress.
D. Insurance Required: Each applicant for a permit required for work within public ways and public utility easements shall carry adequate liability and
property damage insurance as set forth in title 1, chapter 8 of this code.
The legal liability of the permittee to the village and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
E. Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the village engineer
within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and
regulations, the village engineer shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the village engineer is satisfied that the
proposed work conforms to the requirements of this title and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the village engineer shall
issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the village
engineer, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this title.
F. Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the permittee in writing to the village within thirty (30) days after
the change necessitating the amendment. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999; Ord. G-846, 11-13-2007)
8-1-5: COMMENCEMENT AND COMPLETION OF WORK:
A. Work Commenced Within Ninety Days: Work for which a permit has been issued shall commence within ninety (90) days after the issuance of the
permit therefor or within such extended period of time as determined by the appropriate village official upon good cause shown. If the work is not so
commenced, the permit shall automatically be terminated, the fee forfeited, and the performance security returned. Applicants for such
terminatedpermits may reapply and such an application will be treated as a new application.
B. Expiration; Extension Of Time: Permits issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall expire at the end of the period of time as set forth
in the permit. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the work within the time period, he/she shall, prior to the expiration of the permit, present in
writing to the village a request for an extension of time, setting forth therein the reasons for the requested extension. If in the opinion of the village
engineer such an extension is necessary and not contrary to the public interest, he/she may grant the permittee additional time for completion of the
work. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 162/438
8-1-6: LOCATION OF EXISTING UTILITIES OR UTILITY FACILITIES:
Any applicant or permittee proposing to perform work or construct utility facilities in a public way or public utility easement shall contact JULIE and
ascertain the presence and location of existing utilities or utility facilities in the area. The village will make its records available to the applicant. When
notified of an excavation or when requested by the village or by JULIE, a utility provider shall locate and physically mark its underground utility facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act1.
Any person who damages any utility or utility facility through negligence or without having called for a location of the utility or utility facility shall be charged
for the repair or reinstallation of the utility or utility facility. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999; Ord. G-846, 11-13-2007)
8-1-7: REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF FACILITIES:
A. Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the village, a utility provider shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facility within public ways or public utility easements whenever the village has determined that such
removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any village improvement
in or upon public ways or public utility easements.
The village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any utility facility located within public ways or public utility easements as the village may
determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, thevillage shall
attempt to notify the utility provider, if known, prior to cutting or removing a utility facility and shall notify the utility provider, if known, after cutting or
removing such utility facility.
B. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the village, any utility provider that owns, controls, or maintains
any unauthorized utility facility or related appurtenances within public ways shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such utility facility or
appurtenances from the public ways. A utility facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law; or
2. If the utility facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required; or
3. If the utility facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this title; or
4. If the utility facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise or permit.
C. Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a utility facility within public ways, the utility provider shall notify the village within ninety (90) days.
Following receipt of such notice, the village may direct the utility provider to remove all or any portion of the utility facility if the village engineer
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the utility
provider that abandoned the utility facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility provider shall be deemed
to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the utility facility by the village, another utility provider or person. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999;
Ord. G-846, 11-13-2007)
8-1-8: CHANGE OF UTILITY PROVIDER OWNERSHIP, OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
A. Notification Of Change: A utility provider shall notify the village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any utility facility in
public ways or public utility easements or change in identity of the utility provider. The new owner of the utility provider or the utility facility shall have all
the obligations, duties and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under any permit, if any, and shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including this title, with respect to the work and utility facilities in public ways.
B. Amended Permit: A new utility provider or utility facility owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new
owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the
terms and conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the utility facility or allows it to remain on public ways.
C. Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new utility provider owner upon
transfer. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999; Ord. G-846, 11-13-2007)
8-1-9: MAINTENANCE, CLEANUP AND RESTORATION OF FACILITIES:
A. Maintenance Of Facilities And Emergency Maintenance: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within public ways or public utility
easements are to be maintained by or for the utility or owner in a manner satisfactory to the village and at the utility's or owner's sole expense.
B. Emergency Situations: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the public way, the utility or owner shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the public way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the
nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall
be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available.
2. In an emergency, the utility or owner shall, as soon as possible, notify the Village Engineer of the emergency, informing him as to what steps have
been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to
interfere with the free movement of traffic, the Village police shall be notified immediately.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 163/438
3. In an emergency, the utility or owner shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to
the traveling public.
The utility or owner must apply for a permit for the emergency work with the Village within five (5) days after such emergency.
C. Cleanup And Restoration: Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the permittee or utility shall remove all excess material and
restore all disturbed areas in a timely manner to a condition substantially equivalent to thatwhich existed prior to the commencement of work and to
the satisfaction of the Village. This work shall be accomplished in accordance with any permit conditions.
D. Restoration Of Street By Village: When any permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the permit has not been completed, the Village may
do such work as is necessary to restore the area to a condition acceptable to the Village. All expenses incurred by the Village for such restoration shall
be paid by the permittee and may be recovered from the performance security or other bonds posted. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-1-10: LIABILITY OF VILLAGE:
In no case shall any excavation or opening made by a permittee be considered the responsibility of the Village or any of its officers or employees; and no
officer or employee shall assume any responsibility over any such opening except in the exercise of the police power, and then only when necessary to
protect life and property. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-1-11: STOP WORK ORDER:
The Village Engineer is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of any work within a public way or public utility easement upon the
discovery of any of the following:
A. Work is proceeding in a manner which creates imminent hazard or severe harm to persons or property on or off the site; or
B. A notice of violation has been given and the period of time deemed by the Village to be necessary for the completion of such work has elapsed; or
C. Work for which a permit is required has started, or is proceeding, without issuance of such a permit.
Such stop work order shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason for its issuance, and shall order the action, if any, necessary to resolve the
circumstances requiring the stop work order. One copy of the stop work order shall be posted on the property in a conspicuous place and one copy
shall be either given by personal delivery thereof to the agent engaged in the work, mailed by certified or registered United States mail addressed to
the person to be notified, or by telefax and regular mail. It shall be unlawful to proceed with any work for which a stop work order has been given. (Ord.
G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-1-12: USE OF PUBLIC WAYS:
A. Depositing, Storing, Processing Material In Public Ways: It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, process or produce any material in or on any
public way or to store the same, eithertemporarily or permanently thereon; except that building materials may be temporarily stored, processed or
produced on public ways and except that construction debris may be temporarily stored on public ways in a container provided by a scavenger for
removal by such scavenger if a permit therefor has been obtained.
B. Drainage Onto Public Ways: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit or maintain the existence of the discharge of sump pumps or roof
drains in any of the following manners or locations:
1. In a location which does not provide at least five feet (5') of pervious surface between the point of discharge and any property line, unless such
discharge is:
a. Into any open drainage ditch located within the site or on public ways; or
b. Into a storm sewer, provided that adequate capacity exists in the system and that the hydraulic grade of the system will not cause a backup into
buildings on the premises or other premises.
2. Notwithstanding subsection B1a of this section, in any manner and in any location that results in standing water of a depth of three inches (3") or
more or formation of ice of any thickness on the paved portion of the public way or a sidewalk or a pathway.
When the owner or person in control of any property causes, permits or maintains any such discharge, notice to remove such nuisance shall be
given in writing by the village engineer by either personal delivery or certified or registered United States mail addressed to the person to whom was
sent the tax bill for general taxes for the last preceding year on the property, or by telefax and regular mail. In addition to any fine or penalty which
may be imposed, if said recipient nevertheless fails to abate such discharge within ten (10) days of receipt of such notice, the village engineer may
cause the removal of such discharge and any reasonable expense incurred by the village in so doing shall be a charge against the owner so failing,
which may be recovered in an appropriate action at law. For the purposes of enforcing this chapter, the village engineer may, at all reasonable
times, enter in and upon any property within the village.
In addition to all other remedies provided by law, the village shall have a lien on the lot or plot of real estate on which said discharge was found for
the reasonable cost of the abatement of such discharge. Within sixty (60) days after such cost is incurred, the village shall cause to be filed a notice
of lien in the office of the recorder of deeds. Such notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: a) a description of the real estate sufficient
for identification thereof; b) the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable foreach service; and c) the date or dates
when said cost and expense were incurred by the village. For each year after the date of filing of such notice, if such cost and expense are not paid
by the owner or persons interested in said real estate in that year, the village shall file an additional notice in the office of the recorder of deeds
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 164/438
imposing an interest charge of ten percent (10%) of the total cost and expenses. Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of, or persons
interested in, said real estate, after the notice of lien has been filed, the village shall issue a release of such lien, which may be filed of record in said
recorder's office.
C. Prohibited Discharges Into Storm Sewers And Other Drainage Structures: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or empty, or cause to be
discharged or emptied, any type of sewage, including the effluent from septic tanks or other sewage treatment devices, or any other domestic,
commercial, or industrial waste, or any putrescible liquids, into any drain tile or sewer or other drainage structure installed for the purpose of conveying
or discharging surface water within the village.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or permit or cause to be discharged sanitary and industrial wastewater into any storm sewers
constructed as part of the improvements of 22nd Street (FAU 9877) known as state section 1975-145-N, FAUS M-5003 (53), village section 75-00008-
00-PW.
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or cause to be connected, any drain carrying, or to carry any toilet, sink, basement, septic tank, cesspool,
industrial waste, or any fixture or device discharging polluting substances, to any storm water drainage system constructed as part of 16th Street (FAU
1448) and Spring Road (FAU 2671); an improvement known as state section 1976-109-N, FAUS project M-5003(91).
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to discharge, or permit, or cause to be discharged sanitary sewage and industrial wastewater
into any storm sewers constructed as part of the improvement of Butterfield Road (FAU Route 3545) (Illinois Route 56), known as state section
54WRS-7. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999; Ord. G-773, 1-25-2005)
8-1-13: DAMAGING FACILITIES:
A. Sewers, Etc.: It shall be unlawful for any person to break, damage, deface or destroy any sewer, culvert, catch basin, manhole, water pipe or hydrant
laid or placed in, upon, or under any public way or public utility easement.
B. Markers: It shall be unlawful for any person to break, damage, change, remove, deface or otherwise injure any sign, stake, post, or stone, placed or set
to designate the corner or line of any lot, block, land, street, or public way or to show the grade ofany street or sidewalk in the village. (Ord. G-637, 7-
13-1999)
8-1-14: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
A. Statement; Delivery: Whenever the village determines that a default or violation has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of a permit or
of any provision of this chapter, written notice thereof shall be given to the permittee or his agent engaged in the work. Such notice shall contain a
statement of the default or violation, state the work to be done to cure the default or violation, the period of time deemed by the village to be necessary
for the completion of such work (such time shall not be less than 2 days unless the default or violation is deemed by the village engineer to be an
emergency in which case the work shall be accomplished immediately), that the permit will be revoked if the permittee fails to perform, and that the
performance security will be forfeited if the permit is revoked. Such notice shall be given either by personal delivery thereof to the permittee or his
agent engaged in the work, by certified or registered United States mail addressed to the person to be notified, or by telefax and regular mail.
Thereafter, the permittee shall, within the time therein specified, cause the required work to be performed. If the permittee fails to perform within the
allotted time, the village will take whatever action it deems necessary including revoking the permit.
B. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Violation: Upon receipt of a written notice of violation from the village, as provided in subsection A of
this section, the permittee shall have the following options:
1. Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause exists for the notice of violation; or
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the
village within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of violation; or
3. Immediately remove the work or facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public ways and restore the public ways
to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such removal to the village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of
violation. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999; Ord. G-789, 1-10-2006; Ord. G-846, 11-13-2007)
8-1-15: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Any permit may be revoked by the village after prior written notice in accordance with section 8-1-14 of this chapter to the permittee for:
A. When the application, plans or other supporting documents of apermit reflect a false statement or misrepresentation as to material fact; or
B. Violation of any provision of this title; or
C. Violation of any provision or condition of the permit; or
D. Violation of any applicable provision of this code or any other ordinance or law relating to the work or violation of any relevant county, state, or federal
requirement; or
E. Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or creating a nuisance or endangering the lives or property of others; or
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 165/438
F. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities or utility facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare.
If the permittee fails to perform as required, the permit shall be revoked and written notice thereof shall be given to the permittee or his agent engaged
in the work. Such notice shall be given either by personal delivery thereof to the permittee or his agent engaged in the work, by certified or registered
United States mail addressed to the person to be notified, or by telefax and regular mail. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999; Ord. G-846, 11-13-2007)
8-1-16: REIMBURSEMENT OF COST:
There may be times when the village incurs costs, including third party claims and costs related to delay, because the permittee does not perform as
required by its permit and this title. If so, the permittee shall bear the village's costs and damages including costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating or removing the facility that was constructed under the permit. The village engineer may require that such costs, if they can be determined, be
paid at the time of application for permit, or if they are unable to be determined at that time, the village engineer may require a bond or letter of credit in an
amount determined by him, to assure payment of these costs at the time they are incurred by the village. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999; Ord. G-789, 1-10-2006)
8-1-17: VARIATIONS OR WAIVERS:
The president and village board may approve variations or waivers of the provisions of this chapter when, in its opinion, such variations or waivers are in
harmony with the spirit of the requirements of this title and when deemed appropriate. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-1-18: FRANCHISES, LICENSES, OR SIMILAR AGREEMENTS:
The village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utility providers to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of
locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public way. Utility providers that are not required by law to enter into such
an agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions
inconsistent with this title. (Ord. G-846, 11-13-2007)
8-1-19: EFFECT OF FRANCHISES, LICENSES, OR SIMILAR AGREEMENTS:
In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this title and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement
between the village and any utility provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such
agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. (Ord. G-846, 11-13-2007)
8-1-20: CONFLICTS WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS:
In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this title, the utility provider shall comply with the
requirements of this title to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations. (Ord. G-846, 11-13-2007)
Chapter 2
VILLAGE WATER SYSTEM
8-2-1: WATER SYSTEM OWNED AND CONTROLLED BY VILLAGE:
The system of water supply and distribution established, built and constructed in the village, or outside of the village in areas served by the village, is
public property under the control, jurisdiction and management of the village. All extensions to the system located on public ways and public utility
easements shall become the property of the village upon acceptance by the village. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2-2: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
Water distribution system mains and water services shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the public works construction standards and in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2-3: WATER WELL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
No person shall construct or drill any water well without first having registered with the public works director by supplying a copy of the DuPage County
health department permit application. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2-4: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
A. Discontinuance Of Water Supply: In the event that the water system is damaged or in a nonserviceable condition, the village reserves the right to
discontinue the supply of water without notice until all repairs have been made and the water system again placed in a serviceable condition. It is
understood that water is furnished to the consumers of the water system under these conditions.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 166/438
B. Discontinuance Because Of Violation: In any case in which the public works director determines that there is a wilful or unreasonable waste of water,
unauthorized taps for fixture connections, or tampering with a meter from which the customer benefits, the water supply may be shut off in whole or in
part from any premises. Such water service shall not be shut off until a minimum of seven (7) days' written notice has been given to the party to whom
the water bills are mailed and that the party will be given an opportunity to be heard as to why the service should not be shut off. The written notice
shall also be posted by the village on the entrance of the premises involved.
C. Restoration Of Service: It shall be unlawful for any person other than an employee or agent of the village to restore water service to a customer whose
service has been discontinued. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2-5: PROHIBITED ACTS OR CONDITIONS:
A. Tampering With Water System: It shall be unlawful for any person, or other entity not authorized by the village, to connect to, tamper with, alter, operate
or injure any part of the village water system, or any water meter or to introduce any substance into any water pipes, lines or mains connected to or
forming a part of the system without written approval of the village.
B. Resale Of Water: No water from the village water system shall be resold or distributed by any purchaser to any other premises other than that for which
application has been made and approved except in case of an emergency and with the approval of the public works director.
C. Private Well Connections Prohibited: No connection between the village water system and a private water well shall be permitted and it shall be
unlawful to make or continue any such connection. (Ord. G-1007, 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE A. WATER SERVICE LINES AND CONNECTIONS
8-2A-1: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
The construction, maintenance, and repair of all water service lines within the Village, or outside of the Village in areas served by the Village, shall meet
the requirements of and be carried out in compliance with this Title and other pertinent Village ordinances. It shall be unlawful to proceed with any
construction, maintenance, or repair of any water service line without first having secured a permit therefor from the Village and no water service lines
shall be constructed or placed in service that do not meet the design and construction standards established by this Title. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2A-2: WATER SERVICE APPLICATION AREAS:
A. Areas In Oak Brook Presently Served With Water By The Village: Applications for permits for water service within the Village and where the water
mains are existing will be processed and approved on meeting all applicable requirements of this Title and other pertinent Village ordinances and the
payment of the required fees.
B. Areas Outside Oak Brook Within The Certificated Area Of The Oak Brook Utility Company And Where The Water Mains Exist: Applications for permits
for water service within these areas and where the necessary Oak Brook water mains exist will be processed and approved on meeting all applicable
requirements of this Title and other pertinent Village ordinances and the payment of the required fees.
C. Other Areas Outside Oak Brook: Applications for permits for water service to areas outside Oak Brook and not within the certificated area of the Oak
Brook Utility Company shall be considered pursuant to the Village's policy ordinance with respect to provision of water service to areas outside
theVillage.
D. Areas In Oak Brook And Not Served By Water Mains: Applications for permits for water service in areas not presently served with water mains will not
be processed until such mains are installed. The mains must be installed at private expense and the Village will either:
1. Issue permits for the construction; or
2. Construct itself and recapture the cost from benefiting properties upon connection (public recapture); or
3. Construct itself and facilitate private recapture agreements. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2A-3: FIRE PROTECTION/WATER SERVICE LINES:
Where a fire protection line is installed to provide fire protection water within a building, a single fire protection/water service line may be installed from the
appropriate water main to the building where it shall split and from that point separate fire protection and domestic water service lines shall be provided
into the building. A gate valve shall be provided on each line near the exterior of the building. Valve boxes will be permitted on these valves, provided they
do not fall within a driveway or paved area, in which case valve vaults will be required. All fire protection line bypass connections shall be metered. All fire
protection lines, including bypass connections, shall be equipped with appropriate cross-connection control devices as required in Chapter 3 of this Title. If
a single fire protection/water service line is installed, the property owner shall provide easements to the Village for access to the gate valves. (Ord. G-637,
7-13-1999)
8-2A-4: MAINTENANCE OF CONNECTIONS AND EXTENSIONS:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 167/438
A. Water Service Connections: Water service connections are the property of and shall be maintained at the expense of the Village.
B. Water Service Extensions; Discontinuance Of Service: Water service extensions are the property of and shall be maintained at the expense of the
owner of the property served.
Any leaks or defects in water service extensions shall be promptly repaired by the owner and if leaks develop in an existing service extension not
meeting the requirements of this Title, such service extension shall be replaced with a line that does meet such requirements.
In case any leaks in a water service extension are not promptly repaired, the water supply may be shut off in whole or in part by the Village,
provided that such water serviceshall not be shut off until a minimum of seven (7) days' written notice has been given to the party to whom the water
bills are mailed and that the party will be given an opportunity to be heard as to why the service should not be shut off. The written notice shall also be
posted by the Village on the entrance of the premises involved. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the water service may be shut off immediately by the
Village if the Public Works Director determines that an emergency exists. The water supply shall not be turned on until such leak has been repaired
and any expense incurred by the Village in connection therewith has been paid by the owner, occupant or user. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2A-5: LIABILITY OF VILLAGE:
The Village shall not be liable for any damage caused by a leak or break in any water service extension. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2A-6: TURNING ON WATER SUPPLY:
No water service extension shall be turned on for service, other than for construction purposes, until the Director of Community Development has
inspected the water supply lines in the building and certified that they comply with the plumbing code requirements of the Village and until the Public
Works Department has inspected and approved the water service and the water meter.
The water service extension serving any property shall not be turned on by anyone other than Water Division employees or other persons authorized by
the Public Works Director. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2A-7: INSTALLATION OF WATER MAIN PREREQUISITE TO CONNECTION:
No water service may be made unless a water main meeting the requirements of this Title has been installed adjacent to the property to be served. (Ord.
G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2A-8: RECONSTRUCTION OF EXISTING SERVICE:
Where an existing property is served by a water service extending past adjacent property, such water service shall be reconstructed at the expense of the
owner of the property served by such water service within one year after the placing in service of a water main adjacent to said property, or if such main
already exists, within one year after March 27, 1973. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2A-9: EXTENSIONS TO ADJOINING PREMISES PROHIBITED:
No property owner will be permitted to extend a water serviceacross a lot to adjoining premises to avoid an extension of a water main to serve those
adjoining premises. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2A-10: RESPONSIBILITY AND PAYMENT OF WATER SERVICES:
Where a water service connection does not exist, said water service connection shall be installed by a licensed plumber at the sole expense of the owner
of the premises being served.
Where a water service extension does not exist, said water service extension shall be installed by a licensed plumber at the sole expense of the owner of
the premises being served. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
ARTICLE B. WATER METERS AND BILLING
8-2B-1: WATER METERS:
A. Meter Requirements: All premises using water from the Village water system must be equipped with an accurate water meter obtained from the Village
on payment of the required fees and installed by the Water Division or by a licensed plumber in a place of easy access. Said meter location shall,
where possible, be located within three feet (3') of the point where the water service enters the building. Rigid conduit shall be installed extending from
the meter to the outside register. Branch supplies, tees, wyes, etc., shall be prohibited between the meter and the water main. The water meter is and
shall remain the property of the Village. Underground meter vaults or pits are prohibited.
B. Maintenance And Repair: Subsequent to installation, the water meter shall be maintained or, if necessary, replaced by the Village at the Village's cost
and expense for normal wear and tear. The owner of the premises being served shall pay for the cost of repair or replacement of the meter for other
than normal wear and tear. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 168/438
8-2B-2: SUPPLY OF WATER DURING CONSTRUCTION:
Premises may be supplied with unmetered water during construction at a cost determined pursuant to subsection 8-5-2H of this Title. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-
1999)
8-2B-3: PAYMENT LIABILITY:
In every case, the owner of the served premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service
on such premises; and the service is furnished to the premises by the Village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user
ofthe service are jointly and severally liable therefor to the Village. Liability is for payment of all water used on the premises until written notice has been
received by the Village that the use of water is no longer desired and the water service is turned off by the Village. Owners, occupants and users are liable
for all water shown to have passed through the meter on the property whether by use, wastage, leakage or any other cause. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2B-4: BILLING PERIOD AND PAYMENT:
A. Billing Period: Bills for metered service shall be rendered periodically and shall show the readings of the meter at the beginning and end of the period
for which the bill is rendered.
B. Time Of Payment: Bills for water service shall be mailed or delivered to the customer's last address as shown by the records of the Village when due,
but failure to receive a bill will not relieve the customer from the obligation to pay the same. All bills must be paid at the office of the Village. All bills for
water service become delinquent twenty one (21) days after the date of bill and are subject to a late payment charge pursuant to subsection 8-5-3A of
this Title.
The amount indicated on a bill as due (without penalty) will be accepted if mailed and postmarked within twenty one (21) days of the date of the bill.
When the last day for payment falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the time for payment of the bill will automatically be extended to include
the next business day. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2B-5: ESTIMATED USAGE:
If a water meter at any time fails to accurately register the quantity of water consumed, or the Village is unable to obtain a water meter reading, the usage
may be estimated on the basis of the quantity registered to the premises during the corresponding period of the preceding year. If there was no usage in
the corresponding period of the preceding year, then the estimated usage shall be determined by the Village based on the typical consumption at similar
premises. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2B-6: WATER SHUTOFF; INABILITY TO READ METER:
In cases where, for any cause, access to the meter is denied for a period of forty five (45) days, the water supply may be shut off in whole or in part by the
Village, provided that such water service shall not be shut off until a minimum of seven (7) days' written notice has been given to the party to whom the
water bills are mailed and that the party will be given an opportunity to be heard as to why the service should not be shut off. The written notice shall also
be posted by the Village on the entrance of the premises involved. Notwithstanding the foregoing,the water service may be shut off immediately by the
Village if the Public Works Director determines that an emergency exists. The water supply shall not be turned on until such access has been given and
any expense incurred by the Village in connection therewith has been paid by the owner, occupant or user. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2B-7: CONTESTED BILLS:
In cases where a customer files a written objection to any bill within twenty one (21) days of the date of the bill, the Village shall accept payment (without
penalty) within ten (10) days after the customer has been notified of the results of the Village's investigation. Thereafter, a late payment charge shall be
payable on the amount billed pursuant to subsection 8-5-3A of this Title.
In cases of a contested bill, the customer may request that the meter be tested for accuracy. No charge will be made for the test if it is found that the
meter needs repair through normal use. If the meter is found to be accurate within two percent (2%), the customer shall be required to reimburse the
Village for the cost of the test. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2B-8: NONPAYMENT OF BILLS:
The water supply may be shut off in whole or in part from any premises for which the water bill or any other charges remain unpaid thirty (30) days after
the date of such bill; provided, however, water service shall not be shut off until a minimum of seven (7) days' written notice has been given to the party to
whom the water bills are mailed and that the party will be given an opportunity to be heard as to why the service should not be shut off. The written notice
shall also be posted by the Village on the entrance of the premises involved. When the water has been shut off, the supply shall not be turned on except
upon payment of all delinquent bills, and the fee specified for turning on water pursuant to subsection 8-5-2F of this Title.
In the event any water bills or any other charges are not paid within twenty one (21) days after rendition of the bill for such service, such charges shall be
deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter such delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the real estate for which such service is
supplied, and the Village Treasurer is hereby authorized to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies, in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00),
in the office of the Recorder of Deeds and the filing of such statements shall be deemed notice of a lien for the payment of such charges for such service.
(Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 169/438
8-2B-9: VILLAGE TREASURER'S DUTIES:
It is hereby made the duty of the Village Treasurer to renderbills for water service and for all rates and charges in connection therewith and to collect all
money due therefor.
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the waterworks system shall be held by the Village Treasurer in a fund separate and apart from all
other funds of the Village. The Village Treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
129-5.
The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the waterworks system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books and records of the said waterworks system. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
ARTICLE C. RESTRICTIONS ON USE
8-2C-1: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons receiving water from the village. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2C-2: PROHIBITED USES:
The use and withdrawal of water by any person for the following purposes is hereby prohibited:
A. Landscape Watering: Landscape watering other than in accordance with the schedule set forth in section 8-2C-3 of this article.
B. Ornamental Fountains: The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making a similar use of water not employing a recirculating system.
C. Swimming Pools: Swimming and wading pools not employing a filter and recirculating system.
D. Escape Through Defective Plumbing: The escape of water through defective plumbing.
E. Open-System Air Conditioning: All buildings containing, or in which it is proposed to install, an "air-conditioning system", as defined herein, shall
comply with the following provisions:
1. Definitions:
AIR CONDITIONING: Cooling or dehumidification, or both, of space for human occupancy, food preservation, industrial processing or data
processing.
AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEM: One or more air-conditioning units, utilizing water-cooled condensers, the water for which passes through a
common meter, whether or not the units are owned by the property owners, tenants or a combination thereof. Submetering of individual airconditioning
units serving the same or adjacent space under one property owner or tenant shall not create separate systems.
INSTALLED CAPACITY: The total number of tons of refrigeration installed on one air-conditioning system.
TON OF REFRIGERATION: One compressor horsepower (12,000 Btu), the heat required to melt ice at the rate of one ton of ice in twenty four
(24) hours.
WATER-CONSERVING DEVICE: A cooling tower, spray pond, evaporative condenser or other equipment by which water is cooled and
recirculated, thereby limiting the use of additional water to replace water lost through evaporation.
2. Permit Required: No air-conditioning system shall be erected, installed, altered, converted, remodeled, structurally repaired, moved or its use
changed without a permit from the director of community development. A condition of such a permit shall be that the air-conditioning system be
equipped with a water-conserving device approved by the director of community development.
F. Car Wash Facilities: All newly constructed or remodeled car wash facilities shall be equipped with a water recycling system. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-2C-3: LANDSCAPE WATERING:
A. Rationing: Landscape watering shall be permitted as follows:
1. Odd-Numbered Street Addresses: Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday _ six o'clock (6:00) A.M. until ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. until ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., provided that newly seeded areas as well as planted sod may be sprinkled at any time on any day for a maximum
period of two (2) weeks from the date of installation.
2. Even-Numbered Street Addresses: Wednesday, Friday and Sunday _ six o'clock (6:00) A.M. until ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. until ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., provided that newly seeded areas as well as planted sod may be sprinkled at any time on any day for a maximum
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 170/438
period of two (2) weeks from the date of installation.
B. Hand-Held Watering Devices: Hand-held watering devices (including watering cans) may be used at any time on any day.
C. Other Than Village Water Supplies: Landscape watering with water not supplied by the village is permitted at any time on any day.
D. Notice For Other Periods: Notwithstanding all of the above provisions, upon notice from the village engineer, no person shall water at any time when
watering would interfere with construction or maintenance of village or village-sponsored projects. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999; Ord. G-657, 4-11-2000)
8-2C-4: ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE:
A. Police Officers To Enforce: Every police officer of the village shall, in connection with his duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this
article.
B. Discontinuance Of Service: The village manager shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this article by the discontinuance of water service
in the event of violation hereof. In addition to any other penalties, any request to restore water service after a violation of section 8-2C-3 of this article
shall be subject to the submission to the village of all applicable fees and charges.
C. Violation Notice; Penalty: In addition to the other penalties provided for in this section and in this code, the police department is authorized to place
violation notices on the location of any violation of the provisions of this article; citations for such violations shall require the payment of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) within thirty (30) days of the date of the violation notice in order to avoid further proceedings pursuant to the general penalty
provisions of section 1-3-1 of this code. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
Chapter 3
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL REGULATIONS
8-3-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
A. Purpose: The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
1. To protect the public water supply system from contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or pollutants
through the service connection into the public water supply.
2. To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and
nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety.
3. To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public
and consumer's potable water systems.
B. Application Of Chapter: These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises served by the public potable water supply system of the Village. (Ord.
G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-3-2: VILLAGE POLICY:
The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow or backsiphonage
of contaminants through the customer's water service connection. If, in the judgment of the Public Works Director or his authorized
representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the Public Works Director shall give
notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the premises. The consumer shall immediately
install such approveddevice or devices at his own expense. Failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install such device or devices
immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices have been installed. The consumer shall
retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and repair as required in Section 8-3-6 of this Chapter for a period of at least five (5) years. The Public
Works Director may require the consumer to submit a cross-connection inspection report to the Village Water Division to assist in determining whether or
not service line protection will be required. All cross-connection inspections shall be conducted by a cross-connection device inspector certified by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of these cross-connection control regulations:
ASSE: Association of State Sanitary Engineers.
AGENCY: Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
APPROVED: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research Foundation For Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works Association, American National Standards Institute, or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 171/438
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM: Any water source or system on or available to the premises other than the public water supply system and includes the
water supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such
as wells, lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source
or system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than
the intended source of the potable water supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method, or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices
used for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois Plumbing Code and Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
CCCDI: Cross-connection control device inspector.
CONSUMER OR CUSTOMER: The owner, official custodian or person incontrol of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public
water system.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM: Any water system located on the consumer's premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a consumer's
water system.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
CROSS-CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable
water and the other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there may be a flow from one system into the other.
Direct Cross-Connection: A cross-connection formed when a water system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
Indirect Cross-Connection: A cross-connection through which an unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into
a safe potable water system.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single, independently acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A
double check valve assembly must include tight shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water
tightness of each check valve.
FIXED PROPER AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of
the receptacle.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and wellbeing
of consumers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in
death or significant reduction in the quality of life.
INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of a
plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890.
NONPOTABLE WATER: Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use as determined by the requirements of 35 Illinois Administrative Code 604.
PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances andappliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a
private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to within and about any building or buildings where a person or
persons live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems.
Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any
building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private
sewage disposal system five feet (5') beyond the foundation walls.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirements of 35 Illinois Administrative Code 604 for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes.
POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate
extension of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
PROCESS FLUIDS: Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as
would constitute a health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced into the public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes, but is not limited
to:
A. Polluted or contaminated waters;
B. Process waters;
C. Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
D. Cooling waters;
E. Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams, or irrigation systems;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 172/438
F. Chemicals in solution or suspension;
G. Oils, gases, acids, alkalis, and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other process, or for firefighting purposes.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes, and structures through which water is obtained and distributed to the public, includingwells and well
structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or
intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic use and which serve at least fifteen (15) service connections or which
regularly serve at least twenty five (25) persons at least sixty (60) days per year. A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or a
"noncommunity water supply".
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPAL BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves
together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE Standard
1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) check valves shall be less than the supply pressure. In
case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the
check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the device, and each device
shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
SURVEY: The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply
system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing data of all cross-connection control devices and methods located within
that customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should not be an actual plumbing inspection.
SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water
supply system or a consumer's potable water system.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
WATER PURVEYOR: The owner or official custodian of a public water system. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-3-4: WATER SYSTEM:
A. The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts; the public water supply system and the consumer's water system.
B. The public water supply system shall consist of the sourcefacilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the potable water
system under the control of the Public Works Director up to the point where the consumer's water system begins.
C. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the public water supply
distribution system.
D. The public water supply distribution system shall include the network or conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water system.
E. The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities beyond the water service pipe shut-off valve or curb stop used to convey water from
the public water supply distribution system to points of use. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-3-5: CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
A. Connections between potable water systems and other systems or equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable quality
are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection control devices or methods are installed, tested, and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
B. No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological and
chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the Agency. There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe substance
may enter a supply. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-3-6: SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS:
A. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the approved cross-connection control device inspector for the inspection of the
presence or absence of cross-connections within the consumer's premises, and testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection control devices
within the consumer's premises.
B. On request of the Public Works Director, or his authorized representative, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping system or
systems of water use within the consumer's premises. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the Public Works Director for
the verification of information submitted by the consumer to the Public Works Director regarding cross-connection inspection results.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 173/438
C. It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether there are
actual or potential cross-connections to his water system through which contaminantsor pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable water
system. All cross-connection control or other plumbing inspections must be conducted in accordance with 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/3(1).
D. It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow into the public water system by ensuring that:
1. Control Devices Required: All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross-connection control devices are installed for control of backflow
and back-siphonage.
2. Installation: Cross-connection control devices are installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
3. Inspection: Cross-connection control devices are inspected at the time of installation and at least annually by a person approved by the Agency as a
cross-connection control device inspector. The inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
4. Testing And Records:
a. Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer.
b. Records submitted to the Village shall be available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance with 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4(e).
c. Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of the most recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.
d. A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
Date of each test;
Name and approval number of person performing the test;
Test results;
Repairs or servicing required;
Repairs and date completed; and
Service performed and date completed. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-3-7: WHERE PROTECTION REQUIRED:
A. An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to the public water supply as described in the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois
Administrative Code 890 and the Agency's regulations, 35 Illinois Administrative Code 680. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall
be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where, in the judgment of the Public Works Director, actual or
potential hazards to the public water supplysystem exist.
B. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
1. Premises have an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary supply is accepted as an additional source by the Public Works Director and the
source is approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
2. Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply. This shall include premises
having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the Public Works Director.
3. Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of the Public Works Director and/or the cross-connection control device inspector,
are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or not cross-connections exist.
4. Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete crossconnection
survey.
5. Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished.
C. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on all connections to the public water supply as described in the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77
Illinois Administrative Code 890 and the Agency's regulations 35 Illinois Administrative Code 680. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device
shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the
Public Works Director determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists:
1. Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;
2. Laboratories;
3. Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;
4. Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water pumping stations;
5. Food or beverage processing plants;
6. Chemical plants;
7. Metal plating industries;
8. Petroleum processing or storage plants;
9. Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 174/438
10. Car washes;
11. Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks; and
12. Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-3-8: TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED:
A. The type of protection required under subsections 8-3-7B1 through B3 of this Chapter shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
1. An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that
could cause a severe health hazard.
2. An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause a system or health hazard.
3. An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a double check valve
assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not
dangerous to health.
B. The type of protection required under subsections 8-3-7B4 and B5 of this Chapter shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
C. Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
1. The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other chemicals.
2. Water is pumped into the system from another source; or
3. Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source; or water can be pumped into the fire safety system from any other source;
4. There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced into the fire safety system.
D. All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines and
a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-3-9: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
A. All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or
American National Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in compliance with applicable industry specifications.
B. Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer
of the device shall be performed and a manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on-site. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-3-10: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE:
A. It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises on which backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have inspections,
tests, maintenance and repairs made in accordance with the following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in
manufacturer's instructions.
1. Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of the
service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or bypassed
air gaps shall be made within twenty four (24) hours.
2. Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service performed
within five (5) days.
3. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five (5) days.
B. Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the Agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
C. Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
D. A maintenance log shall be maintained by the customer and include:
1. Date of each test or visual inspection;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 175/438
2. Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual inspection;
3. Test results;
4. Repairs or servicing required;
5. Repairs and date completed; and
6. Servicing performed and date completed.
E. Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay as required by subsection A of this Section.
F. Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
Public Works Director. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-3-11: BOOSTER PUMPS:
A. Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off device
designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less.
B. It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the Public Works Director,
at least once a year, that the device is operable. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-3-12: VIOLATIONS:
A. The Public Works Director shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any
backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the Public Works
Director, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the
premises, or if a low pressure cut-off required by these regulations is not installed and maintained in working order.
B. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with
these regulations to the satisfaction of thePublic Works Director and the submission to the Village of a water turn-on charge.
C. Neither the Village, the Public Works Director, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customers of the Village's water supply system for any
injury, damages, or lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this Section,
whether or not said termination of the water supply was with or without notice.
D. The consumer responsible for back-siphoned material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the
cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system.
E. Any person found to be violating any provision of this Chapter shall be served with written notice stating the notice of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit of the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations.
F. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter in addition to the fine provided in the general penalty in Section 1-3-1 of this Code, shall
become liable to the Village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the Village by reason of such violation, whether the same was caused
before or after notice. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999; 2000 Code)
Chapter 4
TREES AND SHRUBS
8-4-1: LOCATION OF TREES AND SHRUBS:
Any trees or shrubs located within public rights of way are public property under the control and jurisdiction of the village. All trees or shrubs placed within
public rights of way shall become the property of the village upon their placement.
Trees may be planted within public ways in accordance with the public works construction standards and upon receipt of a permit. Approved tree species
are listed within the public works construction standards. Placement of trees shall be limited to areas that do not impede or interfere with the sight of
pedestrians or operators of vehicles. The applicant shall provide any landscape watering necessary. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-4-2: TREES, SHRUBS, VINES AND OTHER GREENERY CAUSING OBSTRUCTIONS OR OTHER DANGEROUS
CONDITIONS:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 176/438
A. Every owner or occupant of any house, building, lot, or premises in the village shall keep trees, shrubs, vines, and other vegetation located on his or
her property trimmed and maintained so as to prevent or remove the following conditions:
1. Any tree which is dead, dangerous, or likely to fall or that is so unsafe, unhealthy, diseased, or insect infected (including, without limitation, ash trees
infested with the emerald ash borer and pine trees impacted with pine wilt) as to constitute a hazard to persons, public property, private property or
other vegetation;
2. The obstruction of any street, pedestrian path, or any public way to any extent which interferes or obstructs: a) the free passage of pedestrians or
motorists; b) a clear view along such streets, paths and at any street or driveway intersection; or c) the reflection of any streetlights;
3. The obstruction of any sewer, drainageway, or septic field;
4. The dangerous proximity of any tree or other vegetation to public utility lines; and
5. The interference with any existing or proposed public improvement.
Said conditions are hereby declared to be nuisance greenery and any tree or other vegetation located on private property which is allowed to grow
in violation of the foregoing subsections shall be deemed a weed subject to abatement by the village as provided by state statute.
B. Whenever any person whose duty it is to keep any tree or other vegetation trimmed or cut as provided in the preceding subsection shall fail to do so in
the judgment of the village manager or his or her designee, the public works director may cause written notice to be served upon such person
requiring such person to perform the work within fourteen (14) days following mailing or personal delivery of such notice. Such notice shall also notify
the owner that, unless the required work is done within such fourteen (14) day period, the village will proceed with the work, assess the cost thereof
against the owner, and impose a lien for such cost on the affected property if not paid by the owner within thirty (30) days after billing.
C. The notice referred to in subsection B of this section shall be personally served or sent by registered mail to the person to whom was sent the last
preceding general tax bill for the property upon which the tree or trees affected is or are located, and a copy of said notice shall be mailed to the
occupant of such property.
D. Within fourteen (14) days following delivery or mailing of the notice described in the preceding subsection, the owner of the property shall cause the
nuisance to be removed or remedied. If the owner or occupant shall neglect or refuse to trim or maintain the trees or other vegetation as required by
the notice, the village may promptly cause the removal or remedy of the nuisance by village employees or contractors. If the village shall so cause the
removal or remedy of any such nuisance, all direct and indirect expenses incurred in connection therewith, including the costs of collection, shall be
assessed against the property owner. In the event such expenses are not paid upon billing, the village clerk, not later than thirty (30) days after billing,
shall file a notice of lien against such property for the amount of such expenses in the manner provided by statute. (Ord. G-958, 12-13-2011)
8-4-3: INFECTIOUS OR DISEASED TREES AND SHRUBS:
A. The public works director shall be responsible for the control of infectious diseases and the removal of any trees on village property physically
damaged to the extent that they cannot be saved.
B. All trees infected with an infectious disease as determined by the public works director are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The public works
director is authorized to enter onto any public or private property to remove any tree so infected when the owner of such property refuses or neglects
to test and remove such tree.
C. If it is determined that any tree is so infected, the public works director shall notify the owner of the premises upon which the tree is located in writing to
remove such tree. If the owner does not cause the same to be removed and destroyed within ten (10) days of receipt of such notification, the public
works director shall enter upon such property and remove such tree. Express power to so enter upon such lands and remove such tree is hereby
conferred upon such public works director. Any costs or expenses incurred by the village in removing any tree so diseased shall be charged to the
owner and, if not paid within thirty (30) days after billing, become a lien upon the real estate affected, provided the village files a notice of lien in the
office of recorder of deeds in the county in which the real estate is located. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-4-4: DAMAGE, ATTACHMENT TO TREES:
A. Damaging Public Trees: It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, cut down, damage, or injure any tree in any public right of way.
B. Attachments To Trees: It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any material, wire, insulator or any wire appurtenance to any tree within public right
of way. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
Chapter 5
FEES, CHARGES AND BONDS
8-5-1: PERFORMANCE SECURITY REQUIRED:
8-5-1-1: UTILITY AND TELECOMMUNICATION COMPANIES:
A. Requirement And Purpose: Any public or private utility or telecommunications company applying for a permit required by this Title shall file a
performance security in a form and in an amount as set forth in this Section, unless a company has a franchise agreement stating otherwise. The
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 177/438
performance security shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this Section at the permittee's sole expense until the completion of the work
authorized by the permit. This security may also be used by the Village to complete the work in accordance with the permit or perform certain
minimum requirements as determined by the Village Engineer in the event that the permittee fails to complete said work. The performance security
shall serve as security for:
1. The guarantee of faithful performance of the work and conditions covered by the permit;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits or other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this Title;
3. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this Title including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required to perform that the Village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or complete,
and all other payments due the Village from the permittee pursuant to this Title or any other applicable law.
B. Form: The permittee shall provide the performance security to the Village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the Village, or an unconditional irrevocable letter of credit in a form acceptable to the Village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the Village and the permittee; and
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the Village of any amounts covered by it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the Village and within the State at which it can be drawn.
C. Amount: The dollar amount of the performance security shall be sufficient to provide for one hundred ten percent (110%) of the reasonably estimated
cost, as determined by the Village Engineer, to restore the public ways and public utility easements to at least as good a condition as that existing prior
to the construction under the permit, as determined by the Village Engineer, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the Village
estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will
be performed in phases in multiple locations in the Village, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of
locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion or restoration in the previous phase or
phases, the Village Engineer may, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall
be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the performance security for phased construction shall be equal to
the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection for any single phase.
D. Withdrawals: The village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the performance security, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such
amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder; or
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid; or
3. Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this title that the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the performance
security.
E. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the performance
security, the permittee shall restore the performance security to the amount specified in subsection C of this section.
F. Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the performance security be returned to the permittee by the
village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the performance security below the
minimum balance required in subsection C of this section.
G. Closing And Return Of Performance Security: Upon completion by the permittee and approval by the village of the work authorized under the permit,
the performance security shall be refunded to the permittee, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is
taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this title or other applicable law. In
the event of any revocation of the permit, the performance security, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the village.
H. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the village with respect to the performance security are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this title or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said performance security shall
affect any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect
to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-5-1-2: ALL OTHER APPLICANTS:
Each applicant for a permit required by this title other than utility and telecommunication companies shall file a performance security in the form of cash in
the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) to guarantee faithful performance of the work covered by the permit. This security may also be used by
the village to complete the work in accordance with the permit or perform certain minimum requirements as determined by the village engineer in the
event that the permittee fails to complete said work.
Notwithstanding the above, no cash performance security shall be required under this section for:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 178/438
A. Any municipal corporation; or
B. Any homeowners' association organized as a not for profit corporation if the estimated cost of the work, as approved by the village engineer, is less
than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00); or
C. Tree and shrub installation; or
D. The removal of a driveway; or
E. The replacement of a driveway so long as the replacement driveway is of the same dimensions and constructed in the same location as the previous
driveway. (Ord. G-981, 9-25-2012)
8-5-1-3: DEFAULT IN PERFORMANCE; PERFORMANCE SECURITY FORFEITED:
Whenever the village determines that a default or violation has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of a permit or of any provision of this
title, written notice thereof shall be given to the permittee or his agent engaged in the work. Such notice shall contain a statement of the default or
violation, state the work to be done, the period of time deemed by the village to be necessary for the completion of such work (such time shall not be less
than 15 days unless the default or violation is deemed by the village engineer to be an emergency in which case the work shall be accomplished
immediately), and that the performance security will be forfeited if the permittee fails to perform. Such notice shall be given either by personal delivery
thereof to the permittee, or his agent engaged in the work, by certified or registered United States mail addressed to the person to be notified, or by
telefax and regular mail. Thereafter, the permittee shall, within the time therein specified, cause the required work to be performed. If the permittee fails to
perform within the allotted time, the performance security shall be forfeited and may be used by the village to pay for the cost of doing the work set forth in
the notice or such minimum requirements as determined by the village engineer. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-5-1-4: COMPLETION; RETURN OF PERFORMANCE SECURITY:
Upon completion by the permittee and approval by the village of the permit work, the performance security shall be refunded to the permittee. In the event
that the village is unable to locate the permittee upon reasonable inquiry, the village shall retain said security for three (3) years after which the permittee
shall forfeit the security to the village. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-5-2: FEES AND CHARGES:
A. Plan Review And Inspection Fees: Any work within public ways or public utility easements or any water service extension construction shall be subject
to the following plan review and inspection fees prior to the issuance of any permit for such work:
1. Plan Review: Actual hours of review multiplied by sixty two dollars ($62.00) per hour. Minimum fee: Sixty two dollars ($62.00).
In addition to the above fees, all applicants shall reimburse the village for any outside consulting review charges within thirty (30) days of the date
the village seeks reimbursement for such charges.
2. Inspection:
Less than $2,000.00 $60.00
$2,000.01 - $5,000.00 3.0 percent1
$5,000.01 - $20,000.00 2.5 percent1
$20,000.01 - $50,000.00 2.0 percent1
$50,000.01 and over 1.5 percent1
Note:
1.Based upon estimated cost of construction as determined by the village engineer.
In addition to the above fees, all applicants shall reimburse the village for any outside consulting inspection charges within thirty (30) days of the
date the village seeks reimbursement for such charges.
3. Serve As Reimbursement: Said fees shall serve as reimbursement to the village for services rendered.
4. Fees And Charges Waived And Not Required: The plan review and inspection fees established in this section shall be waived and not required as
stipulated in section 1-14-2 of this code.
B. Meter Charge: There shall be a fee for a water meter based on the actual costs for time and materials incurred by the village.
Estimated Cost Of Construction Fee
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 179/438
C. Water Service Connection And Extension Fees:
1. For each water service connection made prior to July 15, 1999: This fee includes a connection fee and a fee for inspection of all lines.
RESIDENTIAL
Meter Size Connection Fee
5/8 inch $1,198.00
1 inch 1,546.00
11/2 inch 1,945.00
COMMERCIAL
a. A fee for each of the first twelve (12) months' usage commencing with the first full month of usage occurring after the issuance of occupancy
permits determined in the manner provided.
Fee = $0.36 x gallons used per meter reading
The number of days per month of usage
Example:
Days Of Operation
Per Week
Number Of Days Per
Month Of Usage
5.0 21.67
5.5 23.83
6.0 26.00
7.0 30.33
b. The fee determined pursuant to subsection C1a of this section shall be recomputed by the Village upon the expiration of a period of thirty six (36)
months after the first full month of usage as determined above as follows:
Fee = $4.32 x gallons used per meter reading for the last 12 months of stated 36 month period
Number of days of operation in the last 12 months of stated 36 month period
The fee so recomputed shall then be adjusted by the amount determined and paid pursuant to subsection C1a of this section and any additional
amount resulting from said recomputation shall be paid when billed; and any reduction resulting therefrom shall be reimbursed by the Village.
c. In the event that there is a substantial change in the use of the premises subject to the fee hereinabove provided at any time during the thirty six
(36) month term described above, the fee provided in subsection C1a of this section shall be recomputed in accord with subsection C1b of this
section as though the month in which the change in use occurs was the last month of the thirty six (36) month term provided in subsection C1b of
this section.
2. New Connection Fee: For new water service connection made on or after July 15, 1999: This fee is assessed based on the size of the water
extension and includes the fee for inspection of all lines.
Water Service
Extension Size Connection Fee
1 inch $ 1,150.00
11/2 inch 2,760.00
2 inch 3,680.00
3 inch 7,360.00
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 180/438
4 inch 11,500.00
6 inch 23,000.00
8 inch 74,750.00
There shall be no water service connection or extension fee for water lines used exclusively for irrigating/sprinkling (landscape watering) on
predominantly public property within the Village.
3. Charges For Upgrades To Preexisting Service: Where a new building is constructed, or an existing building or structure is altered, modified, or
newly occupied on a lot or tract to which water service has been previously provided, and the new construction, alteration, modification, occupancy,
or addition requires a larger water service extension than the existing or previous service, no permit shall be issued for the new construction,
alteration, modification, occupancy, or addition before the service applicant or customer pays the incremental difference between the connection fee
required for the previous water service extension size and the connection fee required for the newly enlarged water service extension as specified in
this section.
D. Fire Protection Line Charge: Four thousand seven hundred forty three dollars ($4,743.00).
E. Repair Of Damaged Water Meters: Twenty five dollars ($25.00) plus cost of required parts.
F. Water Turn On Charge: Turning on water following the interruption of service shall be subject to a charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) during normal working
hours and one hundred five dollars ($105.00) after normal working hours. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, turning on water following the
discontinuance of service pursuant to provisions of section 8-2C-4 of this title shall require the payment of a two hundred dollar ($200.00) charge.
G. Water Consumption Charges:
1. A monthly service charge of ten dollars ($10.00) per customer account is hereby imposed, effective for any billing periods after January 1, 2019.
2. Effective January 1, 2019 water shall be charged at the rate of ten dollars fifty cents ($10.50) per thousand gallons for customers in the corporate
limits of the Village of Oak Brook and at the rate of twelve dollars forty cents ($12.40) for customers outside the corporate limits of the Village of Oak
Brook.
3. Effective January 1, 2019 water drawn from the hydrant at 3003 Jorie Boulevard shall be charged at a rate of twelve dollars forty cents ($12.40) per
thousand gallons.
H. Construction Water: Unmetered water during construction, for a one hundred twenty (120) day period, as provided in section 8-2B-2 of this title:
1 inch water service extension or smaller $150.00
11/2 inch to 3 inch water service extension, inclusive 300.00
4 inch water service extension or larger 575.00
Water used in excess of one hundred twenty (120) days shall require a second charge for the second one hundred twenty (120) day period and any
subsequent periods thereafter.
I. Water Rate, Extension And Connection Fees: Water used from the Village system and all fees at premises not located within the Village shall be paid
for as required hereunder at a rate or fee equal to the then applicable rate or fee relative to usage or fee within the Village except in those instances
wherein a separate agreement has been approved by the Village or the same is otherwise provided for. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999; Ord. G-689, 12-11-
2001; Ord. G-707, 12-10-2002; Ord. G-716, 3-11-2003; Ord. G-736, 11-25-2003; Ord. G-737, 12-9-2003; Ord. G-769, 12-14-2004; Ord. G-770, 12-14-
2004; Ord. G-793, 12-13-2005; Ord. G-798, 1-24-2006; Ord. G-822, 1-9-2007; Ord. G-843, 10-23-2007; Ord. G-852, 1-8-2008; Ord. G-876, 12-15-
2008; Ord. G-878, 12-15-2008; Ord. G-906, 11-10-2009; Ord. G-907, 12-8-2009; Ord. G-940, 12-14-2010; Ord. G-957, 12-13-2011; Ord. G-985, 11-
13-2012; Ord. G-1012, 11-12-2013; Ord. G-1040, 10-28-2014; Ord. G-1066, 11-10-2015, eff. 1-1-2016; Ord. G-1092, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord.
G-1119, 12-12-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; Ord. G-1142, 12-11-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; Ord. G-1147, 3-26-2019)
8-5-3: DUE DATE OF FEES AND CHARGES; STATEMENTS:
A. If any statement for fees and charges required by section 8-5-2 of this chapter has not been paid in full within twenty one (21) days of the date it was
rendered, a ten percent (10%) penalty charge on the unpaid balance shall be added to the customer's account. The Finance Director is authorized to
waive such ten percent (10%) amount, at the written request of the customer, once annually. This waiver will be automatically granted if the customer
has a proven good payment history.
B. There shall be charged a fee as determined by the Village Treasurer for all payments returned by the maker's bank for insufficient funds, regardless of
the date the payment was attempted. (Ord. G-637, 7-13-1999)
8-5-4: STARTING WORK WITHOUT PERMIT:
In addition to the fees and charges listed in section 8-5-2 of this chapter, a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be charged to an applicant who
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 181/438
begins work without a permit. (Ord. G-907, 12-8-2009)
Chapter 6
CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
8-6-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction,
which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the Village rights-of-way and the
Village as a whole.
B. Intent: In enacting this chapter, the Village intends to exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the Village and, in particular, the use of the public
ways and property by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by small wireless facilities and utility facilities, including without
limitation:
1. Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;
2. Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
3. Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the Village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property;
4. Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of facilities;
5. Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
6. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
7. Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that characterize the Village's residential neighborhoods;
8. Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights-of-way; and
9. Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to facilities locations.
C. Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way within the
jurisdiction of the Village. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated
by the wireless provider or utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or
similar agreement.
D. Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The Village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license
or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the Village rights-of-way. Utilities
that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the Village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the
Village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
E. Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
1. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the Village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
2. Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the Village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
F. Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent
of such conflict.
G. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter,
the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws or regulations.
H. Sound Engineering Judgment: The Village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may exercise the power
described in section 8-6-22 of this chapter to vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the Village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the Village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare. (Ord. G-1117, 11-14-2017; Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code section 530.30, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 182/438
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of any type of wireless
communications services.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds,
and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design Guide.
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The Municipal Code of the Village of Oak Brook.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure
or utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 USC 153(33), as amended; or
wireless service other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in
47 USC 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
CONCEALED FACILITY: A wireless facility mounted on a structure located within the right-of-way that is enclosed, camouflaged, screened, obscured or
otherwise not readily distinguishable from the structure on which it is mounted to an observer at ground level.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The Village Director of Public Works or his or her designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use
of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary
or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the
parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The Village Engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, small wireless facilities, as defined in this section, and
appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the
term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or operated by the Village.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 183/438
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as a monopole, utility pole, antenna, transformer, pump, or
meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by
the Village Engineer to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any Federal or State law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois Highway Code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section
VI.D.1.a.i through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally
landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the
requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation
program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois Commerce Commission.
IDOT: Illinois Department of Transportation.
JULIE: The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators Utility Notification Program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
MONOPOLE: A structure composed of a single spire, pole or tower designed and principally used to support antennas or related equipment and that is
not a utility pole.
MUNICIPALLY-OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE: Infrastructure in the public right-of-way within the boundaries of the Village, including, but not limited to,
streetlights, traffic signals, towers, structures, or buildings owned, operated or maintained by the Village.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to section 8-1-4 of this title and section 8-6-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the Village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, State or Federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT-OF-WAY OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other
similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the Village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the Village. "Right-of-way" or "rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal Village property that is not specifically described in the
previous sentence and shall not include Village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
right-of-way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 184/438
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section 8-6-11 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more
than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is
cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation
of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment,
power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area
telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services,
cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way
communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more
other specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the
form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a
cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Means any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be
used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any facility that is not a small wireless facility as defined in this chapter.
UTILITY POLE: An upright pole designed and used to support electric cables, telephone cables, telecommunication cables, cable service cables, which
are used to provide lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-
201(v).
VILLAGE: The Village of Oak Brook.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network,
including: a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. "Wireless facility" includes small wireless facilities. "Wireless
facility" does not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial
or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structure or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is
acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless service provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory
basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. "Wireless support structure" does not include a utility pole. (Ord. G-
1117, 11-14-2017; Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every wireless provider or utility that occupies right-of-way within the Village shall register on January 1 of each year with the Director of Public Works or
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 185/438
his/her designee, providing the registrant's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact
persons who can act on its behalf in connection with emergencies involving the registrant's facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number
for each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in section 8-6-9 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. G-1130, 7-10-
2018)
8-6-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
A. Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any Village
right-of-way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this chapter), or 4) materially
increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an
application with the Village Engineer and obtaining a permit from the Village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
No application, approval, or permit shall be required for routine maintenance, the replacement of small wireless facilities that are substantially similar,
the same size or smaller, if the wireless provider notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement, or the installation,
placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles in
compliance with applicable Safety Codes. The Village may require a permit to work within the right-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or
that require lane closures.
B. Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the Village and shall be filed in such number
of duplicate copies as the Village may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes
contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. The
application for a small wireless facility, along with supporting information and notices, must be submitted to the Village Engineer.
C. Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the wireless provider or utility or the duly authorized representative and
shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
1. The applicant's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2. The applicant's name and address, if different than the wireless provider or utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in
the work;
3. The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
4. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and
detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely
to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
5. Evidence that the wireless provider or utility has placed on file with the Village:
a. A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and
vehicular traffic; and
b. An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous
materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the Village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes
compliance with this section unless the Village finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
6. Evidence of insurance as required in section 8-6-9 of this chapter; and
7. Evidence of posting of the Security Fund as required in section 8-6-11 of this chapter;
8. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this chapter (see section 8-6-22 of this chapter);
9. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations; and
10. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the Village.
D. Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Facilities: The permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to the
specific facility that is the subject of the permit application:
1. In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, cable television service, video service or natural gas distribution system,
evidence that any "Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by law to obtain,
or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
2. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;
3. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have
been satisfied;
4. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control and other local or State entities with jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or
5. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 186/438
6. Applications for small wireless facilities must also include the following:
a. Drawings and site plans for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application;
b. The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole will be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings;
c. A site specific structural analysis and engineering drawing for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application, prepared and
stamped by a professional engineer, which demonstrates the utility pole or Municipally-owned infrastructure is safely capable of supporting the
small wireless facility in all reasonably foreseeable weather conditions without creating a risk to public health and safety. The structural analysis
will also describe the method by which the facility is designed to fail and demonstrate that any structural failure to the facility shall not cause harm
to any residential structure;
d. The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
e. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application;
f. Certification that the collocation complies with section 8-6-16 of this chapter; and
g. Applications must include the screening and stealth concealment methods used for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the
application.
E. Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the applicant in writing to the Village within thirty (30) days after
the change necessitating the amendment.
F. Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount established in the Village fee schedule. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is
paying the Municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
G. Application Fees For Small Wireless Facilities: All applications for the collocation of a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00). All applications for the collocation of more than
one small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in said application. An application for the installation of a small wireless facility that will
require a new utility pole must be accompanied by a fee in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
H. Consolidated Applications For Small Wireless Facilities: Applications for small wireless facilities may be submitted on a consolidated basis provided
they involve the same type of small wireless facility and the same type of structure. The Village may, at its discretion, remove small wireless facility
collocations from the consolidated application and treat them separately for purposes of deeming the application incomplete or denied. (Ord. G-1117,
11-14-2017; Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
A. Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Village
Engineer on a nondiscriminatory basis. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, or
regulations that concern public safety, the Village Engineer shall notify the applicant of the basis for a denial, including specific code provisions upon
which the denial was based. The applicant may cure the deficiencies and resubmit a revised application without paying additional application fees.
B. Permit Approval Or Denial: When reviewing applications for small wireless facilities, the Village will approve or deny the revised application within thirty
(30) days after the applicant resubmits the application or it will be deemed approved. If the Village Engineer is satisfied that the proposed work
conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Village Engineer shall issue a permit.
In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer, that the construction proposed under the
application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
C. Application Deadlines For Small Wireless Facilities: Applications are deemed complete if the Village does not notify the applicant otherwise within thirty
(30) days of receipt of the application. If the application to collocate a small wireless facility is to be placed on an existing utility pole, the Village will
notify the applicant of its approval or denial within ninety (90) days. If the Village fails to notify the applicant within that timeframe, the application will
be deemed approved. If the application to collocate a small wireless facility requires the installation of a new utility pole, the Village will notify the
applicant of its approval or denial within one hundred twenty (120) days. If the Village fails to notify the applicant within that timeframe, the application
will be deemed approved. (Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
A. Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A permit from the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in
accordance with this chapter on Village rights-of-way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights
of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
B. Duration: No permit issued to a utility shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within that period and
is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. Collocation of small wireless facilities must be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after the
issuance of the permit. If collocation is not complete, the permit will be void. Permits for small wireless facilities are valid for five (5) years from the time
of issuance.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 187/438
C. Pre-Construction Meeting Required: A pre-construction meeting may be requested by Village staff. If requested, no construction shall begin pursuant to
a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under
the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the Village with such
Village representatives in attendance as the Village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit,
and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other facilities
in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other facilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and
egress by adjacent property owners.
D. Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the Village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the Village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. (Ord. G-1117, 11-14-2017; Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications
submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Village within ninety (90) days after the
completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the
locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a request for
variance in accordance with section 8-6-22 of this chapter. If the Village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the
facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. (Ord. G-1117, 11-14-
2017)
8-6-8: ANNUAL RECURRING RATES FOR SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
The Village shall charge an annual recurring rate for the collocation of small wireless facilities on Municipally-owned infrastructure located in its right-ofway
equal to either two hundred dollars ($200.00) per utility pole, or the actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space
on the Village utility pole, whichever is greater. If the Village elects to charge the actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use
of space on the Municipally-owned infrastructure, it shall adopt a fee schedule on an annual basis. (Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-9: INSURANCE:
A. Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each wireless provider or utility occupying
right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the wireless
provider or utility as named insured and naming the Village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional
insureds on the policies listed in subsection A1 of this section:
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X",
"C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
a. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
b. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident;
c. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
d. Wireless providers must include the Village as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy;
2. Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and
3. Property insurance for replacement costs against all risks.
If the wireless provider or utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such
contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section.
B. Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary
policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
C. Copies Required: The wireless provider or utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the Village within ten (10) days
following receipt of a written request therefor from the Village.
D. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by
the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Manager of such intent to cancel
or not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the wireless provider
or utility shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
E. Self-Insurance: A wireless provider or utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by this section. A
wireless provider or utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 188/438
additional insureds under this section. A wireless provider or utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to
demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under this section, such as evidence that the
wireless provider or utility is a "private self insurer" under the Workers Compensation Act.
F. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Wireless Provider Or Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the wireless provider or utility to the Village and
any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such
insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder. (Ord. G-1117, 11-14-2017; Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-10: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a wireless provider or utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the Village
and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or
alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the wireless provider or utility or
its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing
or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or
similar agreement; provided, however, that the wireless provider or utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the Village, its
officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. (Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-11: SECURITY:
A. Purpose: The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
Security Fund shall serve as security for:
1. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this chapter;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this chapter; and
3. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance
by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the Village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to
perform or complete, and all other payments due the Village from the permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable law.
B. Form: The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the Village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to
the Village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the Village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this
subsection shall, at a minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the Village and the permittee;
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the Village of any amounts covered by it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the Village and within the State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
C. Amount: The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at least as
good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the Village Engineer, and may also include reasonable,
directly related costs that the Village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of
facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the Village, with each phase consisting of construction of
facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion
of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Village Engineer may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single
amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection C for any single phase.
D. Withdrawals: The Village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3. Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the Village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
E. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the Village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund,
the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in subsection C of this section.
F. Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the Village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the Village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 189/438
balance required in subsection C of this section.
G. Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the
Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the Village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable
costs, loss or damage incurred by the Village as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall
be refunded to the permittee.
H. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the Village with respect to the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the Village, whether reserved
by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect any other
right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its
rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. G-1117, 11-14-2017; Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-12: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. Village Right To Revoke Permit: The Village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
2. Non-compliance with this chapter;
3. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way presents a
direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
B. Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The Village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.
C. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the
Village, the permittee shall have the following options:
1. Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the
Village within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the
satisfaction of the Village providing written proof of such removal to the Village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection.
D. Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the Village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of this section.
E. Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the Village or its
designee may, at the option of the Village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon not less than twenty (20) days notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days notice to the permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the Village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the Village for all costs of removal. (Ord. G-1117, 11-14-2017; Ord.
G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-13: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
A. Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the Village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way or
change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner
under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in the
right-of-way.
B. Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the Village's right-of-way.
C. Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. G-
1117, 11-14-2017; Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-14: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 190/438
A. Standards And Principles: All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and
standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
1. Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
2. Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
3. Highway Design Manual;
4. Highway Standards Manual;
5. Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
6. Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices;
7. Flagger's Handbook; and
8. Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
B. Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the Village Engineer shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final. If
requested, the Village Engineer shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the
future. (Ord. G-1117, 11-14-2017; Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-15: PUBLIC SAFETY AND TRAFFIC CONTROL:
A. Public Safety: The placement of any antenna, wireless facility or small wireless facilities located in the Village right-of-way may not interfere with the
frequencies used by public safety agencies for public safety communications. Unacceptable interference will be determined in accordance with
industry standards and the Federal Communications Commission's regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum. If an
antenna, wireless facility or small wireless facility causes such interference, the owner must take all steps necessary to correct and eliminate the
interference at its own costs. The Village may terminate a permit for any antenna, wireless facility or small wireless facility based on such interference
if the interference is not corrected.
The Village may reserve space on its utility pole for future public safety uses or for the Village's electric utility uses. This reservation of space may
preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility where the Village determines that the utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
B. Minimum Requirements: The Village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this Code.
C. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The wireless provider or utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective
devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable Federal, State, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers
when performing any work on the rights-of-way.
D. Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
E. Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the wireless provider or utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of
such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 8-6-21 of this chapter, the wireless provider or utility shall
provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
F. Compliance: The wireless provider or utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to
its attention by the Village. (Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-16: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of facilities, all facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to
the general location requirements of this subsection.
1. No Interference With Village Facilities: No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the Village Engineer determines that the proposed location
will require the relocation or displacement of any of the Village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of
the Village's utility facilities.
2. Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin
said right-of-way.
3. No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
4. No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
5. Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals,
and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 191/438
6. The Village is not required to install or maintain any specific utility pole or to continue to install or maintain utility poles in any location if it makes a
non-discriminatory decision to eliminate above-ground utility poles of a particular type. For Village utility poles with collocated small wireless facilities
in place when the Village makes a decision to eliminate above-ground utility poles, the Village will, at its discretion, either maintain the utility pole or
install and maintain an alternative utility pole for the collocation of the small wireless facility, or offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless provider.
B. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
a. Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will
permit;
b. Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
c. Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
d. No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
e. Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
a. The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right-of-way line;
b. A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
c. In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more
than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the rightof-
way line or as near as practicable.
C. Facilities Crossing Highways:
1. No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of Village highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
2. Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3. Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
4. Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83 Ill.
Adm. Code 305);
b. Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
c. Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5. Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and
b. Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
6. Markers: The Village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may
also be eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707 (1989)).
D. Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights-Of-Way: The Village may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
E. Freestanding Facilities:
1. Small Wireless Facilities:
a. The Village may not require the placement of a small wireless facility on a specific utility pole or category of poles. However, should the
application necessitate the installation of a new utility pole, the Village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing
utility pole or existing support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the proposed collocation. Should the applicant reject the proposed
relocated collocation, it must provide a written certification describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternative
location will not satisfy the wireless provider's needs. The Village may require any monopole, utility pole or other freestanding facility located
within a right-of-way to be screened from view in compliance with the appearance standards described below.
b. If all existing monopoles, utility poles and other aboveground facilities are located on one side of the right-of-way, all new monopoles, utility poles
and other freestanding facilities shall be located on the same side of the right-of-way as the existing aboveground facilities. If there exist above
ground facilities on both sides, new freestanding facilities shall be located on the side where the above ground facilities most closely match the
scale of the new freestanding facility.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 192/438
2. Other Facilities:
a. The Village may restrict the location and size of any monopole, utility pole or other freestanding facility located within a right-of-way. No
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way may be constructed or modified so that the height of the free standing facility is higher by more
than ten feet (10') or more than ten percent (10%), whichever is greater, than any other existing, freestanding facility located within the right-ofway
within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed facility, measured along the center line of the respective right-of-way. Where there are no
other freestanding facilities located within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed facility, the maximum height of the freestanding facility shall
be forty five feet (45').
b. The Village may require any monopole, utility pole or other freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view.
c. If all existing monopoles, utility poles and other aboveground facilities are located on one side of the right-of-way, all new monopoles, utility poles
and other freestanding facilities shall be located on the same side of the right-of-way as the existing aboveground facilities. If there exist above
ground facilities on both sides, new freestanding facilities shall be located on the side where the above ground facilities most closely match the
scale of the new freestanding facility.
F. Height Restrictions For Small Wireless Facilities: Small wireless facilities are limited to a maximum height of ten feet (10') above the utility pole or
wireless structure on which it is collocated. The height limit of a new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure on which small wireless
facilities are collocated is limited to the higher of: 1) ten feet (10') higher than the tallest existing utility pole within three hundred feet (300') of the new
or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure that is in the same right-of-way; or 2) forty five feet (45') above ground level. The Village shall
designate which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structure shall control the
height limitation.
G. Facilities Installed Above Ground: Above ground facilities may be installed only if:
1. No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic
qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless,
single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and Municipally-owned infrastructure shall be used
wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles or monopoles is strongly discouraged.
H. Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable
supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.
2. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based
upon the following considerations:
a. The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the
event of damage to or failure of the facility;
b. The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;
c. The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
d. The proposed method of attachment;
e. The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
f. The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g. The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
h. The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved.
I. Design And Appearance Standards:
1. Residential Design Standards:
a. Purpose: Ensure visually acceptable facility design and to provide discretion on required and preferred design of small wireless facilities.
b. Applicability: These design standards shall apply to each facility located in a district zoned for residential uses:
(1) Applicants must use architectural treatments and stealth techniques to reduce potential visual impacts from all small wireless facilities.
(2) All new utility poles installed for the purpose of mounting a facility must be stealth or camouflaged to blend into the surrounding environment.
Examples of stealth or camouflage designs are presented in figure 1 of this section.
(3) Small wireless facilities and all ancillary equipment associated with the facility must not emit sound.
(4) Cables must be routed directly from the ground through the pole and equipment enclosures must completely enclose or hide cabling. No
exposed cable is allowed.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 193/438
(5) No flashing lights or unnecessary, non-essential stickers are allowed to be placed on any facility. Stickers must be designed in the same color
as the pole to which they are attached.
(6) In no case shall equipment block the sidewalk or pedestrian pathway. All installations must maintain accessibility requirements and standards.
(7) All newly installed equipment must be painted with graffiti-resistant paint to match pole color and surroundings.
(8) Colors and materials for small wireless facilities shall be chosen to minimize the visibility of the facility.
(9) Antennas attached to existing poles or Municipally-owned infrastructure shall be painted and textured to match the existing structure.
(10) Any ground-mounted facility shall be painted with non-reflective matte finish paint using color shades that are comparable or blend with
surrounding natural elements such as soil, trees, or grasslands. Any ground-mounted facility shall be screened from the yard of the property in
front of which it is located using year-round landscaping materials. The owner of the ground-mounted facility shall guarantee the landscaping
materials for a period of one year from planting.
(11) All disturbed pavement and landscaping shall be replaced and areas of bare or disturbed soils must be re-vegetated. If replacement
landscape is determined to be infeasible the Village may accept mitigation funds to use elsewhere. The owner of the ground-mounted facility
shall guarantee the restoration work or reseeding for a period of one year.
(12) No facility may display any signage or advertisements unless expressly allowed by the Village in a written approval, recommended under
FCC regulations or required by law or permit condition. Every facility shall at all times display signage that accurately identifies the facility owner
and provides the facility owner's unique site number, and also provides a local or toll-free telephone number to contact the facility owner's
operations center. All required or permitted signage must face toward the street or otherwise placed to minimize visibility from adjacent
sidewalks and structures.
FIGURE 1
SAMPLE STEALTH DESIGNS FOR SMALL CELL UTILITY POLES
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 194/438
2. Design Standards In Special Aesthetic/Economic Purpose Zones:
a. Purpose: To protect and promote the Village's unique character in a manner consistent with State and Federal laws and regulations.
b. Applicability: These design standards shall apply to: 1) each area, district, neighborhood or zone expressly designated in the Village's
Comprehensive Plan as having special aesthetic or economic impacts on the welfare of the community; and 2) each redevelopment area
designed under the Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act or the Business District Development and Redevelopment Act:
(1) Siting of small wireless facilities in special aesthetic/economic purpose zones must respect the existing character or design ordinance of
established zone.
(2) Applicants must include proposed stealth and concealment measures in their applications.
(3) Effective camouflage so as to disguise the facility so that it appears to be something other than a facility and is at the same time compatible
with its surroundings (for example, designed to look like a tree).
(4) Small wireless facilities must be designed so that the facilities silhouette, mass and color are masked in such a way as to be virtually
indistinguishable from their background.
(5) Examples of stealth or camouflage designs are presented in figure 1 of this section.
3. Design Standards In Historic Districts:
a. Purpose: To promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the Village by identifying, preserving, protecting, enhancing and
encouraging the continued utilization and the rehabilitation of such areas, properties, structures, sites and objects having a special historical
interest or value to the Village and its citizens.
b. Applicability: These design standards apply in any historic district or on any historic landmark:
(1) Districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects, significant in American history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture, that are listed,
or are eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic Places are to be avoided, to the greatest extent possible. Local landmarked
buildings, properties, sites, or historic districts that are so recognized by an ordinance that meets the requirements of the certified Local
Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office are also to be avoided, to the greatest extent possible.
(2) Applicants must include proposed stealth and concealment measures in their applications.
(3) Applicant must implement said Village-approved design concepts, and the use of camouflage or stealth materials as necessary in order to
achieve compliance with historic preservation review.
(4) Prior to submitting an application, where the applicant submits an application to site facilities in a historic district, the applicant must meet with
the Village to discuss any potential design modifications appropriate for the installation.
(5) When siting a facility in a historic district, wireless provider must avoid removing, obscuring or altering any historic material or significant
architectural features. Rehabilitation and make-ready work must not destroy the distinguishing character of the property or its environment.
(6) Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible by means such as rust removal, calking, limited
paint removal and reapplication of paint.
4. General Design Standards:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 195/438
a. Applicability: These design standards apply to all small wireless facilities:
(1) All small wireless facilities not governed by the preceding design standards must be placed so as to minimize visibility. The small wireless
facility, including all ancillary equipment and appurtenances, must be a color that blends with the surroundings of the utility pole or Municipallyowned
infrastructure on which it is mounted and use non-reflective materials which blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area
and structures. Any wiring must be concealed within the freestanding facility or covered with an appropriate cover.
(2) The Village may discourage the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
(3) A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the
right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners.
(4) A facility may not be installed in a manner which defeats any existing concealment elements of the utility pole or Municipally-owned
infrastructure to which it is attached.
(5) Facilities under common ownership or operated on the same radio frequency shall be separated as far as practicable.
J. Facility Attachments To Existing Utility Poles And Municipally-Owned Infrastructure:
1. Facility Attachments: Any facility attached to existing utility poles and Municipally-owned infrastructure shall not result in a substantial change to the
physical dimensions of the utility pole or Municipally-owned infrastructure, provided the Village may require a smaller facility for the purpose of
complying with any other more restrictive regulation in this chapter.
2. Physical Dimensions: A facility shall be deemed to substantially change the physical dimensions of the utility pole or Municipally-owned
infrastructure if it meets any of the following criteria:
a. It increases the height of the structure by more than ten percent (10%) or more than ten feet (10'), whichever is greater. Changes in height should
be measured from the existing dimensions of the utility pole or Municipally-owned infrastructure before the first facility is attached.
b. It involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the utility pole or Municipally-owned infrastructure that would protrude from the edge of such
structure by more than six feet (6').
c. It involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure.
d. It would defeat any concealment elements of the utility pole or Municipally-owned infrastructure.
e. It would defeat any concealment elements of a concealed facility.
3. Telecommunications Attachments: A telecommunications facility which does not result in a substantial change to the physical dimensions of the
utility pole or Municipally-owned infrastructure shall be permitted only if it meets all of the following criteria:
a. All antennas capable of serving two (2) or fewer telecommunications providers that are part of the deployment shall fit within enclosures (or if the
antennas are exposed, within imaginary enclosures) that are individually no more than three (3) cubic feet in volume. Any neutral host antennas
capable of serving more than two (2) telecommunications providers shall fit within enclosures (or if the antennas are exposed, within imaginary
enclosures) that are individually no more than seven (7) cubic feet in volume. All antennas on the structure, including any pre-existing antennas
on the structure, shall fit within enclosures (or if the antennas are exposed, within imaginary enclosures) that total no more than seven (7) cubic
feet in volume.
b. All other equipment associated with the telecommunication facility and attached to the utility pole or Municipally-owned infrastructure shall be the
smallest practicable volume for the operation of such facility and be located as high above the established grade as practicable and which
complies with all other applicable separation requirements. Where no other restrictions apply, the equipment shall be located at least eight feet (8')
above existing grade.
c. The telecommunication facility, including all related equipment and appurtenances, must be a color that blends with the surroundings of the utility
pole or Municipally-owned infrastructure on which it is mounted and use non-reflective materials which blend with the materials and colors of the
surrounding area and structures. Any wiring must be concealed within the freestanding facility or covered with an appropriate cover.
d. Facilities under common ownership or operated on the same radio frequency shall be separated as far as practicable.
e. The applicant files a structural analysis, stamped by a professional engineer, which demonstrates the utility pole or Municipally-owned
infrastructure is safely capable of supporting the telecommunications facility in all reasonably foreseeable weather conditions without creating a
risk to public health and safety. The structural analysis will also describe the method by which the telecommunications facility is designed to fail
and demonstrate that any structural failure to the telecommunications facility shall not cause harm to any residential structure.
f. All permits, licenses and approvals required by the owner of the utility pole or Municipally-owned infrastructure have been granted prior to applying
for a Village permit. (Ord. G-1117, 11-14-2017; Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-17: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
A. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
1. Boring Or Jacking:
a. Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Village
Engineer from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or
jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be
clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support
all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
b. Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 196/438
c. Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
d. Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
e. Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved or protected shall be bored under
or around the root system.
2. Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of section
603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction".
a. Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only one-half (1/2)
of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the Village Engineer.
b. Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as
added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow
for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location.
c. Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved.
3. Backfilling:
a. Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and
materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
b. For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any
backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the Village Engineer, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any
pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement,
sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the Village Engineer.
4. Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic.
If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection is permitted under section 8-6-22 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
a. Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the Village Engineer.
b. Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the Village.
c. All saw cuts shall be full depth.
d. For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3)
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen
before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate.
5. Encasement:
a. Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by
one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the Village.
b. The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
c. In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous
or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
d. In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
e. In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
f. If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt
the right-of-way.
6. Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
Communication, cable or video service lines 18 to 24 inches (0.45 m to 0.6 m, as determined by Village)
Electric lines 30 inches (0.8 m)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m)
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 197/438
B. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
1. Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
a. Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within Village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code part 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for
Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines", and the National Electrical Safety Code.
b. Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall
be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
c. Underground Facilities:
(1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
(2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only
if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for
cable installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.
(3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code.
d. Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the Village. Weather permitting,
utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days after placement.
2. Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
a. The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
b. Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
c. Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
d. Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village approved
manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, part 192 -
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code for
Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5. Waterlines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage
lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction
in Illinois".
6. Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free
area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the Village Engineer. With the
approval of the Village Engineer, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for groundmounted
appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
C. Materials:
1. General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", the requirements of the Illinois
Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
2. Material Storage On Right-Of-Way: No material shall be stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Village Engineer. When
such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during
installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other
property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the Village.
3. Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the Village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions:
1. Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the Village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are
such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the Village Engineer when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours of construction are those set forth in this Code.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 198/438
E. Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the Village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and location of
existing above-ground and underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The Village will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the Village or by
JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act1. (Ord. G-1117, 11-14-2017; Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-18: VEGETATION CONTROL:
A. Electric Utilities - Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control activities in the
right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the Village
as permitted by law.
B. Other Utilities - Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed
pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall
require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter.
1. Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration
date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
2. Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the
tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The Village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation
for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The Village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning
would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
C. Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The Village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
D. Chemical Use:
1. Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the
Village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease.
2. Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Village
Engineer that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. G-1117, 11-14-2017; Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-19: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS:
A. Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the Village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the Corporate Authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
Village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or upon, the rights-of-way. Wireless providers are required to provide the Village
with written notice of its intent to sell or transfer small wireless facilities. Such notice must include the name and contact information of the new
wireless provider.
B. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the Village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
C. Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The Village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-way
of the Village, as the Village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the Municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
D. Abandonment Of Facilities:
1. Small Wireless Facilities: As used in this section, a small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be
considered abandoned. The owner of an abandoned small wireless facility shall notify the Village within ninety (90) days of it being abandoned and
the owner of that small wireless facility must remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after sending such written notice to the Village.
The Village may direct the wireless provider to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Village Engineer determines that such removal will be in
the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of such notice, the Village
may remove or cause the removal of the facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Village utility poles or through whatever
actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 199/438
2. Other Utility Facilities: As used in this section, a facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered
abandoned. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way of the Village, the utility shall notify the Village within ninety (90) days. The
owner of the abandoned facility must remove the facility within ninety (90) days after sending such written notice to the Village. The Village may
direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Village Engineer determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public
health, safety and welfare. If the facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of the
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Village utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. (Ord. G-1117, 11-14-2017; Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-20: CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights-of-way are
disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the Village. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Village Engineer. Such cleanup
and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition
substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the
Village Engineer for good cause shown. (Ord. G-1117, 11-14-2017; Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-21: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
A. General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory
to the Village and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify non-compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection
for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the
traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate
signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the
facility is available.
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the Village Engineer or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing
him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the
nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the Village police shall be notified immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
C. Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the Village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within forty eight (48) hours
after an emergency repair. (Ord. G-1117, 11-14-2017; Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-22: VARIANCES:
A. Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the Village Engineer as
a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a
variance should be granted.
B. Authority To Grant Variances: The Village Engineer shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified in the
variance request on an individual basis.
C. Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The Village Engineer may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
1. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that
would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
2. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
D. Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for authorizing a variance, the Village Engineer may require the utility requesting the
variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
E. Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Village
Engineer under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board, or such other board or commission as it may
designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order, requirement,
decision or determination. The Village Board shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the Board's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring
at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The Village Board shall timely decide the appeal. (Ord. G-1117, 11-14-2017; Ord. G-1130, 7-10-
2018)
8-6-23: PENALTIES:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 200/438
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be times when the Village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the
utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the
requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the Village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or
removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost
apportionment of the Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. G-1117, 11-14-2017; Ord. G-
1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-24: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. G-
1117, 11-14-2017; Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
8-6-25: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions hereof. (Ord. G-1117, 11-14-2017; Ord. G-1130, 7-10-2018)
Title 9
STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN, AND SEDIMENTATION AND EROSION CONTROL
REGULATIONS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 1
AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
A. This title shall be known, and may be cited, as the VILLAGE OF OAK BROOK STORMWATER AND FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE.
B. The DuPage County stormwater management planning committee (the "committee") and the DuPage County board promulgated the DuPage County
stormwater and floodplain ordinance ("county ordinance") pursuant to their authority to adopt ordinances regulating floodplain management and
governing the location, width, course, and release rate of all stormwater runoff channels, streams, and basins in DuPage County, in accordance with
the adopted DuPage County stormwater management plan (the "plan"). The statutory authority for the county ordinance is contained in 55 Illinois
Compiled Statutes sections 5/5-1041, 5-1042, 5-1049, 5-1062, 5-1063, 5-1104, 5-12003, and 5-15001 et seq.; and 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/43,
and other applicable authority, all as amended from time to time.
C. The village enforces this title pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-
2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-1-2: DUPAGE COUNTY STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
The plan was recommended by the committee and adopted by the DuPage County board, after review by the appropriate agencies and public hearing, as
ordinance OSM-0001-89. The plan is available for public inspection in the office of the DuPage County clerk. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-1-3: FINDINGS:
The village hereby finds that:
A. Inappropriate use of the floodplain and development have increased flood risk, flood damage, and environmental degradation; and
B. It is necessary to consider stormwater management on a watershed basis; and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 201/438
C. DuPage County drains poorly because of flat topography and soils of low permeability; and
D. The costs of increasing channel capacity are prohibitive; and
E. Many land development practices upset the natural hydrologic balance of DuPage County streams; and
F. Most flood damage occurs to structures developed adjacent to streams in the floodplain or floodway; and
G. Wetlands represent a significant portion of the natural watershed storage in DuPage County, and wetlands play an essential role in flood storage,
conveyance, sediment control, and water quality enhancement; and
H. Many stormwater management facilities are not adequately maintained; and
I. The authority for control of stormwater facilities is widely distributed to many entities in DuPage County; and
J. There are many strong local stormwater management programs; and
K. Inconsistent enforcement of stormwater regulations contributes to the extent and severity of flood damage. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-1-4: PURPOSES OF THIS TITLE:
A. The principal purpose of this title is to promote effective, equitable, acceptable, and legal stormwater management measures. Other purposes of this
title include:
1. Managing and mitigating the effects of urbanization on stormwater drainage throughout the village; and
2. Reducing the existing potential for stormwater damage to public health, safety, life, and property; and
3. Protecting human life and health from the hazards of flooding and degradation of water quality; and
4. Protecting and enhancing the quality, quantity, and availability of surface and ground water resources; and
5. Preserving and enhancing existing wetlands, buffers and aquatic environments, and encouraging restoration of degraded areas; and
6. Controlling sediment and erosion in and from stormwater facilities, developments, and construction sites; and
7. Preventing the further degradation of the quality of ground and surface waters; and
8. Requiring appropriate and adequate provision for site runoff control, especially when the land is developed for human activity; and
9. Requiring the design and evaluation of each site runoff control plan consistent with watershed capacities; and
10. Encouraging the use of stormwater storage in preference to stormwater conveyance; and
11. Lessening the taxpayers' burden for flood related disasters, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief
operations; and
12. Meeting the Illinois department of natural resources, office of water resources' floodway permitting requirements delineated in 615 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/18g ("an act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the state of Illinois"), as amended from time to time; and
13. Making federally subsidized flood insurance available to individual communities and for property throughout the county; and
14. Complying with the rules and regulations of the national flood insurance program codified in title 44 of the code of federal regulations; and
15. Encouraging cooperation between the county, the village, and other governmental entities with respect to floodplain and stormwater management;
and
16. Requiring cooperation and consistency in stormwater management activities within and between the units of government having stormwater
management jurisdiction; and
17. Restricting future development in the floodplain to facilities that will not adversely affect the floodplain environments or adversely affect the
potential for flood damage; and
18. Incorporating water quality and habitat protection measures in all stormwater management activities within the village; and
19. Requiring regular, planned maintenance of stormwater management facilities; and
20. Encouraging control of stormwater quantity and quality at the most site specific or local level; and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 202/438
21. Allowing the use of simple technologies whenever appropriate and realistic, but requiring the use of more sophisticated techniques when
necessary to ensure the adequacy of stormwater controls;
22. Reserved; and
23. Requiring strict compliance with and enforcement of this title.
B. The purposes of this title are consistent with the plan.
C. The purposes of this title will be implemented by its provisions. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-1-5: REFERENCE TO WATERSHED PLANS:
A. This title recognizes the integrated nature of the watershed system and the need to study certain flood control alternatives and other stormwater
management functions on a watershed wide basis.
B. The following six (6) major watershed divisions, shown on exhibit 1 attached to the ordinance codified herein, are identified for detailed watershed
studies:
1. Salt Creek watershed; and
2. East Branch DuPage River watershed; and
3. West Branch DuPage River watershed; and
4. Sawmill Creek watershed; and
5. Des Plaines River Tributaries watershed; and
6. Fox River Tributaries watershed.
C. Watershed plans or interim watershed plans shall be prepared and periodically updated for these six (6) major watersheds, to identify stormwater
management projects and establish criteria for development. Interim watershed plans may also be developed for subwatersheds of the six (6) major
watersheds for purposes of addressing flood mitigation or water quality. With respect to the county ordinance, developments identified in watershed
plans, interim watershed plans, or other studies approved by the committee and adopted by the county board, shall be considered certifiable provided
that and to the extent that the plan or study addressed certification issues.
D. Adopted watershed plans or interim watershed plans which contain more specific criteria than the criteria established for countywide application in the
county ordinance shall govern over countywide criteria. Such watershed plans, upon their completion, approval, and proper adoption, are hereby
incorporated into the county ordinance without further act of the DuPage County board.
E. Watershed specific criteria established in such watershed plans or interim watershed plans shall be set forth as a schedule to the ordinance codified
herein.
F. The countywide requirements of the county ordinance shall apply in all watersheds unless superseded by more specific watershed certification criteria.
(Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-1-6: VILLAGE ENFORCEMENT; AUTHORITY:
Pursuant to the authority established in 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1062, the provisions of this title, either in part or as a whole, shall not be
enforced by the county after a finding of the committee that the village has duly adopted the provisions of the county ordinance. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-1-7: AUTHORITY FOR COMMITTEE ACTION IN THE VILLAGE; COMPLAINTS:
A. The committee may, at its discretion, direct the department to investigate substantive complaints concerning the failure of the village to implement or
enforce this title.
B. If, after investigation and hearing pursuant to the provisions of chapters 17 and 18 of this title, the committee determines that the village has failed in
some significant way, or has repeatedly failed, to implement or enforce this title, then the committee may revoke any previously granted partial or
complete waiver, and the provisions of this title shall have full force and effect and shall be enforced within the boundaries of the village by the county.
(Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 203/438
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-1-8: AUTHORITY AND CHOICE OF PLANNING JURISDICTION:
A. Pursuant to the authority granted by 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1062(b), as amended, a community that is located in more than one county has
chosen, at the time of formation of the stormwater management planning committee, and based on watershed boundaries, to participate in the
stormwater management planning program of either or both of the counties.
B. The following communities have expressed their intent to choose to be included within the jurisdiction of the plan and the county ordinance: DuPage
County portions only - Bartlett, Batavia, Bensenville, Bolingbrook, Burr Ridge, Chicago, Elk Grove Village, Hanover Park, Hinsdale, Lemont,
Naperville, Oak Brook, Roselle, Schaumburg, and Woodridge; and for the entire community of Wayne. The committee shall include the above listed
communities within the scope of its planning and enforcement jurisdiction. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-2-1: INTERPRETATION OF TERMS AND WORDS:
A. The terms and words used in this title shall be interpreted as follows:
1. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; and
2. Words used in the singular number include the plural number and words used in the plural number include the singular number; and
3. The words "shall", "will", and "must" are mandatory, not permissive; and
4. All distances, unless otherwise stated, shall be measured horizontally; and
5. The phrase "director" refers to the individual responsible for the enforcement of the county ordinance and the phrase "administrator" refers to the
individual responsible for the enforcement of this title; and
6. All references to "he", "him", "his", "she", and "her" shall be construed as gender neutral.
B. Definitions of terms specific to this title, and a list of acronyms and initialisms are contained in chapter 19 of this title. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-
1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-2-2: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
A. The oversight committee shall determine policy related to and direct the enforcement of this title.
B. The director or the administrator shall have the authority and responsibility for the administration of this title. In performing his or her duties, the
administrator may delegate routine responsibilities to any named designee.
C. The village shall remain solely responsible for its standing in the NFIP and for:
1. Maintaining records and submitting reports required for the NFIP, including elevation certificates, floodproofing certificates, and lowest floor
elevations; and
2. Notifying the director, and if required FEMA, OWR, USACE, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the United States environmental
protection agency of any proposed amendment to this title. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-2-3: DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
The duties and functions of the director shall include:
A. Supervising the execution of the county ordinance; and
B. Supervising the development and revision of the appendices of the plan for committee and for the purposes and provisions of the county ordinance;
and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 204/438
C. Authorizing floodplain delineations and support documentation from partial waiver communities for any FEMA map change, which authorization may be
done concurrent with submittal to OWR or its designee and FEMA; and
D. Developing and maintaining countywide regulatory maps; and
E. Directing the application and review of complex stormwater management certifications for any community that requests such assistance; and
F. Performing, in nonwaiver communities, the duties which are assigned to the administrator in waiver communities to the extent consistent with other
laws; and
G. Reviewing and authorizing proposed developments referred to the department in floodplain, wetlands and buffers within partial waiver communities;
and
H. Keeping USACE, OWR and FEMA informed of community waiver and ordinance status within thirty (30) days after any changes in status; and
I. Notifying the communities, and if required FEMA, OWR, USACE, the IEPA, and the USEPA of any amendments to the plan or this title; and
J. Maintaining and making available to applicants a list of all adopted general certifications; and
K. Encouraging and conducting studies, investigations, and research relating to the physical, chemical, ecological, engineering, and other aspects of
stormwater management. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-2-4: DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATOR:
The duties and functions of the administrator shall include:
A. Ensuring that copies of all stormwater related and applicable required federal, state, and regional permits or county approvals are received before work
under a stormwater management certification begins in those areas of a site under the jurisdiction of those agencies; and
B. Verifying the existence of floodplains, wetlands and buffers for each application; and
C. Receiving authorization for development in floodplains, wetlands and buffers in partial waiver communities prior to issuance of a certification; and
D. Reviewing and approving authorizations and issuing any certifications or notices required by this title; and
E. Notifying the director and owners of adjacent upstream, downstream, and potentially affected property, affected state and federal agencies, and
watershed basin communities, and publishing a notice in a local newspaper of any variance requested from the provisions of this title; and
F. Notifying the director and all affected persons defined in subsection E of this section of any alteration or relocation of a watercourse including
application for a FEMA CLOMC and LOMC as required; and
G. Providing for inspections of developments as provided in section 9-2-10 of this chapter; and
H. Investigating complaints of violations of this title; and
I. Notifying any applicant for a variance that granting the variance may result in increased rates for flood insurance; and
J. Notifying the director and other jurisdictions of alleged violations of their certification or permit programs; and
K. Notifying violators within regulatory floodplains that failure to comply with NFIP provisions could make them ineligible to receive flood insurance; and
L. Initiating any proceeding necessary to enforce this title; and
M. Encouraging and conducting studies, investigations, and research relating to the physical, chemical, ecological, engineering, and other aspects of
stormwater management; and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 205/438
N. Advise, consult and cooperate with other governmental agencies to promote the purposes of this title; and
O. Maintaining for public inspection copies of all applications and submittals, federal and state permit documents, variation documentation, FEMA CLOMC
and LOMC, and all other documents required pursuant to chapters 4 and 5 of this title; and
P. Sending copies of any application for a FEMA CLOMC and LOMC to the director; and
Q. Reserved; and
R. Sending a copy of any petition or request for a variance from the terms of this title to the committee before any such variance is approved by the
oversight committee; except in cases where the variance from this title still meets or exceeds the requirements of the DuPage County stormwater
ordinance; and
S. Submitting the necessary information to the director relating to development to maintain countywide regulatory maps and for supervision of the
ordinance. This includes, but is not limited to, copies of any stormwater management certifications, or FEMA CLOMCs and LOMCs; and
T. Maintaining documentation necessary on "cost of improvement" on buildings in the floodplain, relating to the substantial improvements or substantial
damage requirements of this title or the NFIP; and
U. Maintaining and making available to applicants a list of all general certifications adopted within the village. (Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-2-5: REPRESENTATIVE CAPACITY:
In all cases when any action is taken by the administrator, or his or her duly appointed designee, to enforce the provisions of this title, such action shall be
taken either in the name of and on behalf of the village, or the people of the state of Illinois, and neither the director nor the administrator, or his or her
designee, in so acting for the county or the village shall be rendered personally liable. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-2-6: OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE:
A. An oversight committee shall be established to oversee the implementation and enforcement of this title within the village.
B. The oversight committee shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the village board of
trustees.
C. The oversight committee, when considering appeals or variances, may request an opinion from the director or the MEG. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-2-7: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CERTIFICATION REVIEW AND COUNTY AUTHORIZATION:
A. Stormwater Management Certification Review Responsibilities In Partial Waiver Communities: When a community petitions for and is granted a partial
waiver of enforcement of the county ordinance, such community shall have the authority to review and approve applications for stormwater
management certifications in all areas under its jurisdiction, provided that:
1. A partial waiver community shall send applications for stormwater management certifications to the director for review and "authorization" signifying
compliance with the applicable provisions of the county ordinance when a development includes: sites with wetlands on or within one hundred feet
(100') of the development, buffers, and sites which include regulatory floodplain, with the following exceptions:
a. The administrator in a partial waiver community may determine that a development site does not contain a wetland, buffer or floodplain. Further,
the administrator may also determine, without obtaining authorization from the director, that a wetland or buffer is on the development site and
that it will not be impacted by the development based on information submitted by the applicant.
b. The administrator in a partial waiver community may review, without submittal to the county, applications for developments on sites that contain
regulatory floodplain/floodway where no impact to the portion of the site containing regulatory floodplain/floodway is proposed. The administrator
may also review site specific floodplain determinations, and developments in the floodplains, for drainage areas less than six hundred forty (640)
acres where no floodway has been designated.
2. Those applications for development where the administrator has submitted the application to the county for authorization may, after the director
authorizes the application for development, issue the stormwater management certification if the application meets the requirements of the county
ordinance or this title, as applicable.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 206/438
B. Stormwater Management Certification Review Responsibilities In A Complete Waiver Community: When a community petitions for and is granted a
complete waiver of enforcement of the county ordinance, such community shall review and certify, signifying compliance with the county ordinance, all
applications for development under all provisions of the ordinance within the boundaries of its jurisdiction.
C. Stormwater Management Certification Review Responsibilities In A Nonwaiver Community: When a community does not petition for a waiver of
enforcement of the county ordinance, such community shall have applications reviewed and certified by the director, signifying compliance with all
provisions of the county ordinance within the boundaries of the community.
D. Stormwater Management Reviews: Overall responsibility for supervision of the review of all aspects of a stormwater management application under the
jurisdiction of this title rests with the administrator, however the administrator shall ensure that technical reviews are under the supervision of a
professional engineer meeting the requirements of subsections 9-17-6C1a and C1b of this title for complete waiver communities and subsection 9-17-
6C2a of this title for partial waiver communities. The administrator will also utilize, as the situation requires, the appropriate experts who must meet the
requirements of subsections 9-17-6C1c and C1d of this title for a complete waiver community or subsection 9-17-6C2b of this title for a partial waiver
community to review those aspects of the development lying outside of the professional engineer's area of expertise in accordance with the following:
1. In a partial waiver community, the professional engineer may utilize a person with expertise in plant ecology for design review and construction
observation of PCBMP installations which rely upon vegetation for water quality or runoff volume reduction. The professional engineer may utilize a
soil scientist or geotechnical engineer, or other person with significant applicable soils expertise for PCBMP installations which rely on infiltration for
water quality improvement and volume reduction. The professional engineer will coordinate review comments on an application with those from the
director on the same development.
2. In a complete waiver community, the reviewing professional engineer shall provide a written opinion that the proposed development meets the
minimum requirements of the county ordinance. Wetland delineation and other wetland or buffer related aspects outside the expertise of the
professional engineer must be reviewed by an environmental scientist employed by the community in accordance with subsection 9-17-6C1c of this
title who shall provide a written opinion on those matters within their area of expertise that the proposed development meets the minimum
requirements of this title.
3. In a nonwaiver community, the director, or his designee, will determine the appropriate individuals to review the application and coordinate review
comments. (Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-2-8: MUNICIPAL ENGINEERS GROUP:
A municipal engineers group (MEG) shall be established whose purpose will be to provide input to the director for representation of communities on
technical matters related to the county ordinance, recommend general certification topics, review draft ordinance revisions, review draft general
certifications, and discuss permitting issues where a recommendation is requested.
A. The membership of the MEG shall consist of the stormwater administrators, or their designees, in each of the communities who have opted into the
DuPage County stormwater program. In all matters brought to the MEG for a vote, each community shall have one vote exercised by the
administrator, or their designee.
B. The MEG shall adopt bylaws covering, at a minimum, what constitutes a quorum and notice requirements, and meeting schedule.
C. Issues considered by the MEG for a vote shall be listed on the agenda sent out in advance of the scheduled meeting. The MEG shall meet no less
than once per calendar year.
D. All votes by the MEG are advisory. Summaries of the discussions will be kept of all meetings. (Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-2-9: RESERVED:
(Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-2-10: REQUIRED INSPECTIONS:
A. Any development constructed pursuant to a stormwater management certification shall be subject to periodic inspections by the director or the
administrator during construction to ensure conformity with certification provisions and conditions.
B. Unless otherwise provided by a valid and enforceable intergovernmental agreement, the department shall inspect and monitor the construction and
maintenance of mitigation measures prepared pursuant to chapters 11 and 12 of this title for all mitigated wetlands and buffers authorized by a
stormwater management certification in a nonwaiver community or authorization in a partial waiver community. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 207/438
Chapter 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-3-1: SCOPE OF REGULATION:
A. This title shall apply to all development of property within the boundaries of the village since February 15, 1992, including those under the control of
any governmental entity, except state and federal government agencies of higher jurisdiction or authority.
B. The provisions of this title shall not apply to:
1. Structures and land uses existing as of February 15, 1992, except when subsequently redeveloped, and except that minimum standards of the
NFIP shall apply to all development; and
2. Proposed developments that are listed on the official list of exempt developments submitted to the county by the village. All such developments on
the list shall have met at least one of the following criteria:
a. Building permits for such development were issued prior to February 15, 1992; or
b. Engineering of all stormwater facilities for such development was submitted to and approved by the community engineer prior to February 15,
1992; or
c. Annexation agreements or ordinances or other agreements were recorded or executed prior to February 15, 1992, which specifically exempt such
development from community codes; or
d. For other developments, contractual agreements executed prior to February 15, 1992, which specifically exempt such development from
community codes; or
e. Approvals resulting from judicial decrees preclude application of this title.
C. The exemption granted pursuant to subsection B2 of this section shall extend only to the specific improvements authorized by the building permit,
engineering approval, or judicial decrees, and all specific limitations agreed to in any annexation agreement or ordinance or contract shall apply. All
other development not previously specifically exempted shall remain subject to the provisions of this title.
D. Plan changes which result in greater impervious coverage of the site compared to the exempted plan will be cause for the director or administrator to
remove the development from the official list. Such a finding may be appealed to the committee in accordance with chapter 15 of this title for final
decision.
E. Nonconforming structures shall not be replaced or enlarged in any manner unless such replacements or enlargements conform to the requirements of
this title. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-3-2: OFFICIAL LISTS OF EXEMPT DEVELOPMENTS:
A. Each revision to the official list of exempt developments shall be approved by an official action of the village board, and shall be acknowledged in
writing by the director on behalf of the committee.
B. The committee may challenge any revision of an official list of exempt developments submitted by a community within sixty (60) days after proper
submission of such list or revision. The committee shall state in writing its reasons for rejection of any development as not being in accordance with
the provisions of subsection 9-3-1B2 of this chapter.
C. The community may add a development to, or delete a development from, the official list of exempt developments if an applicant shows that the criteria
listed in subsection 9-3-1B2 of this chapter have been met or if the community has determined that the criteria listed in subsection 9-3-1B2 of this
chapter have not been met.
D. Prior to resubmitting its official list of exempt development to the committee deleting a development, the village shall notify the affected owner or
developer of such deletion in writing and provide such owner or developer an opportunity to respond to the community. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-3-3: INTERPRETATION:
A. This title shall be liberally construed to protect the health, welfare, safety, and the environment of the residents of the village and to effectuate the
purposes of this title and the enabling legislation.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 208/438
B. Nothing contained in this title shall be deemed to consent to, license, permit to locate, construct, or maintain any structure, site, facility or operation, or
to carry on any trade, industry, occupation, or activity.
C. When provisions of this title differ from any other applicable statute, law, ordinance, regulation, or rule, the more stringent provision shall apply.
D. The provisions of this title are cumulative and shall be considered additional limitations on all other laws and ordinances previously approved or that
may hereafter be approved and that concern any subject matter included in this title.
E. Interpretation of technical provisions of this title shall be made by the director, or the administrator who may also consult the MEG for an advisory
opinion. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-3-4: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
A. The degree of flood protection provided by this title is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering experience and
scientific methods of study.
B. Increased flooding may result from causes beyond the control of the village.
C. This title does not, therefore, imply that areas outside the delineated floodplain or permitted land uses within the delineated floodplain will be free from
flooding and associated damages.
D. This title shall not be construed or applied in any manner to create liability on the part of or a cause of action against the village, or any elected official,
officer, agent, or employee thereof, for any flood damage resulting from reliance on the provisions of this title or from reading or interpreting any map
that is part of this title. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-3-5: GENERAL STORMWATER AND FLOODPLAIN REQUIREMENTS:
The following general stormwater and floodplain requirements shall apply to all development:
A. Development shall not:
1. Result in unreasonable new or additional expense to any person other than the developer for flood protection or for lost environmental stream uses
and functions attributable to the development; nor
2. Unreasonably increase flood elevations or decrease flood conveyance capacity upstream or downstream of the area under the ownership or control
of the developer; nor
3. Pose any unreasonable new or additional increase in flood velocity or impairment of the hydrologic and hydraulic functions of streams and
floodplains unless a watershed benefit is realized; nor
4. Violate any provision of this title either during or after construction; nor
5. Unreasonably or unnecessarily degrade surface or ground water quality.
B. For purposes of this section, changes in flood elevations or changes in discharges, within the limits of modeling tolerance allowed in this title, shall be
deemed acceptable.
C. Analysis and design of all stormwater and floodplain facilities required for development shall:
1. Meet the standards and criteria established in the plan and, if available, in watershed plans or in interim watershed plans; and
2. Be consistent with techniques specified in the watershed plans or the interim watershed plans; and
3. Site runoff storage and compensatory storage facilities shall be either constructed before or concurrently with general construction. The facilities
shall be functional prior to or concurrent with any building construction that increases a site's total impervious area. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-
1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-3-6: BUILDING PROTECTION:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 209/438
A. Within the boundary of the regulatory floodplain, all usable space in new buildings, or added to existing buildings, shall either be elevated, floodproofed,
or otherwise protected such that the lowest entry shall be at least one foot (1') above the nearest base flood elevation to prevent the entry of surface
stormwater. Floodproofing devices shall be operational without human intervention. If electricity is required for protection against flood damage, there
shall be a backup power source which will activate without human intervention. Floodproofing measures shall be certified by a professional engineer.
B. All usable space in new buildings or added to existing buildings, shall be elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise protected to at least one foot (1') above
the design elevation to prevent the entry of surface stormwater. The design elevation is the higher elevation of either chapter 10 of this title or the
elevation associated with the design rate as determined in subsection 9-9-3A2 of this title.
C. Other building protection standards for structures that may be implemented in the floodplain are listed in subsection 9-10-2B of this title. (Ord. G-976,
7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
Chapter 4
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CERTIFICATIONS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-4-1: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CERTIFICATIONS:
Any person proposing a development shall obtain a stormwater management certification, or the development must fit all conditions of a general
certification (section 9-4-3 of this chapter), or if applicable, obtain a letter of permission (section 9-4-2 of this chapter) unless the development meets all of
the criteria of subsection A of this section or one of the criteria of subsection B of this section.
A. The development is:
1. On a development site that does not include floodplain, wetlands or buffers; and
2. The development does not add two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more of net new impervious area compared to the
predevelopment conditions; and
3. Does not include five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of land disturbing activities.
B. The development site does not include wetlands, buffers or floodplains and consists solely of one or more of the following:
1. Cultivation, conservation measures or gardening; or
2. Installation, renovation or replacement of a septic system, potable water service line, or other utility to serve an existing structure; or
3. Excavation or removal of vegetation in rights of way or public utility easements for the purpose of installing or maintaining utilities; or
4. Maintenance, repair or at-grade replacement of existing lawn areas not otherwise requiring a stormwater certification under this title. (Ord. G-976, 7-
24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-4-2: LETTERS OF PERMISSION:
The administrator, or the director in nonwaiver communities, shall have the option of issuing a "letter of permission" in lieu of a stormwater management
certification. A letter of permission may be issued for developments that can be determined, based on review of the applicant's proposed plans, available
documents, site inspection and judgment, to be limited in scope and complexity and fit the definition, for "minor development". The applicant may propose
that certain submittal requirements be waived for those developments approved for processing as a letter of permission, provided that the request is in
writing in advance of the submittal, and the request is approved in writing by the administrator or the director in a nonwaiver community. The applicant, or
if applicable their design professionals, must affirm that all calculations are in accordance with standard engineering practice and have been checked for
accuracy of calculation and are in compliance with the requirements of this title. The applicant shall remain responsible for any errors in calculation or
application of engineering methodology.
A. The following are the potential modifications to submittal requirements in the form of "waiving submittal" that may be considered:
1. Supporting calculations for simple soil erosion and sediment control plans, if the development is not subject to NPDES permitting;
2. Routine backup calculations such as time of concentration, runoff curve number, and storm sewer design calculations;
3. Copies of maps such as soils maps;
4. Other supporting calculations when the results used in the design appear to the administrator to be within the norms of engineering practice.
B. The following are not eligible to be "waived for submittal":
1. Construction plans complete with all details, including soil erosion and sediment control plan must be submitted by the applicant.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 210/438
2. Development securities in the amounts and forms defined in this title, record exhibits and maintenance easements may be reduced or waived if
adequate other securities are required under other building permit requirements such that the administrator is reasonably assured that the intent of
those provisions in this title is carried out.
C. Decisions made on behalf of the village by the administrator or director with regard to letters of permission applicability and submittal requirements are
by permission to the applicant.
D. The letter of permission will serve in all respects as the stormwater management certification, with the same duration, and may be combined with a
general certification for the parts of the development to which a general certification might be applicable.
E. A letter of permission cannot be used to substantively change the technical standards of this title. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-4-3: GENERAL CERTIFICATIONS:
The director or the administrator may issue general certifications which when adopted by the stormwater committee, county board, and oversight
committee and when found applicable to the particular circumstances of a development, will serve as the stormwater management certification for the
development activity, or a portion of the development activity. General certifications may provide clarification or interpretation of technical requirements
and are intended to address common and generally low impact developments, reducing submittal requirements, design costs and the public burden to
apply for certification and review such development cases. The applicant may be required to make a submittal and pay review fees, as described in the
general certification or in the village's fee schedule. As long as the applicant abides by the special conditions as described in the general certification, then
the development will be considered as having obtained a stormwater management certification.
A. Types of developments for general certifications drafts will be recommended by the MEG, who may refer them to a committee of the MEG or county
staff. The director will present the general certification to the stormwater committee for those general certifications with countywide applicability. When
initiated by an administrator, the administrator shall obtain a recommendation from the director, who will also refer it to the MEG for a recommendation.
Any general certification may be used by any community. A general certification must be adopted by the community for use in that community or by
the county board for applicability countywide.
B. General certifications are authorized for one year and shall be automatically renewed annually unless action is taken to change the certification within
sixty (60) days of expiration. An applicant who relied on a general certification shall have one year from the date of reauthorization to complete the
development under the terms of the general certification as it read at the time the general certification was issued. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-4-4: DATUM:
All topographic maps or exhibits, and record drawings associated to a project shall be tied to the North American vertical datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) of the
national spatial reference system (NSRS) as maintained by the United States national geodetic survey (NGS). A minimum of two (2) vertical geodetic
control points shall be established on or adjacent to the project to tie the elevations of each project to NAVD 88. The methods used by an Illinois
professional land surveyor to establish NAVD 88 elevations shall achieve a national NSRS vertical network accuracy of 0.15 of a U.S. survey foot (5
centimeters) or better to be in compliance with FEMA requirements, as specified in the FEMA document "Guidelines And Specifications For Flood Hazard
Mapping Partners" dated April 2003. The surveyor shall use one of the following methods to achieve vertical network accuracy as well as to provide
documentation to substantiate the vertical network accuracy:
A. Establish vertical geodetic control at the site using a combination of GNSS measured ellipsoid heights and calculated orthometric heights using the
most current available version of a reputable geoid model. Global navigation satellite system (GNSS) derived ellipsoid heights shall be determined by
processing GPS field measurements through the NGS GPS online positioning system - rapid static service (OPUS-RS). The surveyor shall provide to
the county a copy of the OPUS-RS report.
B. Establish vertical geodetic control at the site by differential leveling surveying using NGS specifications for third order vertical surveys. All vertical
leveling must be measured relative to at least two (2) NSRS vertical geodetic control monuments of second order or better accuracy. The surveyor
shall provide to the county a list of the two (2) or more NGS second order vertical geodetic control monuments used during the leveling survey and a
copy of the leveling notes. (Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-4-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICANTS TO USE PROFESSIONAL ENGINEERS AND SURVEYORS:
Calculations for the design of stormwater facilities, determination of the regulatory floodplain, or calculations of the impact of the development shall be
prepared, signed and sealed by a professional engineer, or professional land surveyor when they are legally entitled to sign. Structures which are subject
to a differential water pressure head of greater than three feet (3') shall be designed under the supervision of a licensed structural engineer, who shall sign
and seal the design plans and calculations. Topographic exhibits and record drawings may alternatively be signed and sealed by a professional land
surveyor. (Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 211/438
9-4-6: REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICANTS TO USE ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENTIST:
When required, all determinations regarding the absence or presence of wetlands on the development site or within one hundred feet (100') from the
development site shall be performed by an environmental scientist (subsection 9-11-1B of this title), unless the administrator concludes and documents
otherwise in accordance with subsection 9-11-1A of this title. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-4-7: PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER STATEMENT WITH APPLICATION:
Unless waived by the village or by general certification, a professional engineer under the employment of the applicant shall provide a statement
rendering an opinion that the development meets the minimum criteria for stormwater management in accordance with this title. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-4-8: OTHER AGENCY APPROVALS:
No work may begin on a site in those areas under the jurisdiction of any other stormwater authority until the authority's permits or approvals have been
obtained. Failure to obtain a permit from other required stormwater related jurisdictions will invalidate an issued stormwater management certification.
When the development qualifies for and meets the special conditions of an IDNR-OWR general, regional or statewide permit, then no special approval
correspondence from IDNR-OWR will be required. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-4-9: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENTS:
A community must obtain a permit from IDNR-OWR, or their designee, prior to issuance of a stormwater management certification for any community
development that falls under the jurisdiction of IDNR-OWR, unless the development qualifies for and meets the special conditions of an IDNR-OWR
general, regional or statewide permit, then no special approval correspondence from IDNR-OWR will be required. (Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-4-10: IDNR-OWR RESERVED REVIEW:
For development within the regulatory floodway, the following calculations or analyses shall be submitted to and approved by IDNR-OWR or its designee
prior to issuance of a stormwater management certification:
A. Flood damage analysis for the replacement or modification of existing bridges or culverts;
B. Hydraulic analysis of new, modified or replacement bridges or culverts;
C. Analyses of alternate transition sections from those required in subsection 9-10-3E of this title; and
D. Analyses of hydrologically and hydraulically equivalent storage.
E. Any embankment or structure meeting IDNR-OWR's definition of a dam, including areas outside the regulatory floodway. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-4-11: CERTIFICATION APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND SUBMITTALS:
The specific applicable technical requirements and the extent of documentation required to be submitted may vary depending on existing conditions of the
development site. The applicant shall combine the separate "submittals" referenced in this title into a single application package of materials. Unless
superseded by application under either a general certification or a letter of permission, or the director or administrator specifically allows a modification of
the submittal requirements in writing, the following shall guide the determination that an application for stormwater certification is complete.
A. Stormwater Submittal: All developments requiring a stormwater certification are required to submit the information required for minimum submittal
(subsection 9-5-1A of this title). The requirement for record drawings (subsection 9-5-1B of this title) applies to all developments that construct
stormwater facilities, or include wetland, buffer or floodplain on site. Unless the development fits the definition of minor development, the plans and
calculations listed in subsection 9-5-1D of this title will also be required (as relevant to the specific development).
B. Maintenance Plan: When the development includes construction of a site runoff storage facility or postconstruction best management practices, a
maintenance plan specifying tasks and frequency shall be submitted.
C. Exceptions: The provisions of section 9-6-2 of this title shall apply to all developments except:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 212/438
1. Developments classified as "minor developments"; or
2. Developments which do not include site stormwater storage facilities and which do not include any best management practices with a design
drainage area greater than one acre.
D. Performance Security: Performance security in accordance with section 9-6-1 of this title may be combined into a single instrument and is required as
follows:
1. Development security in accordance with subsection 9-6-1B of this title is required for all developments which are not minor developments, and
which include construction of a stormwater facility (chapter 9 of this title), or more than two hundred feet (200') of storm sewer, or a postconstruction
best management practice (chapter 8 of this title) designed to serve more than one acre of drainage area.
2. Erosion and sediment control security in accordance with subsection 9-6-1C of this title is required for any development disturbing more than one
acre, or which disturbs the bed and banks of a channel draining more than one hundred (100) acres, or when an erosion and sediment control plan
is required because of impact to wetlands, buffers or floodplain.
3. A natural area, wetland and buffer mitigation area security shall be posted per subsection 9-6-1D of this title. Whenever a natural area is being
restored or a wetland or buffer is impacted and mitigated, unless mitigation is provided by fee in lieu.
E. Soil Erosion And Sediment Control: All developments must provide both temporary and permanent soil erosion and sediment control; however, plans
for these measures must be submitted for review only where the development is required to obtain a stormwater management certification (section 9-
4-1 of this chapter). Developments required to make application may obtain a letter of permission (section 9-4-2 of this chapter), even if it is not a
minor development, as long as no other aspect of the development requires review under chapter 8, 9, 10 or 11 of this title. All other applications shall
include the following based on area of land disturbance of the proposed development:
1. If the land disturbance is less than one acre and does not disturb the bed and banks of a channel draining more than one hundred (100) acres, and
the development does not involve impact to buffer, wetland, or floodplain, and is not part of a larger common plan, then the submittal shall be per
subsection 9-5-4B of this title.
2. If the land disturbance is one acre or greater or disturbs the bed or banks of a channel draining more than one hundred (100) acres, or the
development includes impact to buffers, wetlands, or floodplain, then the requirements of subsections 9-5-4C and D of this title shall apply.
F. Postconstruction Best Management Practices: When the impervious coverage of the development site is increased by two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet or more compared to the predevelopment site then PCBMPs designed in accordance with chapter 8 of this title are required and
submittals in accordance with section 9-5-3 of this title are required with the application, unless one of the exceptions or exclusions listed in section 9-
8-1 of this title applies.
G. Floodplains And Floodways: All developments shall check the requirements of section 9-10-1 of this title to determine if floodplain exists on a
development site. Chart 3 is included in chapter 21 of this title as a guide. If floodplain does exist on the development site, a BFE shall be established
as outlined in subsection 9-10-1A of this title and shall be drawn on the site topographic map. If the datum for the BFE determination is different from
the site topographic map datum, the appropriate conversion factor shall be used. The DuPage County developed conversion factors from NGVD 29 to
NAVD 88 per watershed shall be used when appropriate. If the proposed work is outside of the BFE, there shall be no additional requirements from
chapter 10 of this title that need to be met. Applicants shall determine if floodway exists following subsection 9-10-1F of this title. For developments
that involve work within the floodplain or, where there is floodway within the disturbed area, the floodplain and floodway shall be delineated on the site
plan.
1. For developments within the floodplain, document that requirements of section 9-10-2 of this title are being met with a narrative and appropriate
calculations, modeling, cross sections and plans.
2. For developments within the floodway, document that requirements of section 9-10-3 of this title are being met with a narrative and appropriate
calculations, modeling, cross sections and plans per section 9-5-5 of this title.
H. Wetlands: A flow chart is included in chapter 21 of this title as a guide. Stormwater management certifications are required for developments where the
area being disturbed, or developed, is within one hundred feet (100') of a wetland located either on site or off site. The application shall include the
following:
1. A wetland delineation and report will be required unless the wetland is determined to be greater than one hundred feet (100') away from the
development's limit of disturbance, and subsection 9-2-7A1a of this title is applied with the concurrence of the administrator.
2. If the development's proposed limit of disturbance is within one hundred feet (100') of a wetland, then:
a. A wetland delineation and report will be required (section 9-11-1 of this title), unless the wetland has clearly defined boundaries and there are no
proposed wetland or buffer direct impacts or indirect wetland hydrologic impacts that exceed the thresholds found in section 9-11-3 of this title.
b. If there are direct impacts to the wetland, then the wetland submittal in accordance with section 9-5-2 of this title will be required.
c. If the development will cause an indirect impact to a wetland, an indirect impact analysis shall be included in the wetland submittal.
d. If the development has a direct or indirect permanent wetland impact a hydrologic analysis of the mitigation area (subsection 9-11-4L of this title)
and a maintenance and monitoring plan (subsection 9-11-4M of this title) are required to be submitted, unless fee in lieu of mitigation is provided.
I. Buffers: See also the flow chart in chapter 21 of this title. Direct impacts to buffers (section 9-12-1 of this title) will require a buffer submittal in
accordance with section 9-5-2 of this title. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 213/438
9-4-12: SPECIAL CASES OF DEVELOPMENT:
Special cases of development shall have differing submittal or technical standards than other developments, as summarized in table 1 of this section.
TABLE 1
SPECIAL CASES OF DEVELOPMENT
Floodplain/Floodway
(Note These
Sections)
Postconstruction
Best Management
Practices
Site Runoff
Storage
Roadway development 9-10-2D4 9-8-1A1 (new) or 9-8-1A2
(existing)
Possible site runoff storage (special) 9-
9-2A4, B
Bridge and culvert modification 9-10-2A2c, A2d; 9-10-3A6,
D, F
Exempt 9-8-1A2 Exempt 9-9-2C1
Stream bank stabilization 9-10-3C2 Exempt 9-8-1A4 Exempt 9-9-2C2
Natural area restoration Exempt 9-8-1A4 Exempt 9-9-2C3
Wetland mitigation site 9-10-3C3 Exempt 9-8-1A4 Exempt 9-9-2C4
Wetland mitigation bank 9-10-3C3 Exempt 9-8-1A4 Exempt 9-9-2C4
Trail development, bikeway, pedestrian
walkway
9-10-2A2b, A2c Exempt 9-8-1A5 (meeting
conditions)
Exempt 9-9-2C5 (meeting conditions)
Open space development 9-10-2A6, 9-10-3A5, A9 9-8-1
.2,500 sq. ft. net new
impervious
Only site runoff storage (special)
9-9-2B
Water and sewer improvement
development
9-10-2C2, C3 Exempt 9-8-1A7 Exempt 9-9-2C6
Note:
1. Referenced sections of this title apply to the special cases of development.
(Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-4-13: FEES FOR CERTIFICATION AND AUTHORIZATION BY THE COUNTY AND OTHER FEES:
A. A review and inspection fee schedule for stormwater management certifications in nonwaiver communities, and for authorization reviews performed by
the county on behalf of waiver communities, is attached to the ordinance codified herein as schedule A and by this reference incorporated into this
title.
B. All certification review and inspection fees for development in nonwaiver communities, and in those areas of review undertaken by the county in waiver
communities, shall be payable to the department.
C. Waiver communities may set certification review and inspection fees or set up escrow accounts for payment of review costs for developments within
their jurisdictions.
D. All stormwater management review fees shall be paid at the time directed by the administrator or director.
E. Any fee in lieu that is part of the conditions for issuance must be paid prior to issuance of the certification. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-
2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-4-14: RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE SECURITY AND EASEMENTS:
The record drawings requirements of subsection 9-5-1B of this title and the applicable requirements of section 9-6-2 of this title will also be required to be
satisfied prior to the release of the remaining development securities in section 9-6-1 of this title. (Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-4-15: DURATION AND REVISION TO CERTIFICATIONS AND AUTHORIZATIONS:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 214/438
Certifications expire December 31 of the third year from the date of certification or authorization, whichever is sooner.
A. If the certified activity has been started but is not completed by the expiration date of the certification, and the certification holder intends to pursue the
certified or authorized activity, then the certification holder must submit a written request that the expiration date be extended. Upon receipt of such
request, the director or the administrator may extend the expiration date in maximum increments of three (3) years for certified or authorized activities,
provided the activity is in compliance with the then current requirements of this title. Expiration dates for certified or authorized activities within
wetlands and buffers may be extended provided that an updated delineation shows no significant change in wetland boundary or classification.
B. If, after certification issuance, the certification holder decides to revise the approved plans, the certification holder shall submit revised plans to the
director or the administrator, along with written request for approval by the expiration date. If the director or the administrator determines that the
revised plans are in compliance with the then current requirements of this title, an approval of the revised plans will be issued.
C. No activity by the applicant in the form of a resubmittal or follow through on outstanding issues required for certification in the twelve (12) month period
following the date of the last correspondence from the director or administrator pertaining to the application, will be cause for considering the
application withdrawn. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
Chapter 5
CERTIFICATION SUBMITTALS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-5-1: STORMWATER SUBMITTALS:
A. Minimum Submittal: Unless one of the following is specifically waived with documentation by the director or the administrator, or the development is
eligible for certification by a general certification or letter of permission, a minimum stormwater submittal shall be required for all developments
requiring certification. The following constitutes a minimum stormwater submittal:
1. The name and legal address of the applicant and of the owner of the land; and
2. The common address and legal description of the site where the development will take place; and
3. Affidavits signed by the landowner and the developer attesting to their understanding of the requirements of this title and their intent to comply
therewith, including the submittal of a record drawing in accordance with subsection B of this section; and
4. A listing of all other required stormwater related permits, a brief description of how the other permits apply to the development, and when requested
by the director or the administrator, complete copies of the applications for the permits; and
5. A statement of opinion by a qualified professional either acknowledging or denying the presence of floodplain in accordance with section 9-10-1 of
this title, wetlands in accordance with section 9-11-1 of this title, and buffers in accordance with section 9-12-1 of this title; and
6. A standard engineering scaled drawing depicting any proposed major stormwater facilities on a topographic map depicting any off site upstream
drainage area and the characteristics of the downstream facilities receiving discharge from the development.
7. An exhibit at standard engineering scale is also required that is used as the basis to determine the extent of existing impervious area, proposed
developed impervious area, and extent of area to be disturbed in the construction of the development.
8. A statement from the applicant acknowledging that all stormwater submittals shall be made available for inspection and copying by the county,
notwithstanding any exemption from inspection and copying for such materials under the Illinois freedom of information act, upon the written request
of either: a) the applicant; b) any subsequent owner of the subject property; or c) any governmental unit having planning or drainage jurisdiction
within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the subject property.
B. Record Drawings: Upon completion of the stormwater facilities, a record drawing signed and sealed by either a professional engineer or a professional
land surveyor depicting the as constructed size, rim and inverts elevations of pipes, stormwater structures and culverts, and contours and flood
storage volumes of all required basins of the major stormwater systems and minor stormwater systems.
C. Noting Presence Of On Site Drainage Areas: An informational note acknowledging the presence of on site wetlands, buffers, floodplains and PCBMPs
with drainage areas one acre or greater, shall be recorded against the title to alert all future owners and shall reference the stormwater management
certification number.
D. Documentation Supporting Certification Compliance: The following items will be submitted to demonstrate and support that the application for
certification is in compliance with this title. The administrator or director may approve, in writing, an application without some or all of these items
based on the extent and complexity of the development. All plans and drawings shall be at standard engineering scale.
1. A scaled plan or plans illustrating the major and minor conveyance system, including:
a. Size, type, length and inverts of conveyance structures including drainage pipes, culverts, manholes, catch basins, inlets, and drain tiles.
2. A scaled exhibit illustrating the impervious area of the site prior to the certification along with a calculation of the percentage of the site that is
impervious.
3. A scaled exhibit illustrating the proposed impervious surfaces of the development.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 215/438
4. Calculations of the percentage of impervious surfaces after complete construction of the proposed development.
5. Scaled plans illustrating the location of and details for site runoff storage.
6. Calculations that establish the required site runoff storage volume along with calculations confirming that the proposed plan achieves either the site
runoff storage or the modified site runoff storage.
7. When site runoff storage special is required, calculations that demonstrate the specified postdevelopment discharges have not exceeded the
predevelopment values. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-5-2: WETLAND AND BUFFER IMPACT SUBMITTALS:
A. Required Information: The submittal shall include all the following information unless the director or administrator concludes otherwise in accordance
with subsection 9-2-7A1a or 9-11-1A of this title:
1. A complete wetland delineation report prepared in accordance with the federal methodology. The report shall also contain the following:
a. Completed USACE wetland delineation data forms.
b. Aerial photograph, or other exhibit, clearly showing wetland boundaries, location of wetland delineation data points, and off site wetlands within
one hundred feet (100') of the property.
c. A narrative describing the physical characteristics and size of each on site wetland and buffer including a floristic inventory list, calculated mean C
and floristic quality index (FQI) calculated for each on site wetland area.
d. Representative photos of each wetland and its associated buffer.
e. Copies of the below listed information shall be provided:
(1) Floristic inventory list.
(2) NRCS DuPage County soil survey map with legend identifying any mapped hydric soils.
(3) IDNR threatened and endangered species consultation (EcoCAT).
(4) National wetland inventory map.
(5) DuPage County wetland inventory map.
(6) DuPage County regulatory floodplain map and flood insurance rate map.
(7) Site location map with approximate scale.
2. For critical wetland impacts, complete an alternatives analysis in accordance with subsection 9-11-2B of this title.
3. For impacts to regulatory wetland/waters of DuPage greater than 0.1 acre total surface area, or corps of engineers jurisdictional waters or wetland,
complete an alternatives analysis in accordance with subsection 9-11-2C of this title.
B. USACE Jurisdictional Wetland: If a USACE jurisdictional wetland will be impacted, a copy of a letter of no objection, general, regional or individual
permit shall be provided prior to issuance of the stormwater management certification, unless the director or administrator concludes otherwise. In
which case, the certification can be conditioned to state that such work may not commence within or adjacent to the waters of the United States or
wetland until receipt of the necessary USACE authorization.
C. Supporting Documentation: The following support documentation is required to be submitted. The administrator or director may waive the requirement
to provide some or all of the following support documentation when considering the complexity and extent of the proposed development and its
impact:
1. Wetland delineation plan view that includes a depiction of the buffer limits (section 9-12-1 of this title).
2. Statement indicating the date of the wetland boundary verification and OHWM verification.
3. Indirect impact determination. When required, documentation including: subarea watershed map and hydrologic calculations with a table
summarizing results in accordance with the analysis in section 9-11-3 of this title is required.
4. Development narrative shall include the following applicable items:
a. Description of the functions of the impacted wetland or buffer, and how the impacts will be mitigated.
b. Historic aerials, if available, to document the previous site conditions or the extent of farmed wetland.
c. Description of mitigation method, location, and ratios.
d. Description of mitigation area and plan objectives.
e. Description of management practices. The document shall include clarification that prescribed burns and herbicide applications must be
performed by trained/licensed personnel under the proper permits.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 216/438
f. Performance standards.
g. Reporting requirements.
h. Hydrology monitoring methodology and goals.
i. Implementation schedule.
j. Native species list with quantities, size of stock, seeding rate and/or plug spacing.
k. Planting specifications and soil handling.
l. Cost estimate to include installation, management, monitoring, and reporting as anticipated to meet performance standards.
5. Plan view drawings and details, where applicable:
a. Existing and proposed topography.
b. Delineated wetland and waters of DuPage OHWM boundary to a submeter accuracy or better.
c. Buffer boundary.
d. Location of impacts to wetland and buffer.
e. A table shall be provided on the plans listing the total acreage of the existing wetland and buffer areas, and the proposed impact and mitigation
areas. These calculated areas should also be graphically highlighted.
6. Wetland and buffer mitigation plan, if applicable, shall contain the following information:
a. Delineate and label planting and seeding zones.
b. Delineate and label mitigation and enhancement zones.
c. Existing and proposed topography.
d. Planting methodology and soil handling.
e. Proposed wetland and buffer boundaries.
f. Native species list including size of stock, quantity, seed rate, and spacing of plugs.
g. Woody planting locations, if any.
h. Signage or physical barrier locations.
i. Monitoring well locations, if installed.
j. Permanent transect locations and photo documentation points for monitoring, if required.
k. Maintenance and monitoring plan with performance standards. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-5-3: POSTCONSTRUCTION BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE SUBMITTAL:
The postconstruction best management practice (PCBMP) submittal shall include:
A. A discussion documenting compliance with the requirements of chapter 8 of this title.
B. A listing and discussion of all PCBMPs to be used.
C. Supporting calculations documenting compliance with the volume reduction BMP requirements.
D. For manufactured PCBMPs, the manufacturer documentation to support pollutant removal rates shall be supplied.
E. A BMP specific planting/seeding plan for all areas to be vegetated which shall include:
1. Identified locations for all plantings (e.g., lawn, upland prairie, wet prairie, etc.), seeding and planting specifications and methodology; and
2. A schedule for installation; and
3. Proposed maintenance and monitoring provisions; and
4. An opinion of probable cost to construct the BMPs. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 217/438
9-5-4: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Developments that only require approval of the soil erosion and sediment control provisions of this title and do not require approval for any other aspect
of this title shall be reviewed and processed as a letter of permission (LOP). To be eligible for an LOP, in addition to the requirements of this title, the
applicant must certify that he is aware of the design requirements of the IEPA NPDES ILR10 permit and certify that the plan meets those
requirements.
B. For developments with less than one acre of land disturbance that are not part of a larger common plan, a qualified designer shall certify that the
development meets the soil erosion and sediment control design criteria found in chapter 7 of this title. However, formal submittal of the information
under subsection D of this section is unnecessary unless the director or administrator requests demonstration of compliance with these provisions.
C. For developments that disturb one or more acres of land area, or will disturb less than one acre of land, but are part of a larger common plan that will
ultimately disturb one or more acres of land area, the applicant shall prepare and provide a copy of an SWPPP in accordance with the requirements of
Illinois environmental protection agency general NPDES permit no. ILR10, part IV.D.1.a-f (contents of plan), part IV.D.2.a-d (controls), part IV.D.3
(maintenance) and part IV.D.4.a-f (inspections). The plan prepared for the SWPPP may be submitted as the SESC plan for the development.
D. If the SESC plan does not appear adequate to comply with the design requirements of chapter 7 of this title, in the opinion of the administrator or
director, then the administrator or director may require submittal of any or all of the following to demonstrate the plan's compliance:
1. Site maps which indicate:
a. One foot (1') contours with delineated subbasins, and
b. Approximate slopes anticipated before and after major grading activities,
c. Locations where vehicles enter or exit the site and, controls to prevent off site sediment tracking areas, and concrete washout controls and
procedures, limits of soil disturbance, and the location of major structural and nonstructural controls identified in the plan,
d. The location of areas where stabilization practices are expected to occur,
e. Surface waters (including wetlands), and locations where stormwater is discharged to a surface water; and
2. Developments that will extend through winter shall provide a description of winter specific soil erosion and sediment control measures to be
implemented.
3. A description of the nature of the construction activity or demolition work.
4. A description of the intended sequence of major activities which disturb soils for major portions of the site (e.g., clearing, grubbing, excavation,
grading) and construction stabilization schedule.
5. An estimate of the total area of the site, and the total area of the site that is expected to be disturbed by excavation, grading, or other activities.
(Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-5-5: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR DEVELOPMENT IN THE REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN:
A. Developments located in the regulatory floodplain shall, at a minimum, provide the following:
1. A copy of the effective FIRM, RFM, and DFIRM (if available) drawn to scale and showing the limits of the regulatory floodplain, regulatory floodway,
and the boundaries of the development site. If available, a FIRMette should be made for the development site. A "FIRMette" is a full scale section of
a FEMA FIRM that is created through FEMA's website.
2. Engineering calculations and designs that demonstrate the proposed development meets the floodplain requirements of this title. All calculations
and designs shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a professional engineer.
3. A topographical map of the development site, showing the boundaries of the development site and the limits of the existing and proposed
conditions, zone A regulatory floodplain, and regulatory floodway.
4. The applicant shall obtain and provide copies of all required local, state, and federal permits prior to approval for a stormwater management
certification. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
Chapter 6
PERFORMANCE SECURITY AND EASEMENTS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-6-1: PERFORMANCE SECURITY:
A. General Security Requirements:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 218/438
1. As security to the county or the village for the performance by the developer of the developer's obligations to complete the construction of any
stormwater facilities required by the stormwater management certification, to ensure that such stormwater facilities function as designed after
construction, to pay all costs, fees, and charges due from the developer pursuant to this title, and to otherwise faithfully perform the developer's
undertakings pursuant to this title, the developer shall, prior to issuance of a stormwater management certification and in accordance with
subsection 9-4-11D of this title, post performance security and grant easements as hereafter described.
2. The developer shall bear the full cost of securing and maintaining the securities required by this chapter in accordance with subsection 9-4-11D of
this title.
3. Performance security required by this chapter may be posted in the form of one or more surety instruments as the director or administrator deems
appropriate for the proposed development.
4. Public bodies shall not be required to post performance security under this chapter for development activities which involve construction,
improvement, relocation or demolition work paid for in whole or in part with public funds.
5. The developer shall grant the village a temporary easement which authorizes, but does not obligate, the village to access the development site to
perform or complete any act or work the developer is required to do by the stormwater certification which may include: a) the construction of any
required stormwater facilities; b) restoration and/or mitigation of natural areas, wetlands and buffers; c) installation and maintenance of soil erosion
control; d) planting or removal of vegetation; and e) any other maintenance or monitoring. The term for such easements shall be of sufficient
duration as necessary to allow the village to perform and satisfactorily complete any activity or work for which the developer/certificate holder has
posted security under this chapter.
B. Development Security:
1. A development security shall be posted and shall include:
a. A schedule, agreed upon by the developer and the director or the administrator, for the completion of the construction of any stormwater facilities
required by the certification; and
b. An irrevocable letter of credit, or such other adequate security as the director or the administrator may approve, in an amount equal to not less
than one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated probable cost to complete the construction of any stormwater facilities required by the
stormwater management certification, which estimated probable cost shall be approved by the director or the administrator; and
c. A statement signed by the applicant granting the director or the administrator the right to draw on the security and the right to enter the
development site to complete required work in the event that work is not completed according to the work schedule; and
d. A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant shall indemnify the village for any additional costs incurred attributable to concurrent
activities of or conflicts between the applicant's contractor and the village's remedial contractor at the site.
2. The security required by this subsection B shall be maintained and renewed by the applicant, and shall be held in escrow by the administrator until
the conditions set forth in this subsection B and section 9-6-2 of this chapter or other applicable provision are satisfied.
3. After approval of record drawings and final inspection of any constructed stormwater facilities by the director or the administrator, not more than
ninety percent (90%) of the security provided for in this subsection B or other applicable provision may be released. A minimum of ten percent (10%)
of the security shall be retained after completion of construction of such stormwater facilities, for a period of time not less than one year, to ensure
the satisfactory performance of such stormwater facilities. The remaining development security shall be released after the director or the
administrator verifies, by an inspection performed not sooner than one year following the final construction inspection, that such stormwater facilities
function as provided for in the certification.
C. Soil Erosion And Sediment Control Security:
1. If a soil erosion and sediment control security is required pursuant to subsection 9-4-11D2 of this title, such a security shall include:
a. An irrevocable letter of credit, or such other adequate security as the director or the administrator shall approve, in an amount equal to not less
than one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated probable cost to install and maintain the erosion and sediment control measures, which
estimated probable cost shall be approved by the director or the administrator; and
b. A statement signed by the applicant granting the director or the administrator, as applicable, the right to draw on the security and the right to enter
the development site to complete erosion and sediment control measures in the event that such measures are not installed and maintained
according to the established schedule.
2. The security required by this subsection C shall be maintained and renewed by the applicant, and shall be held in escrow by the director or the
administrator, as applicable, until the conditions set forth in subsection C3 of this section and section 9-6-2 of this chapter are satisfied.
3. After establishment of vegetation, removal of all sediment from stormwater facilities unless designed otherwise, and final inspection and approval by
the director or the administrator, as applicable, one hundred percent (100%) of the erosion and sediment control security shall be released.
D. Natural Area Restoration, Wetland And Buffer Mitigation Area Security:
1. Natural area restoration or wetland and buffer mitigation area security, in accordance with subsection 9-4-11D3 of this title shall be posted and shall
include:
a. A schedule, agreed upon by the developer and the director or the administrator, for the completion of a natural area restoration development or
completion of wetland or buffer mitigation development; and
b. An irrevocable letter of credit, or other such adequate security as the director or the administrator may approve, in an amount equal to, not less
than, one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated probable cost to plant, maintain and monitor all vegetated areas and/or complete the
restoration or mitigation development for the agreed upon maintenance and monitoring period as required by the certification. The estimated
probable cost shall be approved by the director or the administrator; and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 219/438
c. A statement signed by the applicant granting the director or the administrator the right to draw on the security and the right to enter the
development site to complete the work in the event that work is not completed according to the work schedule; and
d. A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant shall indemnify the village for any additional costs incurred attributable to concurrent
activities of, or conflicts between, the applicant's contractor and the village's remedial contractor at the site.
2. The security required by this subsection D shall be maintained and renewed by the applicant, and shall be held in escrow by the director or the
administrator until the conditions set forth in subsection D4 of this section and section 9-6-2 of this chapter, or other applicable provision are
satisfied.
3. The natural area restoration or wetland and buffer mitigation areas security may be reduced at the discretion of the director or administrator as
conditions are met, but must not be less than one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated probable cost to continue to meet all conditions or
other applicable provisions.
4. After approval by the director or the administrator, not more than ninety percent (90%) of the security provided for in this subsection D, or other
applicable provision may be released. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the security shall be retained for the length of the required monitoring
period, which shall not be less than one year from the completion of the initial restoration or mitigation activities, to ensure the satisfactory
establishment of any vegetated areas required by the certification.
E. Letters Of Credit:
1. Letters of credit posted pursuant to subsections B, C and D of this section shall be in a form satisfactory to the director or the administrator, as
applicable.
2. Each letter of credit shall be from a lending institution: a) acceptable to the director or the administrator, as applicable; b) having capital resources of
at least ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00), or such other amount acceptable to the director or the administrator; c) with an office in the Chicago
metropolitan area; and d) insured by the federal deposit insurance corporation.
3. Each letter of credit shall, at a minimum, provide that:
a. It shall not be canceled without the prior written consent of the director or the administrator; and
b. It shall not require the consent of the developer prior to any draw on it by the director or the administrator; and
c. If at any time it will expire within forty five (45) or any lesser number of days, and if it has not been renewed, and if any applicable obligation of the
developer for which its security remains uncompleted or is unsatisfactory, then the director or the administrator may, without notice and without
being required to take any further action of any nature whatsoever, call and draw down the letter of credit and thereafter either hold all proceeds
as security for the satisfactory completion of all such obligations or employ the proceeds to complete all such obligations and reimburse the
county or the village for any and all costs and expenses, including legal fees and administrative costs, incurred by the county or the village, as the
administrator shall determine.
4. If at any time the director or the administrator determines that the funds remaining in the letter of credit are not, or may not be, sufficient to pay in full
the remaining unpaid cost of all stormwater facility construction or erosion and sediment control measures, then, within ten (10) days following a
demand by the director or the administrator, the developer shall increase the amount of the letter of credit to an amount determined by the director
or the administrator to be sufficient to pay such unpaid costs. Failure to so increase the amount of the security shall be grounds for the director or
the administrator to draw down the entire remaining balance of the letter of credit.
5. If at any time the director or the administrator determines that the bank issuing the letter of credit is without capital resources of at least ten million
dollars ($10,000,000.00), is unable to meet any federal or state requirement for reserves, is insolvent, is in danger of becoming any of the foregoing,
or is otherwise in danger of being unable to honor such letter of credit at any time during its term, or if the director or the administrator otherwise
reasonably deems the bank to be insecure, then the director or the administrator shall have the right to demand that the developer provide a
replacement letter of credit from a bank satisfactory to the director or the administrator. Such replacement letter of credit shall be deposited with the
director or the administrator not later than ten (10) days following such demand. Upon such deposit, the director or the administrator shall surrender
the original letter of credit to the developer.
6. If the developer fails or refuses to meet fully any of its obligations under this title, then the director or the administrator may, in his or her discretion,
draw on and retain all or any of the funds remaining in the letter of credit. The director or the administrator thereafter shall have the right to take any
action he or she deems reasonable and appropriate to mitigate the effects of such failure or refusal, and to reimburse the county or the village from
the proceeds of the letter of credit for all of its costs and expenses, including legal fees and administrative expenses, resulting from or incurred as a
result of the developer's failure or refusal to fully meet its obligations under this title. If the funds remaining in the letter of credit are insufficient to
repay fully the county or the village for all such costs and expenses, and to maintain a cash reserve equal to the required letter of credit during the
entire time such letter of credit should have been maintained by the developer, then the developer shall, upon demand of the director or the
administrator therefor, immediately deposit with the director or the administrator such additional funds as the director or the administrator determines
are necessary to fully repay such costs and expenses and to establish such cash reserve. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-6-2: LONG TERM ACCESS FOR MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTIONS:
A. Access to privately owned land for inspection and maintenance of site runoff storage facilities, compensatory storage facilities, major stormwater
systems, and storm sewers covered by the certification shall be through a grant of easement in a form approved by the director or the administrator.
Other instruments may be accepted by the director or administrator, provided that the access and maintenance rights granted runs with the land and
survives title transfers.
B. Subdivision site runoff storage areas, compensatory storage facilities, major stormwater systems, and storm sewers not already located in dedicated
rights of way or easements, shall be located either: 1) on a parcel granted or dedicated to, and accepted by, a public entity; or 2) on a parcel or
parcels, conveyed by plat as undivided equal interests to each lot in the subdivision or otherwise conveyed or dedicated to conservation or land
preservation entities approved by the director or the administrator.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 220/438
C. When title to the land underlying site runoff storage areas and storm sewers is conveyed in undivided equal interests to the owner(s) of each of the lots
within the subdivision the following apply:
1. A covenant shall appear on the face of the plat of subdivision, and on each deed conveying ownership of a subdivision lot, which states that title to
such site runoff storage facilities and storm sewers shall be held in undivided equal interests by each lot owner within the subdivision; and
2. A covenant shall appear on the face of the plat of subdivision, and on each deed conveying ownership of the subdivision lots, which states that in
the event the governmental unit having easement rights under subsection A of this section exercises its right to perform maintenance to such
subdivision runoff storage facilities and storm sewers, that governmental unit may lien each lot within the subdivision for the costs of any
maintenance work performed; and
3. An owners' association may be established to provide for the maintenance of the facilities, payment of property taxes, and the assessment and
collection of owner dues or fees to fund said activities. Such associations shall be duly incorporated and the property owners' association's
declaration of covenants and bylaws shall be recorded against the title for all lots in that subdivision; and
D. When title to the land underlying the site runoff storage areas and storm sewers are located on privately owned land not falling within the scope of
subsection C of this section, the following shall apply:
1. The applicant shall reserve an easement for access for maintenance and inspection purposes to any governmental unit having drainage and/or
stormwater management jurisdiction over the property; and
2. The applicant shall record a covenant against title stating that in the event the governmental unit having easement rights under subsection A of this
section exercises its right to perform maintenance to site runoff storage facilities and storm sewers on that property, that governmental unit may lien
the property for the costs of any maintenance work performed. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
Chapter 7
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL REQUIREMENTS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-7-1: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Soil erosion and sediment control features shall be considered as part of any development's initial site planning process. Soil erosion and sediment
control related measures are required to be constructed and maintained for any land disturbance activity. The following factors shall be addressed:
1. The susceptibility of the existing soils to erosion.
2. Existing native and mature vegetation.
3. Existing natural or established drainageways.
4. The natural contours of the land.
5. Development phasing.
6. Emphasis first on erosion control, then sediment control.
7. Winter shutdown.
B. Temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be functional and consistent with this chapter and the NPDES stormwater permit in effect prior
to land disturbance activities.
C. Soil disturbance shall be conducted in a manner that minimizes erosion. Areas of the development site that will not be graded shall be protected from
construction traffic or other disturbance until stabilization of the disturbed areas has been completed.
D. Soil stabilization measures shall include the use of temporary or permanent measures. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-7-2: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN DESIGN CRITERIA:
A. Channels and adjoining properties shall be protected from erosion and sedimentation. Where concentrated flow leaves a development site, effective
energy dissipation shall be placed on site at discharge locations.
B. Erosion control blanket shall be required on all interior site runoff storage facilities side slopes between normal water level and high water level.
C. Erosion control blanket to be placed in wetland or buffer shall be one hundred percent (100%) biodegradable, unless an alternative material is
approved by the director or administrator. This requirement does not include turf reinforcement mats or other structural materials necessary for high
erosion or scour areas.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 221/438
D. Land disturbance activities in streams shall be avoided, where possible. If disturbance activities are unavoidable, the following requirements shall be
met:
1. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed of nonerosive material.
2. The time and area of disturbance of a stream shall be kept to a minimum. The stream, including bed and banks, shall be restabilized within forty
eight (48) hours after channel disturbance is completed.
E. Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be placed where there is a potential for erosion and sized appropriately for the tributary drainage
area, and disturbed areas draining less than one acre shall, at a minimum, be protected by a filter barrier (including filter fences, which at a minimum,
meet the applicable sections of the AASHTO standard specification 288-00, or equivalent control measures) to control all off site runoff from disturbed
areas. The filter barrier shall be designed in accordance with the following:
1. The use of straw bales as a filter barrier or ditch check is prohibited.
2. Silt fences can be used to intercept sheet flow only. Silt fences cannot be used as velocity checks in ditches or swales, nor can they be used where
they will intercept concentrated flows.
3. Ditch checks shall be constructed using nonerodible materials or prefabricated devices. Straw or hay bales are not acceptable.
4. Reinforced silt fences (normal silt fence reinforced with woven wire fencing) can be used to intercept sheet flow runoff from disturbed areas greater
than one acre.
5. All undisturbed wetland, floodplain, waters and buffer areas shall, at a minimum, have a barrier of protection. The barrier shall be placed at the limits
of soil disturbance and consist of:
a. A dual row of silt fence, and a row of orange construction fence, or
b. A dual silt fence barrier, with one of the fences being of high visibility material.
c. Alternative practices offering comparable protection to wetland, floodplain, waters, and buffer areas may be used to prevent impact where
applicable.
d. Additional soil erosion and sediment control measures may be required to adequately protect these sites.
F. Disturbed areas with drainage areas of one acre or greater, but fewer than five (5) acres shall, at a minimum, be protected by a sediment trap or
equivalent control measure at a point downslope of the disturbed area.
G. Disturbed areas with drainage areas of five (5) acres or greater, shall, at a minimum, be protected by a sediment basin, in accordance with subsection
H of this section, with a perforated filtered riser pipe or equivalent control measure at a point downslope of the disturbed area.
H. Sediment basins shall have both a permanent pool (dead storage) and additional volume (live storage) with each volume equal to the runoff amount of
a 2-year, 6-hour event over the on site hydrologically disturbed tributary drainage area to the sediment basin. The available sediment volume below
normal water level, in addition to the dead storage volume, shall be sized to store the estimated sediment load generated from the site over the
duration of the construction period. For construction periods exceeding one year, the one year sediment load and a sediment removal schedule may
be submitted. If the site runoff storage basin for the proposed development condition of the site is used for sediment basin, the above volume
requirements will be explicitly met. Until the site is finally stabilized, the basin permanent pool of water shall meet the above volume requirements and
have a filtered perforated riser protecting the outflow pipe.
I. Pumping sediment laden water into any stormwater facility that is not designated to be a sediment control measure, sediment trap, or sediment basin
either directly or indirectly without filtration is prohibited.
J. Water removed from traps, basins and other water holding depressions or excavations must first pass through a sediment control or filtration device.
When dewatering devices are used, discharge locations shall be protected from erosion. Discharges shall be routed through an effective sediment
control measure (e.g., sediment trap, sediment basin or other appropriate measure).
K. All discharges to undisturbed area, stabilized area or watercourse shall be designed at a nonerosive velocity corresponding to the soil and vegetative
cover of the undisturbed area.
L. All storm sewers, storm drain inlets and culverts that are, or will be functioning during construction shall be protected by sediment and erosion control
measures. The sediment and erosion control measures shall be maintained until the site is stabilized.
M. A stabilized construction entrance of aggregate underlain with filter cloth, or graveled road, or access drive, or parking area of sufficient width and
length, and/or vehicle wash down facilities, shall be provided to prevent soil from being tracked or deposited onto public or private roadways. Any soil
reaching a public or private roadway shall be removed immediately, or as warranted, and transported to a controlled sediment disposal area.
N. All temporary and permanent stormwater conveyance channels, including ditches, swales, diversions, and the outlets of all channels and pipes shall be
designed and constructed to withstand velocities that have the potential to cause damage or soil erosion.
O. Earthen embankments with constructed side slopes steeper than 3H:1V must be constructed with appropriate stabilization as approved by the director
or the administrator.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 222/438
P. Temporary diversions shall be constructed, as necessary, to direct all runoff through an effective sediment control measure (e.g., sediment trap,
sediment basin or other appropriate measure).
Q. To the extent possible, soil stockpile locations shall be shown on the soil erosion and sediment control plan.
R. Soil stockpiles shall not be located in a drainageway, floodplain area or a designated buffer, unless otherwise approved, under specific conditions to be
established by the director or administrator.
S. Stockpiles to remain in place more than three (3) days shall be provided with soil erosion and sediment control measures.
T. The applicant shall provide adequate receptacles for the deposition of all construction debris generated during the development process. The applicant
shall not cause, or permit, the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, blowing, discarding or leaving of construction material debris upon or into any
development site, channel, pond, lake, wetland, buffer or waters of DuPage County. The applicant shall maintain the development site free of
uncontrolled construction debris. Construction site operators shall implement appropriate soil erosion and sediment control, and control waste such as,
discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste that may cause adverse impacts to water quality.
U. All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be removed within thirty (30) days after final stabilization is achieved. Trapped sediment
and other disturbed soils resulting from temporary measures shall be properly disposed of prior to permanent stabilization.
V. Design criteria, standards and specifications for erosion and sediment control shall be taken from one of the following sources:
1. Handbooks: Standards and specifications contained in the "Illinois Urban Manual", as amended, DuPage appendix E "Water Quality Best
Management Practices Technical Guidance Manual" and the IDOT "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
2. Other: Other design criteria, standards and specifications, provided prior written approval is obtained from the administrator or director.
W. Applicant with land disturbing activities greater than one acre shall provide a statement acknowledging that the site complies with the IEPA NPDES
ILR10 permit, if applicable. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-7-3: INSPECTION:
Inspections, remedial work, and recordkeeping for all soil erosion and sediment control related work shall be performed and documented by the applicant
in accordance with the requirements of Illinois environmental protection agency general NPDES permit no. ILR10 for sites that fall within that jurisdiction.
(Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
Chapter 8
POSTCONSTRUCTION BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-8-1: PCBMPs REQUIRED:
PCBMPs are required to treat the stormwater runoff for pollutants of concern and reduce runoff volume for all developments with the exceptions and
exclusions noted below. Upon a documented finding by the director or administrator that providing PCBMPs is impractical, then the appropriate PCBMP
fee in lieu shall be paid by the applicant in lieu of providing full or partial PCBMPs.
A. PCBMPs are waived for the following developments:
1. When comparing the impervious area of the predevelopment site to the with-development impervious area of the same development site, excluding
any areas of the development site for which PCBMPs have already been provided and maintained, and the net new impervious area is less than two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in the aggregate since April 23, 2013; or
2. The development is limited to the resurfacing of an existing roadway; or reconstruction of an existing roadway with less than two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet of net new impervious area per quarter mile being added compared to the predevelopment condition; or the
replacement of an existing culvert or bridge; or
3. The development is a regional stormwater management development or a flood control development which are also considered to be PCBMPs; or
4. The development is a stream bank stabilization, natural area restoration, or wetlands mitigation bank development, or off site wetland mitigation
which in itself is considered a PCBMP; or
5. The development is limited to the construction, or reconstruction, of a pedestrian walkway/bike path, in which the pedestrian walkway/bike path shall
not exceed sixteen feet (16') in width, including shoulders; and is being constructed for general public use; or
6. The development is limited to the modification of an existing stormwater management facility to incorporate best management practices which in
itself is considered PCBMPs; or
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 223/438
7. The development is a water or sewer improvement development; or
8. The development is limited to construction or maintenance of an underground or overhead utility conduit or line, with supports and appurtenances.
This exception does not include buildings, substations, pads, parking lots or other associated utility support facilities.
B. The following are prohibited from providing on site infiltration PCBMPs:
1. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas.
2. Areas within four hundred feet (400') of a known community water system well as specified, or within one hundred feet (100') of a known private
well, for runoff infiltrated from commercial, industrial and institutional land uses. The applicant shall use their best efforts to identify such zones from
available information sources, which include the Illinois state water survey, IEPA, USEPA, DuPage County health department and the local
municipality or water agency.
3. Areas where contaminants of concern, as identified by the USEPA or the IEPA prior to development, are present in the soil through which infiltration
would occur. For sites with a no further remediation (NFR) letter from the USEPA or IEPA, the applicant shall determine whether or not structural
barriers are part of the mitigation strategy and account for such measures in the design.
4. Development in soils classified as hydrologic soils group A by the NRCS.
5. Developments over soils with the seasonally high groundwater table within two feet (2') of the surface. (Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-8-2: DESIGN CRITERIA:
A. PCBMPs shall provide volume and pollutant control using one of the following practices:
1. Infiltration of 1.25 inches for all new impervious surfaces; or
2. Native vegetated wetland bottom site runoff storage basin; or
3. PCBMPs not constructed pursuant to subsection A1 or A2 of this section shall be constructed in accordance with subsection C of this section.
B. Design criteria may be taken from the DuPage County ordinance appendix E, "Water Quality Best Management Practices Technical Guidance Manual",
or approved equivalent.
C. If the practices listed under subsection A1 or A2 of this section are not utilized, then volume control and pollutant control shall be provided separately
for all new impervious surfaces in accordance with the following criteria:
1. The required volume control shall be calculated as the product of the new impervious area and a 1.25 inch rainfall event. No abstractions are taken
on the rainfall depth.
2. The volume calculated shall be subtracted from any volume of site runoff storage that is also required.
3. A control structure or underdrain may be used provided that the draw down time is between forty eight (48) and ninety six (96) hours.
4. When a trench or other excavation is used, the expected void space (typically no greater than 36 percent) within the uniformly graded stone, sand
or aggregate portion of the fill material may be included in the volume calculation. Silt sized particles (1/16 millimeter) or smaller may not be used to
complete this calculation. The design shall incorporate measures to protect the void space from long term deposition of fine sediments. If testing is
completed on samples of the proposed fill material which indicates a higher level of porosity, the applicant may submit the analysis completed on the
material along with the storage calculations.
5. The bottom/invert of the trench shall be set above the seasonally high water table.
6. Applicants shall identify the pollutants of concern that may be generated by the proposed development from the following list: total suspended soils
(TSS); metals and oils; and nutrients consisting of nitrogen and phosphorous. Proposed PCBMPs shall only be required to treat those pollutants
identified and agreed to by the director or administrator. (Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-8-3: OFF SITE LOCATION:
Required PCBMPs for a development may be located off site as part of a regional stormwater device, practice or system, but must be within the same
major watershed as the development. The six (6) major watershed divisions within the county are identified in subsection 9-1-5B of this title. (Ord. G-
1003, 6-11-2013)
Chapter 9
SITE RUNOFF CONVEYANCE, STORAGE AND FIELD TILES
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 224/438
9-9-1: SITE RUNOFF CONVEYANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minor stormwater systems shall be sized to convey runoff from the tributary watershed under fully developed conditions consistent with the design
requirements of the local jurisdiction.
B. Major stormwater systems shall be sized to carry the base flood without causing additional property damage.
C. Design runoff rates shall be calculated by methodologies in general use for such purposes at the time of application. Stormwater facilities draining
more than five (5) acres shall use event hydrograph methods. The administrator may specify certain design tools and methodologies to be used within
the respective community.
D. Any design runoff rate method shall use Illinois state water survey bulletin 71 northeast sectional rainfall statistics, or for continuous simulations, the
national oceanic and atmospheric administration continuous rainfall record from 1949 to present at the Wheaton gauge, and shall calculate flow from
all tributary area upstream of the point of design. Facilities with a tributary area over one hundred (100) acres will be required to perform critical
duration analysis and use the highest peak discharge for conveyance design, testing events up to a 24-hour duration.
E. Maximum flow depths at the crown of a roadway or the edge of pavement at the high side of a super elevated roadway shall not exceed six inches (6")
during the base flood condition. This requirement does not apply to the at-grade repair, resurfacing or in-kind replacement of a roadway existing prior
to the effective date hereof.
F. Transfers of waters between the major planning watersheds shall be prohibited except when such transfers will not violate the provisions of subsection
9-3-5A of this title.
G. Stormwater facilities for runoff upstream of flood protection facilities shall provide for conveyance or storage of floodwaters without increased potential
for damage to real or personal property during base flood conditions. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-9-2: SITE RUNOFF STORAGE:
Site runoff storage facilities, consisting of site runoff storage and a control structure with an emergency overflow shall be required for all developments.
A. The following cases or special conditions represent exceptions to providing site runoff storage:
1. When comparing the impervious area of the predevelopment site as it existed as of February 15, 1992, to the with-development impervious area of
the same development site, excluding any areas of the development site for which detention has already been provided, and the impervious area
has not increased by a minimum of twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet cumulatively of permitted development; or
2. When comparing the highest percentage of impervious area of the same development site in the three (3) years immediately prior to the date of the
stormwater management certification application to the with-development impervious area the percentage will decrease by a minimum of five
percent (5%); or
3. The with-development impervious area of the same development site is less than or equal to ten percent (10%); or
4. The development is strictly limited to a roadway development intended for public use, and the with-development impervious area is less than twenty
five thousand (25,000) square feet compared to predevelopment conditions.
B. When the development is either a roadway development or an open space development, which are "special cases of development" as noted in section
9-4-12 of this title, then only "site runoff storage special" is required. Site runoff storage special shall be only that volume of site runoff storage required
such that predevelopment peak discharges for the 2-year, 24-hour duration and the 100-year, 24-hour duration rainfall events are not increased.
C. The following "special cases of development" are not required to provide site runoff storage or "site runoff storage, special":
1. Bridge and culvert modification, repair, and replacement developments; or
2. Stream bank stabilization developments; or
3. Natural area restoration developments; or
4. Wetland mitigation sites and wetland mitigation banks; or
5. Trails, bikeways and pedestrian walkways that shall not exceed sixteen feet (16') in width, including shoulders; and are being constructed for
general public use; or
6. Water and sewer improvement developments and all underground utilities.
D. When site runoff storage is required, it will be calculated as a volume utilizing the following development parameters and procedures:
1. The area for which site runoff storage is to be calculated will be the limits of grading or land cover disturbance, or a combination, whichever
encompasses the greatest area of the development site, and will also include any impervious area for which site stormwater storage was deferred in
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 225/438
subsection A1 of this section.
2. The runoff characteristics of the area will be indexed by calculating a representative hydrologic parameter. This parameter will be the NRCS curve
number unless the administrator approves the use of some other generally accepted engineering practice.
3. The design rainfall depth and duration will be the 100-year, 24-hour duration ISWS bulletin 71 rainfall depth. Sectional statistics and rainfall
distributions by Huff appropriate for a 100-year, 24-hour event shall be used unless some other rainfall and distribution is approved by the
administrator.
4. For purposes of calculating the required volume, a control structure shall be assumed that limits the peak runoff from the site to 0.10 cfs per acre for
the disturbed area.
5. For sites less than five (5) acres in area, the unit area site runoff storage nomograph from the Northeastern Illinois planning commission (now
known as CMAP) publication "Investigation Of Hydrologic Methods For Site Design In Northeastern Illinois" (Dreher and Price, 1991) will be
considered an acceptable calculation methodology for determining the volume of site runoff storage required in lieu of modeling.
6. For sites five (5) acres or greater, a hydrologic model that produces a runoff hydrograph shall be utilized, and the runoff hydrograph routed through
a basin which provides sufficient storage such that the combination of control structure and runoff storage volume limits the discharge to the
allowable peak runoff. The calculated volume is then the required site runoff storage volume. This volume may be reduced by any volume control
PCBMP (see chapter 8 of this title) volume if such a volume is required, and is then referred to as the modified required site runoff storage volume.
7. On development sites that have an existing site runoff storage facility, the volume of site runoff storage required for a proposed development shall
not be less than the volume on site predevelopment, regardless of the provisions of this section.
E. The details of the design of a site runoff storage facility, which include a site runoff storage control structure in accordance with section 9-9-3 of this
chapter (side slopes, depths, etc.), will be in accordance with any applicable ordinances of the village.
F. If a development is granted a variance with respect to the required site runoff storage volume, then the applicant shall pay a fee in lieu of site runoff
storage per section 9-13-1 of this title.
G. Small areas of the disturbed area of a development site (less than 5 percent cumulatively) that are impractical to drain to a site runoff storage facility
(backslopes of landscaping berms for example) may be allowed to drain off site without routing through a site runoff storage facility provided that the
areas are primarily vegetated and contain only incidental amounts of impervious surfaces such as sidewalks, utility appurtenances, or trails. Such
areas do not "penalize" the allowable release rate by subtracting the anticipated 100-year discharge from these areas from the release rate, but may
not be included in the area used for calculating the allowable release rate. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-9-3: SITE RUNOFF STORAGE CONTROL STRUCTURES:
A. A site runoff storage facility requires a control structure to meet the peak runoff rate requirements. Its design will be as follows, unless an alternate
design meeting the intent to provide site runoff storage of a determined volume is approved by the administrator:
1. The structure shall be designed so that within the elevation range at which the site runoff storage volume is provided, the calculated discharge from
the structure equals the product of 0.10 cfs per acre multiplied by the disturbed site area, assuming a free discharge.
2. An overflow conveyance system shall also be designed to convey a minimum design rate of one cfs per acre multiplied by the entire upstream
drainage area without damaging any buildings on site with overbank flooding, and shall discharge at the same location as where water leaves the
site predevelopment. This location may be modified by the administrator. This conveyance shall begin operation at the elevation at which the site
runoff storage volume is met. If one hundred (100) acres or greater drains to the emergency overflow then the overflow is part of the major drainage
system and it also falls under the provisions of chapter 10 of this title.
B. For locations draining more than five (5) acres, but less than one hundred (100) acres, the combination of control structure, site runoff storage and
overflow conveyance shall be tested in a with-development hydrologic model and the design shall be further modified by adding additional site runoff
storage, as necessary so that the predevelopment site 2-year and 100-year, 24-hour duration peak discharges are not increased compared to the
with-development site condition.
C. For site runoff storage facilities with a tributary area one hundred (100) acres or greater at the control structure, in addition to the above requirements,
the combination of control structure, site runoff storage and overflow conveyance shall not exceed the predevelopment site peak discharge in a 2-year
and 100-year rainfall event of critical duration up to a 24-hour duration.
D. Unless approved by the director or the administrator, all site runoff storage control structure designs shall operate without human intervention and
when requiring electric power, shall have at least two (2) independent and flood resistant sources of power. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-
11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-9-4: STORAGE FACILITIES IN FLOODPLAIN:
Storage facilities located within the regulatory floodplain shall:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 226/438
A. Conform to all applicable requirements specified in chapter 10 of this title; and
B. Store the required site runoff under all stream flow and backwater conditions up to the base flood elevation; and
C. Not allow design release rates to be exceeded under any stream elevation less than the base flood elevation. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-9-5: STORAGE FACILITIES IN FLOODWAY:
Storage facilities located within the regulatory floodway shall:
A. Meet the requirements for locating storage facilities in the regulatory floodplain; and
B. Be evaluated by performing hydrologic and hydraulic analysis consistent with the standards and requirements for watershed plans; and
C. Provide a watershed benefit. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-9-6: OFF SITE STORAGE FACILITIES:
Storage facilities may be located off site if the following conditions are met:
A. The off site storage facility meets all of the requirements of this chapter; and
B. Adequate storage capacity in the off site facility is dedicated to the development; and
C. The development includes provisions to convey stormwater to the off site storage facility. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-9-7: MODIFICATIONS TO DRAINAGE TILES:
A. Any modification of a drainage tile shall comply with the Illinois drainage code. For the purpose of determining compliance with this provision, a
modification to a drainage tile shall:
1. Preserve the existing tile system's drainage characteristics; and
2. Drain tiles located wholly on property under the control of the developer may be removed or disabled provided that such removal does not cause
additional flood damages; and
3. Drain tiles may be discharged as surface flow within a development site provided that no obstruction to the predicted flow from off site areas will
occur, and the general provisions of subsection 9-3-5A of this title are not violated; and
4. Development designs may only utilize, where practical and approved by the director or administrator, outflow locations with an existing drain tile
leaving the development site with the permission of downstream landowners unless the tile is owned and maintained by a unit of government; and
5. A subsurface connection to the tile shall be constructed as a low flow outlet. A surface outlet shall be designed for the development site outflows
based on the assumption the downstream tile will cease to function; and
6. Drain tiles shall be replaced or intercepted and connected to the proposed stormwater management system or a storm sewer bypass, which system
or bypass shall be of an equivalent size and capacity. The capacity shall be determined by either the capacity of the existing tile flowing full, in its
original condition, or the existing downstream capacity, whichever is more restrictive. A flow restrictor structure shall be required as necessary to
achieve the capacity requirements; and
7. Drain tile systems disturbed by development activities shall be reconnected unless the approved drainage plan provides otherwise.
B. Existing, replaced or rerouted tiles within a development site shall be treated as part of the minor drainage system. The type, size, location and inverts
shall be shown on the record drawings of the development and any further modification to such tiles, or the repair or removal of damaged tiles, shall
require the approval of the director or the administrator.
C. When subsurface drainage tiles are detected on a predevelopment site the applicant shall submit the following:
1. A subsurface drainage inventory including the locations of identified drainage tiles by means of slit trenching and other appropriate methods
performed by a qualified subsurface drainage consultant. Any drain tile lines damaged during the investigation shall be repaired to their previous
working status.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 227/438
2. A topographical map of the development site showing:
a. Location of and depth of each slit trench to correspond with the tile investigation report and surveyed points where the tile was field staked at
approximately fifty foot (50') intervals; and
b. Location of each drain tile with a flow direction arrow, tile size and any connection to adjoining properties; and
c. A summary of the tile investigation report showing trench identification number, tile size, material and quality, percentage of the tile filled with
water, percentage of restrictions caused by silting, depth of ground cover, and working status; and
d. The qualifications of the person or firm conducting tile location investigation.
D. Replacement of downstream drain tiles shall be required if the development site depends on those tiles for stormwater conveyance or water surface
elevation control. Replacement of the downstream drain tiles is not required if a maintainable outlet for the site exists or is installed. Drainage tiles may
be maintained, replaced or repaired for agricultural land use when undertaken in compliance with NRCS approved farming practices without requiring
stormwater management certification. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
Chapter 10
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-10-1: DETERMINATION OF REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN, BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) AND REGULATORY
FLOODWAY:
A. The BFE for purposes of establishing the low opening on new construction of buildings shall be taken from the higher of BFEs established by the
current regulatory profile, or elevations established and published by the director which meet the following conditions:
1. The director certifies that adequate review and quality control has been performed on the hydrologic/hydraulic modeling, and BFEs have been
established using acceptable methodology; and
2. The director notifies an affected community within the studied reach and makes available to that community working input files for the
hydrologic/hydraulic model; and
3. The director publishes notice that the model will be used for the purpose of regulating new building construction.
B. The BFE, for purposes of establishing compensatory storage, will be based on the current regulatory model as determined in subsection D of this
section.
C. If neither elevation identified in this section has been established, then the BFE shall be determined in accordance with subsection D2 of this section.
D. The regulatory BFE shall be taken as the one percent (1%) chance storm established from floodplain studies that have been completed and adopted
by FEMA as the regulatory floodplain. When a BFE has not been adopted by FEMA as regulatory, the following hierarchy of floodplain studies shall be
used to determine the BFE:
1. Floodplain studies that have been published by the director in accordance with subsection A of this section.
2. If no regulatory floodplain study or model published by the director is available and the development includes a channel with a tributary area one
hundred (100) acres or greater, or a depressional storage area with twenty (20) acres or greater of tributary area, a site specific floodplain study
shall be required and the BFE shall be determined using FEMA accepted models and methodology. If the chosen model is not FEQ, the BFE shall
be based on the critical duration.
E. Where a channel has a tributary drainage area equal to or greater than six hundred forty (640) acres, the site specific floodplain study completed in
subsection D2 of this section shall be submitted to IDNR-OWR for approval or their designee.
F. The regulatory floodway shall be as delineated on the maps listed in exhibit 2 attached to the ordinance codified herein. Where interpretation is required
to determine the exact location of the regulatory floodway, IDNR-OWR shall be contacted or their designee.
G. If a floodway is not designated on the maps in exhibit 2 attached to the ordinance codified herein and the tributary area is one square mile or greater,
IDNR-OWR part 3708 rules shall apply. If a floodway is not designated on the maps in exhibit 2 attached to the ordinance codified herein and the
tributary area is less than one square mile, then the regulatory floodplain shall have no designated floodway.
H. The flood protection elevation (FPE) is the BFE plus one foot (1') of freeboard. (Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-10-2: REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 228/438
A. General Performance Standards:
1. No development activity within the floodplain shall result in an adverse hydraulic impact to upstream or downstream properties.
2. Proposed developments that meet the following criteria shall be exempt from the hydrologic and hydraulic modeling requirements set forth in this
title:
a. A development that is located in the regulatory floodplain but is located entirely outside of the regulatory floodway, provided the development
meets the compensatory storage requirements of subsection D of this section.
b. The construction of an at-grade pedestrian path located within the regulatory floodway, provided the proposed development meets the following
requirements which results in a development that does not increase the BFE:
(1) The development must have an at-grade intention, with a reasonable balance of cut and fill at each cross section based on the judgment of the
director. Net cut over the length of the development is acceptable where a balance of cut and fill at every cross section cannot be achieved.
(2) The maximum width of the proposed path is sixteen feet (16') of traveled lane, including shoulders.
c. The construction of a public safety feature, such as a pedestrian bridge railing or a guardrail for a roadway, provided the proposed construction of
a public safety feature does not result in a loss of ten percent (10%) or more of the existing conveyance cross sectional area.
d. Developments replacing culverts with a hydraulically equivalent culvert(s).
3. A CLOMR shall be required for any development that either: a) revises the regulatory floodway boundary; or b) encroaches upon a floodplain and
causes a specified increase in the BFE, in accordance with FEMA and state regulations.
4. In accordance with NFIP regulations, a building permit shall not be issued for construction in the SFHA until an LOMR is issued by FEMA unless the
building meets the building protection standards in subsection B of this section. A building permit for a compliant structure can be issued without an
LOMC.
5. A copy of an application for an LOMC to remove a property from the SFHA including all the required information, calculations, and documents shall
be submitted to the village concurrent with the application to FEMA or IDNR-OWR or its designee.
6. In areas outside the regulatory floodway but within the floodplain, maximum flow depths on new parking lots that are used for permanent parking
shall not exceed one foot (1') during the base flood condition and shall be designed for protection against physical flood damages. Parking areas
that are used solely for the purpose of overflow, temporary, or short term parking may allow flood depths greater than one foot (1'). Parking in areas
below the base flood elevation shall be clearly posted with flood hazard signs.
B. Building Protection Standards:
1. If a proposed building is located in an SFHA, all new construction and substantial improvements shall: a) be designed (or modified) and adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of building resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy, b) be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, c) be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages, and
d) be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. Existing buildings that have not
incurred substantial damage or meet the substantial improvement criteria may also be modified based on the above criteria. All construction below
the FPE shall be of flood resistant materials and conform to provisions in FEMA/FIA technical bulletin 2. All electrical, heating, ventilation, air
conditioning, plumbing, and other appliances shall be located above the FPE. Storage of materials shall be in accordance with subsection C1 of this
section, which states that there can be no storage of certain listed materials below the FPE.
2. New construction or substantial improvements of residential buildings within an SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated to at least the FPE and
that the fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet
or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade. Openings
may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Adequate drainage shall be provided.
3. New construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential buildings within an SFHA shall: a) have the lowest floor elevated to at least the
FPE or, b) together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the FPE the building is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy. Where a nonresidential structure is intended to be made watertight below the FPE: a) a registered professional engineer or
architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable provisions of 44 CFR 60.3, and b) a record of such
certificates which includes the specific elevation (in relation to sea level) to which such buildings are floodproofed shall be maintained by the official
designated by the community under 44 CFR 59.22.
4. Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within the SFHA on sites: a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, b)
in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or d) an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured homes to at least the FPE, be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile home tiedown
act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code 870, provide adequate access and drainage and if pilings are used for elevation, applicable
design and construction standards for pilings shall be met.
5. Manufactured homes to be placed in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within the SFHA not subject to the provisions of subsection
B4 of this section shall be elevated so that either: a) the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least the BFE, or b) the manufactured home
chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty six inches (36") in
height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement in
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 229/438
accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile home tiedown act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code 870, provide
adequate access and drainage and if pilings are used for elevation, applicable design and construction standards for pilings shall be met.
6. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within an SFHA shall either: a) be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, b) be
fully licensed and ready for highway use, or c) meet the permit requirements of 44 CFR 60.3(b)(1) and the elevation and anchoring requirements of
subsection B4 of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by a
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
7. Accessory structures such as detached garages and sheds may be constructed within an SFHA if they meet all of the following criteria:
a. Must be nonhabitable, used for the storage of vehicles and tools, and cannot be modified later into another use.
b. Shall be located outside of the regulatory floodway.
c. Shall be on a single lot and be accessory to an existing principal building on the same lot.
d. When the floor of an accessory structure is below the BFE, the walls of the accessory structure shall include openings to allow floodwater to enter
the structure from the adjacent grade to the BFE. The location of the openings and the size of each opening shall be in accordance with FEMA
technical bulletin 1.
e. All electrical, heating, ventilation, air conditioning, plumbing, and other appliances, or fixed mechanical or electrical devices shall be located above
the FPE.
f. The detached garage must be less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) in market value or replacement cost, whichever is greater, or less
than five hundred seventy six (576) square feet in size.
g. Shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
h. All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides, fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the FPE.
i. All construction below the FPE shall be of flood resistant materials.
C. Public Health Protection Standards:
1. Temporary or permanent storage in the floodplain of the following are prohibited unless elevated or floodproofed to one foot (1') above the base
flood elevation:
a. Items susceptible to flood damage; or
b. Unsecured buoyant materials or materials that may cause off site damage including bulky materials, flammable liquids, chemicals, explosives,
pollutants, or other hazardous materials; or
c. Landscape wastes.
2. On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
3. Sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to eliminate infiltration or inflow of floodwaters and minimize discharge of sewage.
D. Compensatory Storage Volume Standards:
1. Any placement of fill, structures, or other materials above grade in the floodplain shall require compensatory storage equal to at least 1.5 times the
volume of floodplain storage displaced. The storage shall be provided incrementally using one of the following methods: a) between the 0 - 10-year
and the 10 - 100-year flood recurrence intervals; or b) an approved equivalent, at a minimum one to one (1:1) ratio. The remaining 0.5:1 required
storage ratio can be provided at any elevation below the BFE. Compensatory storage for fill in depressional storage areas shall be provided
nonincrementally at a ratio of one to one (1:1). Grading in wetland, floodplain, or buffer areas shall be done in such a manner that the existing
floodplain storage is maintained at all times. Compensatory storage is not required for flood protection of existing buildings for floodplain volume
displaced by the building and within the area of ten feet (10') adjacent to the building.
2. For areas where there is no defined regulatory floodway and a tributary drainage area less than six hundred forty (640) acres, the compensatory
storage requirements set forth in this subsection D shall be waived for developments that meet either of the following criteria:
a. The cross sectional floodplain area, as defined by cross sections through the development site, is not reduced by more than 0.5 percent at any
one cross section; or
b. The total fill volume does not exceed two hundred (200) cubic feet.
3. Existing flood storage that is lost due to channel modification shall require compensatory storage at a one to one (1:1) ratio.
4. Floodplain fill resulting from public roadway developments shall require incremental compensatory storage at a one to one (1:1) ratio.
5. Any removal, replacement, or modification of stormwater facilities that has an adverse hydraulic impact shall provide a watershed benefit and shall
require compensatory storage to mitigate any potential increases in flow or flood elevations. All structures and their associated low entry elevations
within the created backwater of the existing stormwater facility shall be identified. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-10-3: REGULATORY FLOODWAY PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 230/438
A. In the regulatory floodway, all of the requirements of this chapter shall apply to any proposed development, and only the following appropriate uses
shall be considered for certifications:
1. Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding or erosion or water
quality or habitat for fish or wildlife;
2. Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities, and facilities
and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial shipping and other functionally dependent uses;
3. Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;
4. Underground and overhead utilities;
5. Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems including any related fencing built parallel to the direction of flood flows;
6. Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, and railways, and any modification thereto;
7. Regulatory floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive slope toward a watercourse;
8. Floodproofing activities to protect existing structures such as, but not limited to, constructing watertight window wells, and elevating, without
enlarging the footprint;
9. Inground swimming pools, without fill.
B. Hydrologic and hydraulic impacts of proposed developments located in the regulatory floodway shall be evaluated using one of the appropriate models
as described in the following hierarchy:
1. FEMA approved floodplain study model.
2. Watershed plan models or models published by the director.
3. Development specific model using FEMA accepted methodology.
C. If the hydrologic and hydraulic impacts of developments located in the regulatory floodway are to be evaluated using FEQ, the following modeling
guidelines shall apply:
1. FEQ models that have been submitted to or approved by FEMA or FEQ models that have been published by the director shall be used. Any other
FEQ models considered for use in the certification of a proposed development is at the discretion of the director.
2. Developments consisting wholly of stream bank stabilization will not require the use of the FEQ model provided that the cut and fill portions of the
development are balanced.
3. Use of the FEQ model to evaluate hydrologic and hydraulic impacts to wetlands will only be required for wetland areas that are located within the
100-year recurrence interval floodplain, where the existing FEQ model is the regulatory model.
4. Evaluation of the results of the FEQ model will use the following thresholds to determine no adverse impact. In evaluating FEQ results, it is
understood that the term "increases" as used below constitutes a numeric model tolerance and shall not be understood to endorse increasing flood
flows or flood elevations.
a. There will be no increase in elevation for any storm event greater than 0.1 foot. If this threshold is exceeded, the applicant shall prepare a trend
analysis to show if there are any consistent frequency (depth and duration) of storm events that cause impacts greater than 0.1 foot. If there are
no trends determined, then outliers with 0.25 foot or less shall be acceptable. If a trend is discernible, the development shall be reevaluated to
avoid adverse impacts within the determined trend. A trend is considered three (3) or more events within 0.5 foot of depth that show increases
greater than 0.1 foot.
b. No increase in flow greater than ten percent (10%).
c. No increase in velocity greater than ten percent (10%), unless there is either protection to prevent erosion or evidence that the proposed velocity
will be nonerosive.
D. All developments shall preserve effective floodway conveyance such that there will be no increases in 100-year flood elevations, flows, or floodway
velocity, unless any such increases are contained in a public flood easement and a watershed benefit is provided. Increases in flood elevations of 0.1
foot or less associated with bridge and culvert construction are allowable, in accordance with IDNR-OWR part 3700 and 3708 rules.
E. Transition sections within the regulatory floodway are required for the calculation of effective conveyance including the modification and the
replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance for other appropriate uses. The following ratios shall be
used to calculate transition sections:
1. Water will expand no faster than one foot (1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of flooded stream length.
2. Water will contract no faster than one foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of flooded stream length.
3. Water will not expand or contract faster than one foot (1') vertical for every ten feet (10') of flooded stream length.
F. For bridge and culvert replacements within the regulatory floodway where a hydraulic analysis of the floodplain is required, a separate floodway
analysis shall not be required provided that the pre- and post-construction BFE is not increased based on the hydraulic analysis of the floodplain.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 231/438
G. For proposed developments that require a floodway construction permit, the county has been delegated the authority to issue floodway construction
permits on behalf of IDNR-OWR. However, a permit application must still be submitted to IDNR-OWR. The county does not have delegated authority
for specific types of permitting, including:
1. Permitting of developments undertaken by federal or state agencies including those that are funded, planned, or designed by federal or state
agencies.
2. Permitting of developments undertaken by the department, including those in which the department is involved in the planning or design.
3. Permitting of jurisdictional dams.
4. Permitting of work in public bodies of water, as defined by IDNR-OWR.
5. State approval of new or revised regulatory floodway limits or regulatory flood profiles.
6. State certification of flood discharges.
7. State approval of BFE determinations where no regulatory BFEs currently exist and the drainage area of the watercourse is one square mile or
greater. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
Chapter 11
WETLANDS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-11-1: REQUIREMENTS FOR WETLAND DELINEATION:
A. The following should be completed as part of an on site procedure, unless the director or administrator concludes otherwise. The decision shall be
based on review of available resources, current or prior site knowledge, a site visit, or staff recommendations, or the results of subsection B1 of this
section. The basis for the decision shall be documented and placed in the development file.
B. The boundaries, extent, hydrology, function and quality of all wetland areas on the subject property shall be determined by an environmental scientist in
accordance with the federal wetland delineation methodology. All development site wetland boundaries shall be demarcated in the field and verified by
an environmental scientist representing the county, or the complete waiver community where the wetland is located. Verified wetland boundaries are
valid for two (2) years after the date of verification.
1. If an environmental scientist confirms that no wetlands are present on or within one hundred feet (100') of the development site, the administrator
shall document those findings.
2. If wetlands or waters are determined to be present, a delineation report shall be prepared documenting boundaries, extent, function, and quality of
wetland, waters and buffers in compliance with all methodologies and definitions set forth in this title.
C. The boundaries, extent, hydrology, function, and quality of all wetland areas on sites in agricultural production shall be determined by an environmental
scientist in accordance with the current methodology. Agricultural areas that have been abandoned for five (5), or more, consecutive years shall be
delineated in accordance with the current federal wetland delineation methodology authorized under section 404 of the clean water act.
D. The approximate location, extent, and relative quality of off site wetlands within one hundred feet (100') of the development shall be identified by using
the first of the following documents or procedures applicable at the time of delineation:
1. Site specific delineation according to the procedures specified in accordance with the federal wetland delineation methodology.
2. Wetland signatures identifiable from historic and current aerial photography, as determined by an environmental scientist.
3. DuPage County wetland inventory maps.
4. U.S. fish and wildlife service, national wetland inventory maps.
5. Wetlands identified in interim watershed plans.
6. Wetlands identified in watershed plans.
E. Wetlands shall be classified as either critical or regulatory based on the evaluation of the entire wetland complex. Critical wetland status shall be
assigned to those wetlands that have been determined to satisfy one of the following subsections E1 through E5 of this section:
1. Calculate the wetland qualitative value using the modified Michigan department of natural resources method. A score of 5 or higher will be
considered a critical wetland. Alternatively, the mean rated wildlife quality (MRWQ) can be calculated using the Ludwig wildlife habitat evaluation
method. A score of 8 or higher will be considered critical wetland. If both methods are completed, the MRWQ shall prevail.
2. The plant community within the wetland is determined to have a native floristic quality index (nFQI) of 20 or higher during a single growing season
assessment or a native mean C-value of 3.5 or greater, as calculated by the Swink & Wilhelm methodology.
3. The wetland is known to be inhabited by a state listed threatened or endangered species based on the consultation with the Illinois department of
natural resources.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 232/438
4. An evaluation of the wetland completed in accordance with current United States fish and wildlife service review procedure that confirms the
presence or use by listed threatened or endangered species.
5. If the wetland is identified as a critical wetland in the county's wetland inventory, confirmation of the critical status shall be completed through an
evaluation of subsections E1 through E4 of this section. If the wetland evaluation does not confirm a critical status, the wetland shall be considered
"regulatory" for purposes of this title. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-11-2: REQUIREMENTS FOR DEVELOPMENT AFFECTING WETLANDS:
A. Development affecting wetlands may not occur without certification, or letter of permission if applicable.
B. Development proposing to affect critical wetlands must demonstrate through an alternatives analysis that the presence of critical wetlands precludes all
economic use of the entire parcel, and that no practicable alternative to wetland modification exists, and that the proposed development represents the
least damaging alternative while still achieving the basic development purpose. If the impact is determined to be allowable, the impacted area shall be
mitigated in accordance with section 9-11-4 of this chapter.
C. Development proposing to affect regulatory wetland must demonstrate through an alternatives analysis that the proposed development represents the
least damaging alternative while still achieving the basic development purpose. If the impact is determined to be allowable, the impacted area shall be
mitigated in accordance with section 9-11-4 of this chapter. The following exception applies:
1. The administrator shall waive the requirement for completion of an alternatives analysis or the need to provide wetland mitigation for developments
proposing, in the aggregate, 0.10 acre or less direct impact to wetlands provided:
a. The wetland(s) is regulatory; and
b. None of the wetland(s) to be impacted is over 0.1 acre in size; and
c. The wetland(s) to be impacted is not jurisdictional under the USACE; and
d. The wetland(s) to be impacted is located entirely within the development's platted lot(s); and
e. There will be no indirect impacts to remaining wetland area(s); and
f. The wetland(s) to be impacted is not part of a wetland mitigation development; and
g. The impact is in line with the basic development purpose.
D. Development proposing to temporarily affect a regulatory wetland is allowable provided the impacted wetland is restored pursuant to subsection 9-11-
4D of this chapter.
E. Vegetative maintenance within wetland may be allowed through issuance of a letter of permission under the following conditions:
1. A written description of the development goals, objectives and management plan must be provided for approval to the director or administrator. As
long as the development does not require stormwater management certification for any other aspect of the development, the director or
administrator may issue a letter of permission to allow the maintenance activity. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-11-3: INDIRECT IMPACTS TO WETLANDS:
A. The applicant must demonstrate that the development or hydraulic alteration will not cause an indirect wetland impact unless one of the following
exceptions applies:
1. The wetlands occur at or below the OHWM of a waterway on which the hydraulics will not be changed; or
2. The development is a stream bank stabilization project; or
3. The director or administrator concurs that there is no potential for adverse impact.
B. A development or hydraulic alteration is considered to have an indirect impact if one of the following limitations is exceeded:
1. An increase or decrease in the high water level of more than three inches (3") in the 2.03 inch, 2.51 inch, and 3.04 inch, 24-hour rainfall events; or
2. Changes in the wetland's draw down time resulting in an increase or decrease of greater than forty eight (48) hours from the peak elevation to the
normal water level. The draw down times must be calculated for the 2.03 inch, 2.51 inch, and 3.04 inch, 24-hour rainfall event for both the existing
and proposed conditions; or
3. An increase in the duration of inundation of more than twenty percent (20%) from existing to proposed conditions for the 5.51 and 7.58 inch, 24-hour
rainfall event. A minimum increase of forty eight (48) hours is allowed for these storm events.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 233/438
The director or administrator can, based on a review of the submitted information, determine that proposed impacts outside of the above limits will
not affect the existing plant communities, and therefore, would be allowable.
C. Under certain circumstances, the director or administrator, may allow minor variations to the normal water level if it can be demonstrated by an
environmental scientist to be an ecological benefit to the wetland system.
D. When the dominant plant community or wetland type is known to be sensitive to relatively small changes in depth and duration of inundation (e.g.,
sedge meadow, vernal pool), then the thresholds as outlined in subsection B of this section may be reduced by the director or administrator. (Ord. G-
1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-11-4: WETLAND MITIGATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Mitigation for wetland impacts shall take place in the same watershed planning area as the affected wetland. For the purpose of this section, the three
(3) watershed planning areas are defined as the Salt Creek (including the Des Plaines River and Sawmill Creek), East Branch DuPage River and
West Branch DuPage River, as shown on exhibit 1 attached to the ordinance codified herein. If mitigation is not practicable within the same watershed,
the director or administrator may allow out of watershed mitigation, following a request in writing by the applicant. The designs and analyses of all
wetland mitigation measures shall meet the applicable standards of the plan.
B. Mitigation for permanent wetland impacts shall be provided as follows:
1. Three to one (3:1) for permanent development impacts within critical wetlands.
2. One and one-half to one (1.5:1) for permanent development impacts within regulatory wetlands.
3. Natural area restoration developments shall provide wetland mitigation for permanent wetland impacts at a minimum proportional rate of one to one
(1:1).
4. Developments that contain both development and restoration components shall mitigate at the ratios listed above applicable to each type of impact.
5. If a wetland mitigation area is disturbed prior to acceptance, the impact shall be mitigated at a one to one (1:1) rate. Restoration of the impacted
area can constitute fulfillment of the one to one (1:1) requirement. If a wetland mitigation area is impacted following acceptance, the impact must be
mitigated at the appropriate critical or regulatory proportional rate.
6. In order to be eligible for credit, the mitigation must meet the performance standards referenced by the stormwater certification.
C. The director or administrator may allow partial mitigation credit for the following, provided that wetland creation for permanent wetland impacts does
not fall below a one to one (1:1) ratio. A credit may not be counted twice.
1. Enhancement or restoration of an existing wetland will be credited at a ratio of 0.5:1.
2. Enhancement, restoration, or creation of buffer will be credited at a ratio of 0.25:1.
D. Temporary wetland impacts shall be restored in place. The disturbed area must be returned to its original contour and general soil profile, be restored
to a comparable wetland community type, and exhibit an FQI no lower than that of the original wetland in accordance with the approved performance
standards. The director or administrator shall make a determination as to whether the proposed impacts will be considered temporary.
E. The applicant may request an alternative community type, if the development is part of a natural area restoration development, and documentation is
provided describing the restoration plan and goals.
F. Mitigation for depressional storage lost within wetlands shall be provided in accordance with subsection 9-10-2D of this title.
G. Wetland creation shall only take place within areas that are currently nonwetland.
H. Development or the removal of native vegetation in the existing wetland shall be initiated only after a plan has been approved and adequate securities
are provided as specified in chapter 6 of this title.
I. Wetland mitigation areas shall incorporate native, noninvasive species and be designed to duplicate or improve the hydrologic and biologic function of
the original wetland.
J. A native buffer is required to protect the mitigation wetland from surrounding land uses. Buffers shall be one hundred feet (100') for mitigation adjacent
to critical wetland and fifty feet (50') adjacent to regulatory wetland, unless the director or administrator concludes otherwise.
K. Hydrology for wetland mitigation shall be evaluated by the applicant to establish the depth and duration of inundation and soil saturation for the wetland
plant community design. The applicant shall identify the sources of wetland hydration including surface runoff, groundwater and overbank flooding.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 234/438
L. Applicants shall submit hydrology information for the proposed wetland mitigation area to demonstrate sustainability using the best available data.
M. Mitigation must meet certification requirements and associated performance standards, and shall undergo a maintenance and monitoring period as
required in the stormwater management certification.
1. Upon inspection, if the mitigation meets certification requirements and performance standards during or at the end of the monitoring period, the
director or administrator shall issue regulatory signoff.
2. If the permit requirements are met early and it appears that the cessation of the maintenance and monitoring period will not jeopardize the area's
continuing compliance, the director or administrator may consider granting early signoff when requested.
3. If the mitigation area is not considered a success within the approved monitoring period, additional measures shall be required to bring the site into
compliance.
N. Mitigation is considered separate from other development components, and requires a performance security be established in accordance with chapter
6 of this title for the completion of the mitigation development.
O. The certification holder shall provide annual monitoring reports documenting progress towards meeting the approved performance standards. The
monitoring reports shall include relevant data and observations during the growing season and shall be submitted no later than January 31 of the
following year until performance standards are met and accepted.
P. If property ownership is changed during the management and monitoring period, the applicant shall provide formal written notification to the director or
administrator. The notification shall contain complete contact information including certification number(s), owner(s) name(s), street address(es),
phone number(s) (office, fax, mobile), e-mail address(es), etc. The certification holder must notify the future owner(s) of their obligations regarding
certification conditions and maintenance and monitoring requirements for the subject development as they relate to the stormwater management
certification and to submit written confirmation from the receiving party accepting these responsibilities.
Q. Development within or affecting a wetland begun prior to authorization under this title, or other unauthorized impact to a wetland, shall presume the
wetland was critical and provide mitigation at a three to one (3:1) replacement ratio, and shall be processed in one of the following two (2) ways:
1. If the unauthorized wetland impact can be considered a temporary impact, the director or administrator may process the resolution of this violation
outside of the normal certification program, through preparation of a letter of permission which would be countersigned by the applicant committing
them to specific site restoration and management requirements and time frames.
2. If the unauthorized wetland impact cannot be considered a temporary wetland impact, the applicant shall enter into a formal stormwater
management certification process, and meet all requirements of this title. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-11-5: WETLAND BANKING:
A. Where development affecting wetland meets the requirements of this chapter and the long term preservation of existing wetland functions or
characteristics is unlikely as a result of existing or proposed land use practices in adjacent upland areas, then the director or administrator may provide
that mitigation for development within or affecting wetlands be accomplished wholly or in part through investment in an established wetland banking
development in lieu of constructing new wetlands.
B. Such wetland banking shall be allowed only if no long term net loss of wetlands results within each watershed planning area as defined in this chapter
and if the adverse impacts of development in regulatory or critical wetlands are fully mitigated.
C. Wetland banking for development impacts within a critical or regulatory wetland shall take place within an established wetland banking development
approved by the committee, or the oversight committee, and shall:
1. Include a wetland enhancement, restoration, and construction plan approved by the committee and the county board, or by the oversight committee
and the village board; and
2. Include a capital improvements plan containing an estimate of the total per acre cost of wetland mitigation, including operation and maintenance
costs; and
3. Include a formula to determine that any investment in a wetland bank shall be at least equal to the cost of planning, acquiring of lands, constructing,
operating, and maintaining mitigated wetlands of equivalent or greater functional value than those lost to development.
D. If development impacts to a wetland meet all the conditions for mitigation in a wetland banking development, a payment may be made into the wetland
banking program and shall be determined by multiplying the acres of required mitigation times the first of the following applicable costs:
1. The investment cost of the closest wetland banking development to the development that is in the watershed planning area that has the greatest
wetland deficit, as defined in subsection D3 of this section; or
2. The investment cost of the closest wetland banking development within the same watershed planning area as the proposed wetland impact; or
3. The investment cost of the closest wetland bank to the development that is outside the watershed planning area where the development is
proposed. However, the area of mitigation available within a wetland banking development for mitigation from outside the watershed planning area
shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the bank's total wetland area. This amount of wetland mitigation is considered a wetland deficit in the
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 235/438
watershed planning area where the development occurs. The watershed planning area that receives the wetland mitigation shall pay back the
wetland deficit in accordance with subsection D1 of this section.
E. If development impacts to a wetland meet all the conditions for mitigation in the wetland banking program, and there is not a wetland banking
development available per subsection D of this section, a payment may be made to the village for deposit into a specific wetland banking development
or in a wetland bank suspense account equal to one hundred seventy five thousand dollars ($175,000.00) per acre of required mitigation.
F. All funds deposited in the wetland banking program shall be maintained in accounts designated solely for a particular wetland banking development or
in a wetland bank suspense account if collected under subsection E of this section. At the option of the director or administrator, funds may be
transferred to the account of another wetland banking development in the same watershed planning area, or if one is not available, in an off site
mitigation area meeting the requirements in this section, if that particular wetland banking development is not constructed within ten (10) years after
the date on which such funds were deposited. Upon approval of a wetland banking development within a watershed planning area for which payments
have been deposited in accordance with subsection E of this section, such payments shall be immediately transferred into that wetland banking
development. Any portion of the payment paid in excess of the actual fee established for said wetland banking development shall be refunded to the
then current property owner or his/her/its designee.
G. The village board shall audit annually all funds deposited in wetland banking accounts and shall account for such funds on a first in, first out basis.
(Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
Chapter 12
BUFFERS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-12-1: IDENTIFICATION OF BUFFERS:
A. Buffer areas for wetlands shall extend from the edge of the delineated wetland. Buffer for those portions of a nonwetland waters of DuPage shall
extend from the ordinary high water mark (OHWM).
1. A property may contain a buffer area that originates from another property.
2. Buffer widths for wetland shall be as follows:
a. One hundred feet (100') for critical wetlands, except as noted in subsection B2 of this section.
b. Fifty feet (50') for regulatory wetlands, except as noted in subsection B2 of this section.
B. Buffer for nonwetland waters of DuPage shall be a minimum width of fifteen feet (15') and a maximum width matching the regulatory floodplain.
1. Width shall be determined as follows for the following situations:
a. Where there is no regulatory floodplain study, and the drainage area is over one hundred (100) acres, then the required site specific BFE study in
section 9-10-1 of this title will define a 100-year flood elevation for the site and that elevation shall be used to set the buffer width, except as noted
in subsection B2 of this section.
b. Waters of DuPage which have a drainage area of less than one hundred (100) acres and no flood study has been performed will have a buffer of
fifteen feet (15'), from the OHWM, except as noted in subsection B2 of this section.
c. For purposes of regulation under this title, the applicant may choose to accept the 100-year floodplain limit as the buffer, or he may submit
documentation addressing the buffer functions and request that a narrower buffer limit between the 100-year floodplain and one hundred feet
(100') from OHWM should be allowed by the administrator or the director, in accordance with subsection 9-12-3B of this chapter.
2. Buffer does not include impervious nonvegetated surfaces, permanent structures or buildings. In addition, nonwetland waters of DuPage County
buffer does not include maintained lawn or associated maintained landscape plantings within the limits of the 100-year floodplain that are more than
fifty feet (50') from the limits of the waters. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-12-2: RESERVED:
(Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-12-3: DEVELOPMENT AFFECTING A BUFFER:
A. Vegetative maintenance within buffer may be allowed through issuance of a letter of permission under the following conditions:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 236/438
1. A written description of the development goals, objectives and management plan must be provided for approval to the director or administrator. As
long as the development does not require stormwater management certification for any other aspect of the development, the director or
administrator may issue a letter of permission to allow the maintenance activity.
2. The maintenance activity will result in an enhancement of buffer functions in accordance with subsection C of this section.
3. Maintained lawn or landscape planting beds have limited buffer function and may be replaced in kind.
B. Development of buffer, or a reduction in width, function, or the removal of native vegetation, shall not occur without mitigation.
1. Mitigation for buffer impact does not require one for one replacement of the area impacted. Replacement of impacted function takes precedence
over replacement of area.
2. Impacts to buffers shall consider the effectiveness of the natural functions and mitigate those functions to the extent practicable.
C. Buffer mitigation design shall incorporate native, noninvasive species and be designed to duplicate or improve the hydrologic and biologic function of
the original buffer unless documentation is provided to support establishment of alternative communities. When native plantings are required as part of
a mitigation development, the plantings shall be native to Northeastern Illinois as defined by "Plants Of The Chicago Region".
D. Buffer mitigation shall meet certification requirements, associated performance standards, and shall undergo a maintenance and monitoring period, as
required in the stormwater management certification. Performance standards are found in chapter 20 of this title. Applicants may choose to use the
performance standards found in chapter 20 of this title, or the applicant may prepare and submit individualized site specific standards for review and
approval.
1. Upon inspection, if the buffer mitigation meets certification requirements and performance standards during or at the end of the monitoring period,
the director or administrator shall issue regulatory signoff.
2. If the buffer mitigation area is not considered a success within the approved monitoring period, additional measures shall be required to bring the
site into compliance.
E. Development affecting a wetland buffer shall be initiated only after a mitigation plan has been approved and adequate securities are provided as
specified in chapter 6 of this title.
F. Mitigation is considered separate from other development components, and requires a performance security be established in accordance with chapter
6 of this title for the completion of the mitigation development.
G. The certification holder shall provide annual monitoring reports documenting progress towards meeting the approved performance standards. The
director or administrator may require the certification holder to undertake remedial action to bring the area into compliance with the mitigation plan.
The monitoring reports shall include relevant data and observations taken during the growing season and shall be submitted no later than January 31
of the following year until performance standards are met and accepted.
H. If property ownership is changed during the management and monitoring period, the applicant shall provide formal written notification to the director or
administrator. The notification shall contain complete contact information including certification number(s), owner(s) name(s), street address(es),
phone number(s) (office, fax, mobile), e-mail address(es), etc. The certification holder must notify the future owner(s) of their obligations regarding
certification conditions and maintenance and monitoring requirements for the subject development as they relate to the stormwater management
certification and to submit written confirmation from the receiving party accepting these responsibilities.
I. Features of a naturalized stormwater management system, such as stormwater structures, infiltration trenches, vegetated swales, filter strips, site runoff
storage ponds, compensatory storage areas, may be within the buffer area, provided the system is set back to a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the
required buffer width and the buffer functions, if impacted, are mitigated.
J. Access through buffer areas shall be allowed, when necessary, for maintenance purposes. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
Chapter 13
FEE IN LIEU PROGRAMS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-13-1: SITE RUNOFF STORAGE VARIANCE FEE PROGRAM:
A. Where a variance to the site runoff storage requirements of section 9-9-2 of this title is granted, payment into a site runoff storage variance fee program
shall be made prior to the issuance of a stormwater management certification as a condition of the variance.
B. All developments shall participate in the county's fee in lieu program, unless the development is within a waiver community with its own ordinance and
fee in lieu program.
1. Payment of a site runoff storage variance fee for the varied storage shall be made to the village and is determined by applying the first applicable
criteria as follows:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 237/438
a. Where the program has an established off site storage facility(ies) the fee shall be calculated by multiplying the per acre-foot cost of the closest
off site storage facility times the varied storage where:
(1) A design concept plan for the facility has been approved by the oversight committee and the village board containing an estimate of the per
acre-foot cost of constructing the storage, including operation and maintenance costs; and
(2) A formula has been developed to determine that any investment in the facility shall be at least equal to the cost of planning, acquiring of lands,
constructing, operating, and maintaining the facility; and
(3) The facility is located in the same watershed planning area as the variance.
b. Where the program has not established off site storage facility(ies) in accordance with subsections B1a(1) through B1a(3) of this section,
detention variance fee shall be charged in accordance with an adopted fee schedule, attached to the ordinance codified herein as schedule B and
by this reference incorporated into this title. The fees set forth in schedule B attached to the ordinance codified herein shall identify reasonable
and rational costs to provide site runoff storage in the same watershed planning area as the subject variance. The detention variance fee shall
include the cost of planning, acquiring land, construction, operation, and maintenance.
2. Fee in lieu funds collected shall be accounted for in separate development or watershed planning area accounts. Funds shall be used in the same
community or watershed planning areas as collected to enhance existing site runoff storage facilities and related components, construct off site
facilities and related components, provide maintenance of stormwater facilities, or undertake other development that provides a watershed benefit.
Funds may not be used to fulfill permit requirements.
3. The administrator shall provide an annual accounting of all funds deposited in each development or watershed planning accounts and shall account
for each fund on a first in, first out basis.
4. The administrator may prioritize and allocate funds on an annual basis within each watershed planning area account. Communities may make a
request to the committee by June 30 of each year for funds within the watershed planning accounts for uses identified in subsection B2 of this
section.
5. Detention variance fees shall be refunded to the person who paid the fee, or to that person's successor in interest, in accordance with subsection
B6 of this section, whenever the program administrator fails to encumber fees collected within ten (10) years from the date on which such fees were
collected.
6. Refunds shall be made provided that the appropriate party files a petition with the administrator within one year from the date on which such fees
are required to be encumbered.
C. The village may adopt its own fee schedule and designate off site facilities. Funds collected in the village program shall be used within the village, or
within the watershed planning area in which such fee was collected. The village's accounting records shall be made available to the committee upon
request. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-13-2: POSTCONSTRUCTION BMP FEE IN LIEU PROGRAM:
A. With the approval of the administrator, and provided the conditions of section 9-8-1 of this title apply, the applicant may be allowed or required to pay a
PCBMP fee in lieu payment. Payment into a PCBMP fee in lieu program shall be made prior to the issuance of a stormwater management certification.
B. Development in a nonwaiver community or in a waiver community that has not adopted a PCBMP fee in lieu program shall participate in the county's
program where:
1. PCBMP fee in lieu payment shall be made to the appropriate fee in lieu program. A PCBMP fee in lieu payment shall be calculated by applying the
adopted fee schedule, attached to the ordinance codified herein as schedule B and by this reference incorporated into this title, that identifies
reasonable and rational cost to construct and maintain similar PCBMPs for those areas of the development that remain without effective PCBMP
treatment.
2. PCBMP funds collected shall be separately accounted for in watershed planning area accounts. Funds shall be used in the same watershed
planning areas as collected solely to design, construct, and maintain water quality or runoff volume reduction improvements. Funds may not be used
to fulfill obligations required by this title.
3. The administrator shall provide accounting on an annual basis of all funds deposited in each watershed planning account and shall account for each
fund on a first in, first out basis.
4. The administrator may prioritize and allocate funds on an annual basis within each watershed planning area account. Communities may make a
request to the committee by March 30 of each year for funds within the watershed planning accounts for uses as identified in subsection B2 of this
section.
5. All PCBMP fee in lieu payments shall be refunded to the person who paid the fee, or to that person's successor in interest, in accordance with
subsection B6 of this section, when the program administrator fails to encumber that development's fees collected within ten (10) years of the date
on which such fees were collected.
6. Refunds shall be made provided that the appropriate party files a petition with the program administrator within one year from the date on which
such fees are required to be encumbered.
C. Development in the village shall participate in the village's PCBMP fee in lieu program where the corporate authority has adopted a program that is
consistent with subsection B of this section. The village may adopt its own fee schedule and designate off site facilities. Funds collected in the village
program shall be used within the village, or within the watershed planning area in which such fee was collected. The village's accounting records shall
be made available to the committee upon request. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 238/438
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-13-3: WETLAND MITIGATION FEE IN LIEU:
If development impacts to a wetland meet all the conditions for mitigation in the wetland banking program, and there is no wetland banking development
available under the criteria set forth in chapter 11 of this title, the applicant may make a fee in lieu payment to the county in the sum of one hundred
seventy five thousand dollars ($175,000.00) per acre of required mitigation area. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
Chapter 14
PROHIBITED ACTS/ENFORCEMENT/PENALTIES
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-14-1: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake any development within the county or within the village without first securing a stormwater management
certification as required by this title.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, disobey, omit, neglect, or refuse to comply with, or to resist enforcement of, any provision of this title, or
any condition of any stormwater management certification or variance required by this title.
C. It shall be unlawful for the person owning or exercising control over any property, or development thereon, to permit or allow that property, or any
development thereon, or any condition thereof, to violate, or remain in violation of, any provision of this title, or fail to comply with, abide by or
satisfactorily complete any condition of any stormwater management certification or variance granted to, or issued for, that property or development.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to continue any work on a property after having been served with a stop work order issued pursuant to section 9-14-
7 of this chapter, except such work as that person is directed, or authorized, to perform by the director or administrator necessary to remove a violation
having a temporary impact or to abate an unsafe condition. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-14-2: PROSECUTION OF VIOLATIONS:
Upon finding the existence of any violation of this title, the director or the administrator shall have the authority and duty to take or direct all actions
necessary or appropriate to abate and redress such violation. The administrator shall also initiate proceedings, as necessary, to enforce this title. A code
enforcement adjudication program may be used to prosecute violations of this title. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-14-3: NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS:
A. Whenever the director or the administrator determines that a violation of this title exists, the director or the administrator shall issue a notice of violation
in any of the following manner:
1. By posting a copy on the subject property in a conspicuous place, or
2. By personally delivering or mailing a copy to the person, firm, or corporation responsible for the unlawful act or omission or condition which forms
the basis for the violation, or
3. By personally delivering or mailing a copy to any adult who resides at, occupies, uses, leases, manages or maintains the property on which the
violation is located, or
4. By personally delivering or mailing a notice of violation to any owner in title to the property on which the violation is located.
B. If a notice, or order, is issued in accordance with subsection A1 of this section or if the party to whom the notice of violation was issued in accordance
with subsection A2 or A3 of this section is not also the property owner, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed to the "owner of record" as indicated
on the latest tax assessor's records at the last address to which a tax bill was mailed.
C. A notice of violation shall contain the following:
1. A brief statement setting forth the type and nature of the violation; and
2. The section, or sections, of this title violated and, if applicable, the identity of any order, permit, plan or statement of specifications violated; and
3. The date the violation was observed; and
4. The address and/or PIN of the property on which the violation was observed; and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 239/438
5. A statement directing the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and abatement of the violation; and
6. A statement informing the violator, and/or owner, that they may contest the notice of violation by requesting in writing and within fourteen (14) days
of issuance of the notice, an administrative appeal; and
7. A statement informing the violator, and/or owner, that they may correct the violation within fourteen (14) days. A violator may remedy the violation by
either:
a. Correcting, abating or removing the violation, or the condition(s) which caused the violation, and has such remediation verified by an inspection;
or
b. Applying to the village, for any necessary certification(s), or to revise or amend any previously issued certification, or revise or amend any
previously approved plan, drawing or specifications, as applicable; and
8. A warning that if the violator fails to comply with this title and remedy the violation within the time specified the village shall institute appropriate legal
proceedings against the violator; and
9. A statement that this title authorizes fines of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), per day, for each day a violation remains uncorrected, plus
additional court costs, which fines and costs may be assessed in addition to other remedies at law including a court order enjoining further violations
and ordering the offender to cease, correct, repair, abate or otherwise remedy the offending condition.
D. If a party to which a notice of violation has been issued requests an extension of time to comply with this title, or perform any act necessary to remedy
a violation, the director or administrator may allow an extension of time for such compliance or act, which extension shall not be more than forty five
(45) days. The director or administrator shall not extend the period of time in which a party may request an administrative hearing.
E. The issuance of a notice of violation shall not be required as a condition of the village commencing legal action to enforce a stop work order issued
pursuant to section 9-14-7 of this chapter, or where the violation presents an imminent risk of harm to the health, life or safety of any person, or an
injunctive suit brought pursuant to section 9-14-11 of this chapter. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-14-4: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE AUTHORITY:
A. Pursuant to the authority granted by 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1104 and 5-1062, the village may, after thirty (30) days' written notice to the
owner or occupant, in a nonemergency situation enter upon any lands or waters within the village for the purpose of inspecting or maintaining
stormwater facilities or causing the removal of any obstruction to an affected watercourse.
B. The director or the administrator shall post the notice in a prominent place on the premises, or shall send by certified mailing a copy of the notice to the
property owner listed in the county property tax records. The notice shall:
1. State the method by which the stormwater facility will be cleaned or maintained; and
2. State the date upon which the proposed work will begin; and
3. Inform the property owner that the property owner may appeal the commencement date of the proposed maintenance work.
C. Where an obstruction is within a watercourse and is obstructing flow, the village may, with ten (10) days' notice, enter upon the property and remove
the obstruction. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-14-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR IMMEDIATE REMEDIAL ACTION:
Whenever the director or administrator determines that a violation has a temporary impact to a floodplain, wetland, buffer or PCBMP, which may be
corrected, abated, or removed, in whole or in part, or where the adverse effects of the violation can be ameliorated by immediate action, the director or
administrator may authorize the violator, in writing, to perform remedial action at the violation site without certification.
A. Unauthorized wetland impacts that are intended to be permanent are required to proceed through the normal stormwater certification process to
determine if the impact will be allowed to remain, or
B. Remedial action may include, as the director or administrator deems appropriate for the situation, the following:
1. Removal of fill or other materials from the impacted area; and
2. The area, and/or volume of fill or material removal, the manner of such removal and method of disposal for such fill or material; and
3. A restoration and/or mitigation plan for the impacted area setting forth performance standards, management and monitoring requirements as
necessary, and implementation schedule.
C. When the director or administrator authorizes remedial action under this section, such remedial acts shall:
1. Focus on the restoration of floristic communities and function of the impacted area; and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 240/438
2. Undergo a minimum of one year of management and monitoring, when applicable, to verify successful restoration. Failure to achieve the
performance standards established as part of a restoration or mitigation plan shall result in additional years of management and monitoring being
required.
D. In all cases the director or administrator shall document the nature of violation and the basis for his determination that the impact was temporary. (Ord.
G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-14-6: REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF CERTIFICATIONS:
A. The director or the administrator may revoke a stormwater management certification under any of the following circumstances:
1. When the application, plans, or other supporting documents submitted by the applicant reflect a false statement or misrepresentation as to material
fact; or
2. The development violates any relevant local, state, or federal requirement; or
3. When the security, access rights or covenants posted by the certification holder do not comply with the requirements of this title. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-
2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-14-7: STOP WORK ORDER:
A. The director or the administrator, upon discovery of the existence of any of the circumstances established in subsection 9-14-6A2 of this chapter, is
authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject development. Such stop work order shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason for
its issuance, and shall order the act(s), if any, necessary to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work order.
B. A stop work order shall be issued when:
1. Development is proceeding in a manner which creates imminent hazard of severe harm to persons or property on or off the site; or
2. Development has been accomplished in violation of a requirement of this title or a stormwater management certification, or any other applicable law
or regulation, and a period of longer than fifteen (15) calendar days has elapsed since written notice of the violation or noncompliance was issued
and the violation or noncompliance has not been corrected, abated or rectified; or
3. Development for which a stormwater management certification is required is proceeding without issuance of a stormwater management certification.
In such instance, the stop work order shall indicate that the effect of the order terminates when the required stormwater management certification is
properly obtained.
C. If the director or administrator discovers that work on any property is being conducted contrary to the provisions of this title, or in an unsafe and
dangerous manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property
involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work, or posted on the subject property; and shall state the appropriate code section(s) in
violation.
D. Upon receipt of a stop work order, the property owner has fourteen (14) days to resolve the violation or apply for a stormwater management
certification. Failure to comply within this time frame may result in prosecution and/or fines as outlined in section 9-14-8 of this chapter. (Ord. G-976, 7-
24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-14-8: FINES:
A. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists enforcement of, any provision of this title, or any condition
in any certification issued pursuant to this title, shall be subject to a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor in excess of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each calendar day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
B. For the purposes of this section, the owner, any occupant, the developer, and/or any contractor doing development work on the land shall be jointly and
severally liable for any violation of this title.
C. The committee or the oversight committee shall request its appropriate legal counsel to prosecute such action as a petty offense pursuant to 730
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1-17 (1992), as hereafter amended; or according to other appropriate authority in law or in equity. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-
2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 241/438
9-14-9: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES FOR SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
A. In accordance with state law, the village may petition the circuit court for an order to remove any unauthorized fill placed in a special flood hazard area
and to restore the subject property to its natural elevation(s) in order to lessen or avoid the imminent threat to public health, safety, or welfare and
damage to property resulting from the accumulation or runoff of stormwater or floodwater.
1. When, after a diligent search, the identity or whereabouts of the owner of any such parcel, including lienholders of record, are not ascertainable,
notice mailed to the person in whose name the real estate was last assessed for taxes, constitutes sufficient notice under section 9-14-3 of this
chapter.
2. The cost of removal of fill and restoration incurred by the county shall be recoverable from the owner of such real estate and shall be a lien against
the property.
3. Such lien shall be superior to all other prior existing liens and encumbrances, except taxes; provided that within sixty (60) days after such removal of
fill or restoration of the parcel to its natural elevation, the county board shall file a notice of lien of such cost and expense incurred in the office of the
county recorder.
4. Such notice shall include a sworn statement setting out:
a. A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof; and
b. The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred; and
c. The date on which the cost was incurred.
5. Such lien may be enforced by proceedings of foreclosure as in the case of mortgages or mechanics' liens, which action shall be commenced within
three (3) years after the date of filing of the notice of lien.
6. Upon payment of the costs and expenses by the owner or persons interested in the property, the lien shall be released by the county or the village
and the release may be filed of record.
B. The village shall utilize all available means at law or in equity to enforce the special flood hazard area provisions of this title. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-14-10: LEGAL AND EQUITABLE RELIEF:
In the enforcement of this title, the director or the administrator shall have the authority to institute, or cause to be instituted, in the name of the county or
the village, any and all actions, legal or equitable, including appeals, that are required for the enforcement of this title. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-14-11: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
In circumstances of substantial danger to the environment, to the public health and welfare, or to the livelihood of any person, the director or the
administrator shall have the authority to cause to be instituted a civil action for an immediate injunction to halt any discharge or other activity causing or
contributing to the danger, or to require such other action as may be necessary. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
Chapter 15
APPEALS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-15-1: RIGHT TO APPEAL:
A. Any person directly aggrieved by any decision, order, requirement, or determination of the administrator made pursuant to an interpretation of this title
shall have the right to appeal such action to the oversight committee.
B. Every applicant for an appeal shall notify the oversight committee in writing of the decision being appealed, which notice shall include a short, plain
statement containing the reasons why the decision is being appealed and how the applicant has been directly aggrieved by the action taken.
C. Upon receipt of such a notice of appeal, the oversight committee shall set a date for a public hearing before the oversight committee. Such public
hearing shall commence not fewer than fourteen (14) days nor more than sixty (60) days after the date on which a properly prepared notice of appeal
was received. The applicant shall be promptly notified of the public hearing date.
D. A public hearing shall be set, noticed, and conducted by the oversight committee in accordance with the provisions of section 9-18-1 of this title.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 242/438
E. The oversight committee shall decide the appeal within sixty (60) days after the conclusion of the public hearing. All decisions on appeals shall be in
writing and shall include a statement of the reasons for the decision. The failure of the oversight committee to act within sixty (60) days shall be
deemed to be a decision denying the appeal.
F. A party may appeal the decision of the oversight committee to the village board by filing a notice thereof in the form required by subsection B of this
section with the village board within fourteen (14) days after the date of decision by the oversight committee. Failure to properly file such notice shall
render final the decision of the oversight committee.
G. Within thirty five (35) days after receipt of a properly prepared and filed notice of appeal, the village board shall, without further hearing, affirm, reverse,
or modify the decision of the oversight committee. The failure of the village board to act within thirty five (35) days shall be deemed to be a final
decision of that body denying the appeal and affirming the decision of the committee, or oversight committee.
H. The decision of the village board shall in all instances be considered a final decision. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
Chapter 16
VARIANCES
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-16-1: AUTHORITY; APPLICATIONS; STANDARDS:
A. The village board shall have the authority to grant variances from the requirements of this title but only in compliance with the procedures set forth in
this chapter.
B. The variance procedure is intended to provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be granted to allow development when the
requirements of this title place an undue and particular hardship on a specific developer.
C. Variance petitions may be filed either by the owner or by the developer of land specified in the application.
D. The petition for a variance shall accompany or follow an application for a stormwater management certification including all necessary submittals.
E. All variance petitions filed pursuant to this chapter shall be filed with the administrator.
F. All variance petitions filed pursuant to this chapter shall be on forms supplied by the administrator and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies
as the administrator may designate by administrative order.
G. Every variance petition filed pursuant to this chapter shall provide the following information:
1. The owner's or developer's signed consent to the filing of the petition; and
2. The names and addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the petitioner with respect to the petition; and
3. The name and address and the nature and extent of any economic or family interest of any officer or employee of the village, as to: the owner, the
petitioner, or the subject property or development; and
4. The addresses and legal description of the subject property or development; and
5. The specific feature or features of the proposed construction or development that require a variance; and
6. The specific provision of this title from which a variance is sought and the precise variation therefrom being sought; and
7. A statement of the characteristics of the subject property or development that prevent compliance with the provisions of this title; and
8. A statement of the minimum variance of the provisions of this title that would be necessary to certify the proposed construction or development; and
9. A statement of how the variance sought satisfies the standards set forth in section 9-3-5 of this title.
H. No public hearing will be scheduled on a variance petition unless the petition is filed in proper form and number and contains all required information.
I. Whenever supplemental data in connection with a previously filed variance petition is required or offered by the applicant, it shall be submitted at least
five (5) days prior to the date on which it is to be considered at a hearing or acted upon in connection with such petition. The filing of such data shall, in
the discretion of the body hearing the petition, be a cause to delay a requested or scheduled hearing date.
J. The oversight committee shall consider, and the village board may grant, such petition for a variance only when it is consistent with the general purpose
and intent of this title and when the development meets the requirements specified in section 9-3-5 of this title as well as the following conditions:
1. Granting the variance shall not alter the essential character of the area involved, including existing stream uses; and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 243/438
2. Carrying out the strict letter of the provisions of this title would create an undue or particular hardship or difficulty on a specific developer or owner;
and
3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary and there are no means other than the requested variance by which the alleged hardship can be
avoided or remedied to a degree sufficient to permit the reasonable continuation of the development; and
4. The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a general condition or problem; and
5. The subject development is exceptional as compared to other developments subject to the same provision; and
6. When the variance request involves the standards for wetlands and floodplains, the development proposed for a wetland or floodplain could not be
constructed if it were limited to areas outside the wetland or floodplain.
K. No variance shall be granted for any development in the regulatory floodway, regulatory wetlands, and critical wetlands from any provision of this title
where the effect of such variance would be to create regulation less restrictive or stringent than federal or state required minimum standards for
development in such areas. Subject to this standard, a variance may be granted in accordance with this chapter from provisions of this title more
restrictive or stringent than the federal and/or state required minimum standards for development in such areas.
L. When a variance from the requirements of this title would lessen the degree of protection to a structure, the administrator shall notify the applicant that
the variance, if granted, may result in increased rates for flood insurance.
M. The administrator shall give written notice of any variance petition, including the date and time of the public hearing, to the committee, the director, and
all watershed planning area community administrators. Such notice shall be sent no less than twenty one (21) days in advance of the date of the
public hearing by regular U.S. mail or its equivalent. In addition, the certification application and variance petition including all certification submittals
and support documentation shall be sent to the director. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-16-2: PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED:
A public hearing shall be set, noticed, and conducted by the oversight committee in accordance with the provisions of section 9-18-1 of this title. (Ord. G-
976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-16-3: REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION:
A. Administrator Review: The administrator shall review all requests or petitions for a variance and shall present written findings of the review to the
oversight committee.
B. Oversight Committee Recommendation: Within thirty five (35) days after the close of the public hearing, the oversight committee shall make a written
recommendation to the village board to grant or deny the variance petition. The failure of the oversight committee to act within thirty five (35) days
shall be deemed to be a recommendation to deny the variation.
C. Reasons For Decision: The written recommendation of the oversight committee whether to grant or deny the requested variance shall be accompanied
by written findings of fact specifying the reasons for the decision, which written findings shall be distributed to the members of the village board before
the village board votes to grant or deny the variance petition.
D. Decision: The village board shall grant the variation, grant the variation with modifications or conditions, or deny the variation within forty five (45) days
after receipt of the recommendation of the oversight committee. The failure of the village board to act within forty five (45) days, or such additional time
as the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision denying the variation.
E. Conditions:
1. A variance less than or different from that requested may be granted when the record supports the applicant's right to some relief but not to the
relief requested.
2. The village board may impose such specific conditions and limitations concerning any matter relating to the purposes and objectives of this title on
the development benefited by a variance as may be necessary or appropriate.
3. Whenever any variance authorized pursuant to this title is made subject to conditions and limitations to be met by the developers, the applicant
shall, upon meeting such conditions, file an affidavit with the administrator so stating.
4. For any variance to section 9-9-2 of this title, a fee shall be required pursuant to section 9-13-1 of this title to compensate for any site runoff storage
not being provided. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
Chapter 17
WAIVER COMMUNITIES
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 244/438
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-17-1: NOTICE OF INTENT TO PETITION FOR WAIVER:
A. Any community that desires to enforce, either partially or completely, within its borders the provisions of the county ordinance or its own stormwater
management ordinance (waiver community ordinance), that is consistent with, and at least as stringent as, the plan and the county ordinance, shall
provide the committee with written notice of that intent within sixty (60) days after the date of enactment of the county ordinance, or in accordance with
the provisions of subsection B of this section.
B. Following the effective date hereof and every June 1 thereafter, any community may request a change in waiver status by providing the committee with
written notice of intent that such community intends to petition for such a change of waiver status. The committee shall consider any such petition
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-17-2: FILING AND CONTENTS OF PETITION:
A. A petition to the committee for a partial waiver or a complete waiver of enforcement of the county ordinance shall be filed by the community with the
committee. Each petition shall include a duly adopted resolution or ordinance of the corporate authorities of the community including:
1. Adoption of, or an agreement to adopt the provisions of the county ordinance or an ordinance consistent with, and at least as stringent as, the plan
and the county ordinance; and
2. A proposed schedule indicating how the minimum criteria of the county ordinance will be implemented, including proposed staffing; and
3. An agreement to include a provision in any new annexation or preannexation agreement that requires every developer to comply with the
stormwater standards as currently adopted or as amended from time to time with regard to any proposed development for which a plat of
subdivision has not yet been recorded; and
4. An agreement that the community will be bound by the rules and procedures governing the petition, including, without limitation, the committee's
procedures for reasserting county jurisdiction over stormwater management within waiver community boundaries; and
5. Documentation indicating the intent and ability to comply with subsection A3 of this section.
B. Each petition shall specify whether the community seeks a partial waiver or a complete waiver of enforcement. (Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-17-3: RESERVED:
(Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-17-4: COMMITTEE CONSIDERATION OF PETITION:
The committee shall consider each properly filed petition for either a partial or a complete waiver of county enforcement of the county ordinance at a
regular or special call meeting. The committee may take comments from interested parties, and the committee shall have the right by rule to establish
procedures for the conduct of such meetings. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-17-5: RESERVED:
(Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-17-6: STANDARDS FOR GRANT OF PETITION:
The committee shall grant a petition for waiver of county enforcement of the county ordinance upon finding that:
A. The community's stormwater ordinance is consistent with, and at least as stringent as, the plan and the county ordinance, as they may be amended
from time to time; and
B. The community has complied with the requirements of articles 3 and 17 of the county ordinance; and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 245/438
C. By the effective date of the community's stormwater ordinance, the community shall provide reasonable assurance that it has available and will utilize
experts with the following qualifications:
1. In a complete waiver community:
a. A professional engineer with two (2) years' experience in stormwater and floodplain management; and
b. A professional engineer with two (2) years' experience in the application of continuous hydrology and fully dynamic hydraulic models; and
c. An environmental scientist; and
d. A soil scientist; or
2. In a partial waiver community:
a. A professional engineer with two (2) years' experience in stormwater and floodplain management; and
b. An environmental engineer or environmental scientist; or a request for assistance from the director to review for PCBMPs. (Ord. G-1003, 6-11-
2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-17-7: DECISION; FINDINGS AND DECISION IN WRITING:
The committee shall decide, based upon all of the facts and circumstances: whether to deny the petition; whether to grant the petition and approve a
partial waiver; or, whether to grant the petition and approve a complete waiver. The committee's findings and decision shall be in writing, and shall specify
whether a partial or a complete waiver has been approved or whether the petition has been denied, and shall specify the reasons for granting or denying
the petition. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-17-8: FINAL ACTION REQUIRED BY COMMITTEE:
If the committee fails to take final action on a community's petition within seventy five (75) days after the petition for application has been properly
completed and filed with the committee, such petition shall be deemed to be granted; provided, however, that the committee may, on its own motion,
extend such seventy five (75) day period for not more than one additional sixty (60) day period, during which additional sixty (60) day period this
ordinance shall not be enforced by the county in such community. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-17-9: VILLAGE RECORDS:
A. The village shall maintain records of every stormwater management certification issued and every variance granted for development within its borders.
B. The village shall maintain record drawings of all structures erected or constructed pursuant to a stormwater management certification issued or
variance granted by such community.
C. The village shall maintain such records for periodic inspection by the department.
D. The village shall send to the department a copy of each variance granted by such community, together with a copy of those documents required by
chapter 16 of the county ordinance. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-17-10: COMMITTEE REVIEW OF WAIVER COMMUNITY PROGRAMS:
The department shall review the implementation and enforcement of each waiver community's stormwater program on a schedule adopted by the
committee. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-17-11: COMPLAINTS:
A. Any person may file a written complaint with the committee alleging that a waiver community or the department has failed in some significant way, or
has repeatedly failed, to implement or enforce the applicable stormwater management ordinance.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 246/438
B. Such complaint shall contain a short statement of facts describing how the waiver community or the department has so failed in some significant way,
or has repeatedly failed, to implement or enforce the waiver community ordinance or the county ordinance. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-17-12: COMPLAINT INVESTIGATION AND REVIEW:
A. Upon receipt of a complaint, the department shall notify, and provide a copy of the complaint to, any community named in the complaint. When a
complaint involves the department's failure to implement or enforce the county ordinance, the committee shall designate a third party to act in place of
department personnel for the purpose of carrying out the requirements of subsections B through E of this section and section 9-17-13 of this chapter.
B. The department shall conduct a preliminary investigation of the complaint, including, without limitation:
1. An inspection of all relevant records related to the implementation and enforcement of the waiver community ordinance or the county ordinance by
the community or the department; and
2. Field inspections of relevant developments, structures, or stormwater facilities.
C. The department shall compile such information as necessary to determine whether there has been any failure in some significant way, or a repeated
failure, to implement or enforce the waiver community ordinance or the county ordinance.
D. If the department determines that there has been any failure in some significant way, or a repeated failure, to implement or enforce the community
waiver ordinance or the county ordinance, then it shall prepare a report of its findings and determinations and file such report with the committee.
E. The department shall provide a copy of its report to the complainant and the community. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-17-13: FORMAL COMPLAINT OF COMMITTEE:
A. After receipt of the department report specified in section 9-17-12.E of the county ordinance, the committee may request the state's attorney, by his
assistant, to issue and serve on the department or the community that is the subject of the investigation a written notice of charges together with a
formal complaint.
B. The formal complaint shall specify the manner in which the community or the department has failed in some significant way, or has repeatedly failed, to
implement or enforce the applicable stormwater ordinance.
C. The complaint shall also advise the community or the department of its right to answer the charges specified therein at a public hearing before the
committee. The date, time, and place of such hearing shall be specified in the written notice.
D. A copy of the written notice and formal complaint shall also be sent to OWR, FEMA, adjacent communities within the same watershed planning area,
and to any person that has filed a complaint about the community or the department within the six (6) months immediately preceding the date of the
complaint. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-17-14: ANSWER AND TIME FOR FILING:
The community or the department shall have the right to file a written answer to the allegations contained in the formal complaint at least seven (7) days
prior to the date for which the public hearing is first scheduled. No written answer shall be allowed to be filed less than seven (7) days prior to the date for
which the public hearing is first scheduled except by leave of the committee. In lieu of filing an answer, the community or the department may waive the
public hearing and submit to a final determination of the committee issued in accordance with sections 9-17-14 and 9-17-15 of the county ordinance. (Ord.
G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-17-15: PUBLIC HEARING:
Any public hearing required by this chapter shall be set, noticed, and conducted by the committee in accordance with the provisions of section 9-18-1 of
the county ordinance. Such hearing shall be commenced not less than thirty (30) days nor more than forty five (45) days after the date of service of the
written notice. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 247/438
9-17-16: COMMITTEE DECISION:
A. After due consideration of all written and oral statements, testimony, and arguments submitted at the public hearing, or upon default in appearance of
the community or the department on the hearing day specified in the notice, the committee shall issue a final determination, as it shall deem
appropriate under the circumstances.
B. The committee shall file a written opinion, within thirty five (35) days of the conclusion of the public hearing, stating the facts and reasons leading to its
decision.
C. The committee shall immediately notify the community or the department of the committee's opinion and order, if any, in writing.
D. If the committee determines that a fine or other penalty other than reduction or rescission of waiver status is to be sought, then it shall request the
state's attorney to file a complaint for such in a court of competent jurisdiction.
E. If the committee determines that reduction or rescission of waiver status is mandated then such reduction or rescission shall occur at the direction of
the committee. The committee's opinion and determination may be appealed in a court of competent jurisdiction. Any such appeal must be filed within
thirty (30) days of issuance of the committee's written determination. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-17-17: COMMITTEE DETERMINATIONS:
The committee may by final determination revoke any partial or complete waiver of county enforcement of the county ordinance previously granted,
specifying the date on which the revocation will be effective; or the committee may issue any other order directing the community or the department to
take such actions or measures as the committee deems are necessary and appropriate to assure cooperation and proper enforcement of the waiver
community ordinance or the county ordinance. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
Chapter 18
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-18-1: PUBLIC HEARINGS:
A. When the provisions of this title require a public hearing in connection with any application, petition, or appeal, the oversight committee shall, upon
receipt of a properly completed application, petition, or notice, fix a reasonable time and place for such hearing; provided, however, that such hearing
shall be commenced no later than sixty (60) days, and shall be concluded no later than one hundred twenty (120) days, following the submission of
the subject application, or petition, unless hearing dates of the body are completely committed during that time.
B. All hearings shall be open to the public and shall be held before the oversight committee.
C. The oversight committee shall cause notice to be given of public hearings in the form and manner and to the persons herein specified.
1. Such notice shall contain a description of the subject matter to be heard or considered at the hearing, the address or particular location of the
subject development, and the time, place, and date of the hearing. The notice shall also contain a reference to the particular sections of this title
involved.
2. Notice of every hearing shall be given by mail or personal delivery to the applicant or petitioner. Notice by mail shall be mailed no fewer than
fourteen (14) days in advance of the hearing by regular U.S. mail, except as otherwise specifically provided in this title.
3. The oversight committee shall publish notice of the public hearing at least once, not less than fourteen (14) days before the date for the hearing, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the geographic area where the property that is the subject of the hearing is located.
D. Any interested person may appear and testify at a public hearing, either in person or by a duly authorized agent or attorney, and may submit
documentary evidence; provided, however, that the oversight committee, may exclude irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence.
E. Subject to the discretion of the oversight committee, the applicant or petitioner, or any other party to the hearing, may be allowed any or all of the
following rights:
1. To present witnesses on their behalf.
2. To cross examine all witnesses testifying in opposition to the application, petition, or appeal.
3. To examine and reproduce any documents produced at the hearing.
4. To have subpoenas issued by the body in charge of the hearing as may be provided by Illinois law for persons to appear at the hearings and for
examination of documents by the person requesting the subpoena either before or during the hearing, where such persons or documents are shown
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 248/438
to have a substantial evidentiary connection with:
a. The development to which the request applies; or
b. Facts that would support or negate the legal standards for granting or denying the request or appeal.
5. To a continuance, upon request, for the purpose of presenting evidence to rebut evidence introduced by any other person. In determining whether to
grant or withhold such rights, the discretion of the oversight committee shall be governed by the goal of securing all information and opinion relevant
and material to its deliberations. Such rights shall not be granted, however, when undue and unwarranted delay would result or when to do so would
tend to produce no new evidence to aid the hearing body in reaching its decision.
F. The oversight committee may, at any time, on its own motion or at the request of any person, adjourn the hearing for a reasonable time and to a fixed
date, time, and place, for the purpose of giving further notice, taking further evidence, gathering further information, deliberating further, or for such
other reason as the oversight committee, may find sufficient. Proper notice of such a recess shall be given to all parties to the hearing, and any other
person designated by the committee, and the oversight committee.
G. All testimony at every hearing shall be given under oath.
H. Any person may at any time prior to the commencement of a hearing hereunder, or during such hearing, or within such time as may be allowed by the
oversight committee, following such hearing, submit written statements in support of or in opposition to the application, petition, or appeal being heard.
I. All other matters pertaining to the conduct of hearings shall be governed by the provisions of this title pertaining to, and the rules promulgated by, the
oversight committee.
J. The record of the public hearing shall include:
1. All notices and responses thereto; and
2. A transcript or notes, if any, of all oral testimony received, the cost of which transcription shall be the responsibility of the party requesting that the
record be transcribed, and all written information, if any, submitted by parties or the public; and
3. Any recommendation or report by the hearing body; and
4. All department memorandums or data submitted to the hearing body in connection with its consideration of the subject matter of the hearing.
K. The decision or recommendation of the oversight committee shall be in writing and shall include findings of fact specifying the reasons for the decision.
The copy of the written decision shall be provided to the applicant or petitioner and transmitted to the village board. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-18-2: SEVERABILITY:
A. The several provisions of this title shall be severable in accordance with the following rules:
1. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this title invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this title.
2. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this title, to a particular parcel of land, a particular
structure, or a particular development, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provisions to any other land, structure, or development.
B. All such unaffected provisions of this title shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-18-3: MOST RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS APPLY:
A. The provisions of this title shall be interpreted to be cumulative of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other ordinances, laws, codes, and
regulations in existence or which may be passed governing any subject matter of this title. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this title
shall be construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of such other ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations, and with each
other, to the end that all such provisions may be given their fullest application.
B. This title is intended to repeal the original ordinance or resolution which was adopted to meet the national flood insurance program regulations, but is
not intended to repeal any resolution which the applicable governmental entity passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the national flood
insurance program. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-18-4: AMENDMENTS:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 249/438
This title may be amended in accordance with the adopted rules of the oversight committee and the village board. Amendments to this title shall take
effect after the amendment is adopted by the village board. Unless otherwise noted, complete stormwater certification applications that are accepted prior
to the effective date of an amendment will not be subject to that amendment. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-18-5: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This title shall take effect for all purposes, and its effective date shall be, February 15, 1992. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
Chapter 19
ACRONYMS, INITIALISMS AND DEFINITIONS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-19-1: ACRONYMS AND INITIALISMS:
AASHTO American Association Of State Highway And Transportation Officials
BFE Base flood elevation
BMP Best management practice
CLOMC Conditional letter of map change
CMAP Chicago metropolitan agency for planning
CORS Continuously operating reference station
DFIRM DuPage flood insurance rate map
EPA United States environmental protection agency
FEMA Federal emergency management agency
FEQ Full equation model
FIA Flood insurance administration
FIRM Flood insurance rate map
FPE Flood protection elevation
FQI Floristic quality index
GNSS Global navigation satellite system
GPS Global positioning system
IDNR-OWR Illinois department of natural resources - office of water resources
IDOT Illinois department of transportation
IDPH Illinois department of public health
IEPA Illinois environmental protection agency
LOMC Letter of map change
LOP Letter of permission
MEG Municipal engineers group
MRWQ Mean rated wildlife quality
NARI Natural area rating index
NFIP National flood insurance program
NGS National geodetic survey
NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system
OHWM Ordinary high water mark
OPUS-RS Online positioning system - rapid static service
OWR Illinois department of natural resources - office of water resources
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 250/438
PCBMP Postconstruction best management practices
RFM Regulatory flood map
SESC Soil erosion and sediment control
SFHA Special flood hazard area
SWPPP Stormwater pollution prevention plan
TSS Total suspended solids
USACE United States army corps of engineers
USEPA United States environmental protection agency
(Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-19-2: DEFINITIONS:
Within the context of this title or a waiver community ordinance, the following words and terms shall have the meanings set forth except where otherwise
specifically indicated. Words and terms not defined shall have the meanings indicated by common dictionary definition.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure which is on the same parcel of property as a principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of
the principal structure. Accessory structures are also referred to as appurtenant structures.
ADMINISTRATOR: The person administering the implementation and enforcement of this title; or, the person administering the implementation and
enforcement of a community ordinance in a waiver community.
ADVERSE HYDRAULIC IMPACT: An increase of 0.10 foot or more to the modeled flood profile for a given storm event due to a proposed development
activity.
ALTERNATIVES ANALYSIS: The process of comparing and evaluating two (2) or more courses of action of the various technical aspects of a
development with the intent of selecting the action that best meets the stated basic development purpose, while minimizing environmental effects and
costs. A practicable alternatives study should consider possible alternative sites, a reduction in the scale of the development, and rearrangement of the
proposed facilities. This study assesses actions such as fill site locations, partial and full avoidance of habitats, restoration and enhancement of habitats,
and development economics.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a stormwater management certification, which person must be either the owner or the developer of the land specified
in the application.
APPROPRIATE USE: The only uses of the regulatory floodway that may be considered for a stormwater management certification. See section 9-10-3 of
this title.
AUTHORIZATION: A notice issued by the county to a partial waiver community that those aspects submitted to the county for review have been found to
be in compliance with this title.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in a given year. It is also known as the one percent (1%)
chance or 100-year flood. It has been adopted by the NFIP as the basis for mapping, insurance rating, and regulating new construction.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The height of the base flood in relation to North American vertical datum of 1988 (NAVD 88). DuPage County has
developed appropriate conversion factors to transform BFEs from NGVD 29 to NAVD 88 datum.
BASIC DEVELOPMENT PURPOSE: The fundamental, essential function of the proposed activity.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Design, construction, and maintenance practices and criteria for stormwater facilities that minimize the
impact of stormwater runoff rates and volume, prevent erosion, and capture pollutants.
BUFFER: The predominately vegetated area with a defined width adjacent to those areas that meet the definition of wetland and waters of DuPage for the
purpose of eliminating or minimizing adverse impacts to those areas. Buffer may function to:
A. Reduce flood flow rates, velocity and volume,
B. Promote bank stability, filter sediment, nutrients and other pollutants,
C. Insulate and moderate daily water temperatures,
D. Promote groundwater infiltration,
E. Provide habitat corridors for aquatic and terrestrial fauna and flora.
BUILDING: A structure that is constructed or erected partially or wholly aboveground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term "building" includes
manufactured homes and includes both the aboveground and the belowground portions of the structure. Freestanding signs or structures, such as kiosks
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 251/438
are not considered to be buildings regulated in this title.
CLOMA: A conditional letter of map amendment. A FEMA comment letter on a development proposed to be located in, and affecting only that portion of,
the area of floodplain outside the regulatory floodway and having no impact on the existing regulatory floodway or base flood elevations.
CLOMR: A conditional letter of map revision. A letter that indicates that FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood
boundaries, or floodways as shown on an effective FIRM or FBFM, after the record drawings are submitted and approved.
CERTIFY/CERTIFICATION: A statement that a proposed development meets the requirements of this title.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, lake, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, swale, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either perennially or intermittently.
COMMITTEE: The stormwater management planning committee of the DuPage County board, authorized by public act 85-905.
COMMUNITY: Any municipality, or the unincorporated county, within DuPage County acting as a unit of local government.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An excavated hydrologically and hydraulically equivalent volume of storage created to offset the loss of existing flood
storage.
COMPLETE WAIVER: The authority granted to a community pursuant to chapters 1, 2, 3, and 17 of this title whereby a community acquires complete
jurisdiction over reviewing applications for and granting stormwater management certifications.
COUNTY: The county of DuPage, Illinois.
CRITICAL DURATION: The duration of a storm event that results in the greatest peak runoff.
CRITICAL WETLANDS: Wetlands of the highest value by virtue of one or more high ranking characteristics that result in a uniquely valuable environment.
See subsection 9-11-1E of this title.
DAM: Any obstruction, wall, embankment, or barrier, together with any abutments and appurtenant works, constructed to store or direct water or to create
a pool (not including underground water storage tanks).
DEPARTMENT: The DuPage County department of economic development and planning, or successor department or agency.
DEVELOPER: Any person who undertakes development or certifies development on such person's behalf.
DEVELOPMENT: Any activity, excavation or fill, alteration, removal of vegetation, subdivision, change in land use, or practice, undertaken by private or
public entities that affects the discharge of stormwater; or any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to,
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials in floodplain,
floodway, wetland, waters or buffer areas. The term "development" does not include maintenance.
DEVELOPMENT SITE: The contiguous parcels of land under the ownership or control of the landowner or developer who is making application for a
stormwater management certification. When the development includes subdivision of a parcel, the development site includes all land prior to subdivision.
When the owner or developer controls only a portion of a larger development which has already been constructed, the administrator may consider the
larger, previously developed site as the "development site" if it was developed under a stormwater management permit issued after February 15, 1992.
DIRECT IMPACT: Physical impact within wetland, waters or buffer.
DIRECTOR: The DuPage County director of stormwater management or his or her designee. The director of stormwater management shall be a
professional engineer.
DRY LAND: Land that is not a waters of DuPage which does not contain hydric soil, or can be shown through a review of historic aerial photos spanning
at least four (4) decades leading up to development that an area in question did not contain wetland area, but for an incidental construction activity that
caused the area to become wet.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by FEMA, or its equivalent, that is used to certify the base flood elevation and the lowest elevation of
usable space to which a building has been constructed.
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENTIST: A professional with a four (4) year degree in an earth or life science curriculum and four (4) years of professional
experience in which the scientist has spent more than fifty percent (50%) or their work time on wetland/environmental related tasks with an emphasis on
wetland delineation, ecology, restoration and botany.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FBFM: A flood boundary and floodway map. A floodplain management map issued by FEMA that depicts, based on detailed analysis, the boundaries of
the base flood, the two-tenths percent (0.2%) probability flood, and the floodway.
FEMA: The federal emergency management agency.
FEMA MAP CHANGE: Any one or more of the following: CLOMR, LOMR, LOMA, CLOMR-F, LOMR-F and physical map changes and other designations
of map change as developed under the NFIP.
FHBM: A flood hazard boundary map. An official map of a community, issued by FEMA, on which the boundaries of the flood, mudslide or mudflow, or
related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as zones A, M, or E.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 252/438
FIRM: A flood insurance rate map. A map issued by FEMA that is an official community map, on which map FEMA has delineated both the special hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map may or may not depict floodways. The current effective FIRMs for the
incorporated and unincorporated DuPage County are listed in exhibit 2 attached to the ordinance codified herein.
FIS: Flood insurance study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
The current effective FISs for the incorporated and unincorporated DuPage County are listed in exhibit 2 attached to the ordinance codified herein.
FILTER BARRIER: A temporary barrier installed below disturbed areas to intercept and retain sediment.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the unusual and rapid
accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The base flood elevation plus one foot (1') of freeboard. If an approved FEQ watershed plan model produces
a higher elevation than the regulatory BFE, the FPE shall be the FEQ flood of record elevation plus one foot (1') of freeboard.
FLOODPLAIN: The area typically adjacent to and including a body of water where ground surface elevations are at or below a specified flood elevation.
FLOODPROOF: Additions, changes, or adjustments to structures or property that prevent the entry of floodwater in order to protect property from flood
damage.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify that a structure is floodproofed to one foot (1') above the base flood
elevation.
FLOODWAY: The channel and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse that is needed to convey the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.1 foot. The maps that identify the current effective floodways for the incorporated and
unincorporated DuPage County are listed in exhibit 2 attached to the ordinance codified herein.
FLOODWAY CONVEYANCE: The measure of the flow carrying capacity of the floodway section and is defined using Manning's equation as:
K = 1.49 AR2/3
n
where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective area of the cross section, and "R" is ratio of the wetted area to the wetted perimeter.
FLORISTIC QUALITY INDEX (FQI): A quantitative measure to determine the quality of a plant community as calculated by the methodology contained in
"Plants Of The Chicago Region" (Swink, F. and G. Wilhelm. The Morton Arboretum, Lisle, Illinois).
HYDROLOGY: The science of the behavior of water, including its dynamics, composition, and distribution in the atmosphere, on the surface of the earth,
and underground.
IMPERVIOUS AREA: Land cover that is including, but not limited to, nonporous asphalt or asphalt sealants, nonporous concrete, roofing materials except
planted rooftops designed to reduce runoff, and gravel surfaces used as roadways or parking lots. Graveled surfaces used for storage of materials may
be counted only sixty percent (60%) impervious provided aggregate gradation has a high porosity. Ponded water shall be considered impervious area (at
its normal water elevation), but vegetated wetlands or constructed wetland basins shall not be considered impervious area. The impervious area of a
development site predevelopment is the maximum extent of the impervious surfaces that existed on the development site at the same time in any of the
three (3) years predating the date of the application.
INDIRECT WETLAND IMPACT: A change in hydraulics or hydrology that causes a change in plant community that reduces or eliminates wetland function
without directly filling or excavating wetland.
INTERIM WATERSHED PLAN: A portion of a watershed plan adopted by the county board that does not yet contain all of the elements in chapter 3 of the
plan.
LOMA: A letter of map amendment. The official determination by FEMA that a specific structure is not in a regulatory floodplain. An LOMA amends the
effective FHBM, FBFM, or FIRM.
LOMC: A letter of map change. A letter of map amendment or a letter of map revision.
LOMR: A letter of map revision. A letter from FEMA that revises base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries, or floodway as
shown on an effective FHBM, FBFM, or FIRM.
LAKE: A natural or artificial body of water encompassing an area of two (2) or more acres that retains water throughout the year.
LAND SURVEYOR: A person licensed under the laws of the state of Illinois to practice land surveying.
LETTER OF PERMISSION (LOP): A request for approval to proceed with an action that is believed to have met certain specified criteria as defined within
this title.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). A basement is any area of a building having its floor below grade
on all sides. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement
area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable
nonelevation design requirement of the code of federal regulations 44, part 60.3.
MAINTENANCE: The selective removal of woody material and accumulated debris from, or repairs to, a stormwater facility so that such facility will
perform the functions for which it was designed and constructed. Partial reconstruction or any resurfacing of existing roadways, walkways, trails, and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 253/438
bicycle routes will be considered a form of maintenance.
MAJOR STORMWATER SYSTEM: That portion of a stormwater facility needed to store and convey flows beyond the capacity of the minor stormwater
system.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A building, transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without
a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other
similar vehicles placed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MINOR DEVELOPMENT: The following parameters define minor development:
A. The area proposed to be disturbed by the development activities can be defined and limited in the field to three (3) acres or less; and
B. Does not involve any work within a wetland, buffer, or within one hundred feet (100') of a wetland boundary; and
C. Does not involve any work within a regulatory floodplain; and
D. Does not involve two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more of net new impervious area.
A development may also qualify as minor, with the prior concurrence of the administrator or director in a nonwaiver community if it exceeds two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of net new impervious area but does not meet the thresholds for providing site runoff storage listed in
section 9-9-2 of this title.
MINOR STORMWATER SYSTEM: That portion of a stormwater facility consisting of street gutters, storm sewers, small open channels, swales, and
similar facilities designed to convey runoff from the 10-year flood event or less.
MITIGATION: Measures taken to offset negative impacts by development to wetland, buffer or floodplain areas. When a development unavoidably
requires impact or loss of natural resources, that impact must be offset (compensated or mitigated) by replacing or providing substitute resources or
environments. Mitigation shall take into consideration functions wetlands and buffers may provide.
NFIP: The national flood insurance program. The requirements of the NFIP are codified in title 44 of the code of federal regulations.
NRCS: The United States department of agriculture, natural resources conservation service.
NATIVE VEGETATION: Plants indigenous to Northeastern Illinois as defined within "Plants Of The Chicago Region" (Swink and Wilhelm. The Morton
Arboretum, Lisle, Illinois).
NATURAL AREAS RESTORATION DEVELOPMENT: A development for which the basic development purpose is the restoration or creation of natural
areas including stream bank or shoreline restoration.
NET NEW IMPERVIOUS AREA: The difference between the impervious areas associated with an application for stormwater management certification,
and the impervious areas existing on the predevelopment site.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and included any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW IMPERVIOUS AREAS: Impervious areas constructed under the set of plans associated with an application for stormwater management
certification.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: A manufactured home park for which the construction of facilities for servicing homes are to be affixed (including,
at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after
the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
OWR: The Illinois department of natural resources, office of water resources.
OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT DEVELOPMENTS: Developments which create only incidental amounts of impervious area, such as trails, picnic
shelters or playgrounds that involve grading and vegetation removal, but do not alter significantly the pattern of stormwater runoff compared to the
predevelopment site. Open space developments are limited to twenty percent (20%) impervious coverage in the with-development condition.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The line on the shore established by the fluctuations of water and indicated by physical characteristics such
as a clear, natural line impressed on the bank (scour line), shelving, changes in the character of soil, destruction of terrestrial vegetation, the presence of
litter and debris, or other appropriate means that consider the characteristics of the surrounding areas.
OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE: A committee appointed by a waiver community to oversee the implementation and enforcement of the waiver community's
ordinance.
PARCEL: Contiguous land under single ownership or control.
PARTIAL WAIVER: Authority granted to a community pursuant to chapters 1, 2, 3, and 17 of this title whereby the waiver community acquires limited
jurisdiction over reviewing applications for, and issuing, stormwater management certifications.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: A set of criteria which wetland, buffer, or natural areas development must meet in order to obtain approval as outlined in
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 254/438
a stormwater management certification.
PERMANENT WETLAND IMPACT: The permanent conversion of wetland to nonwetland through direct or indirect activities.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, school district, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, unit of local government,
special taxing district, public utility, political subdivision, state agency, or any other legal entity, or owner, or any legal representative, agent, or assign
thereof.
PLAN: The DuPage County stormwater management plan, adopted by the DuPage County board in September 1989, as amended from time to time.
POSTCONSTRUCTION BMPs: Features or infrastructure permanently installed on site to treat stormwater runoff for pollutants of concern and to reduce
runoff volume, following construction, for the life of the development.
PRACTICABLE ALTERNATIVE: A development that is available and capable of being completed after taking into consideration cost, existing technology,
and logistics in light of the overall basic development purpose. A study of practicable alternatives should consider possible alternative sites, a reduction in
the scale of the development and rearrangement of the proposed facilities. This study assesses actions such as fill site locations, partial and full
avoidance of habitats, and restoration and enhancement of habitats and development economics. See also definition of Alternatives Analysis.
PREDEVELOPMENT SITE: On the date of application, the predevelopment site consists of those existing site features that were either permitted or did
not require permits at the time of their construction, or were constructed prior to February 15, 1992. Specifically, such features as pervious and impervious
(paved or roof) surfaces, and existing drainage facilities, as well as wetlands, floodplains/floodways and buffers are important predevelopment site
features.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: A person licensed under the laws of the state of Illinois to practice professional engineering.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEERING: The application of science to the design of engineering systems and facilities, using the knowledge, skills, ability, and
professional judgment developed through professional engineering education, training, and experience.
PUBLIC FLOOD EASEMENT: An easement acceptable to the appropriate jurisdictional body that meets the regulation of the OWR, the department, and
the community, that provides legal assurances that all areas subject to flooding in the created backwater of the development will remain open to allow
flooding.
RECORD DRAWINGS: Drawings prepared, signed, and sealed by a professional engineer or land surveyor representing the final "as built" record of the
actual in place elevations, location of structures, and topography.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is: a) built on a single chassis; b) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections; c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD MAP (RFM): The floodplain map panels maintained and published by DuPage County which reflect the current effective flood
zone boundaries as shown on the FIRM and all effective letters of map change issued by FEMA.
REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN: The floodplain as determined by the base flood elevation used as the basis for regulation in this title.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The floodway that is used as the basis for regulation in this title.
REGULATORY WETLANDS: All wetlands other than critical wetlands.
ROADWAY DEVELOPMENT: A development on an essentially linear property holding including easements, not a part of a larger development project
involving adjacent land holdings, and for the purpose of building a new roadway, expanding the impervious footprint of an existing roadway, or completely
reconstructing an existing roadway.
RUNOFF: The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within a tributary drainage basin that exceeds the infiltration capacity of the soils of that
basin.
SEDIMENT BASIN: Settling ponds with pipe outlet, which have both a permanent pool (dead storage) and additional volume (live and sediment storage)
component, to detain sediment laden runoff from disturbed areas to allow sediment and debris to settle out.
SEDIMENT TRAP: A small, temporary ponding basin formed by the construction of an embankment or excavated basin to detain sediment laden runoff
from disturbed areas to allow sediment and debris to settle out.
SILT FENCE: A temporary filter barrier of entrenched geotextile fabric (filter fabric) stretched across and attached to supporting posts.
SOIL SCIENTIST: A person with a four (4) year degree in which the core curriculum included coursework in a minimum of two (2) of the following fields:
soil science, pedology, edaphology, and geomorphology, and which person has a minimum of two (2) years of field experience in classifying soils.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): An area having special flood, mudslide or mudflow, or flood related erosion hazards, and which area is shown
on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M, or E.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The date the certification was issued provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the certification date. The actual start date includes the first day of
any land preparation, including clearing, grading, filling, or excavation. For substantial improvements, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STORMWATER FACILITY: All ditches, channels, conduits, bridges, culverts, levees, ponds, natural and manmade impoundments, field tiles, swales,
sewers, BMPs or other structures or measures which serve as a means of draining surface and subsurface water from land.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CERTIFICATION: A certification established by this title or by a waiver community's stormwater ordinance; and issued
by the department or a waiver community signifying acceptance of measures identified for proposed development to comply with this title and the plan.
STRUCTURAL ENGINEER: A person licensed under the laws of the state of Illinois as a structural engineer.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 255/438
STRUCTURE: Includes, without limitation: buildings, manufactured homes, tanks, dams, sewers, constructed channels, outfalls, parking lots, driveways,
roads, sidewalks and concrete patios.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building, the cost of which improvement
equals or exceeds, individually or in the aggregate, fifty percent (50%) of the fair market value of the building, determined from the equalized assessed
value of the building, before the start of construction of the improvement or, if the building has been damaged, before the damage occurred. The term
"cost of improvement" includes the value of volunteer labor and donated materials. The term "cost of improvement" does not, however, include either: a)
any development for improvement of a building to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or b) any alteration of a historic
building that will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building.
TEMPORARY WETLAND IMPACT: A wetland impact that would result in a short term loss of wetland function. Temporary wetland impacts do not result in
a permanent conversion of wetland to nonwetland. Temporary impacts do not include relocation of wetland, or conversion of a vegetated community to
open water, unless the conversion is part of an overall wetland restoration/creation program that is submitted for review and approved. Additionally, for the
impact to be considered temporary, wetland soil profiles shall be able to be restored to a similar predisturbance condition and elevation, vegetative
communities shall have the capability of being restored to same or higher quality, function, and the restoration must occur within one year of the
disturbance.
TOTAL IMPERVIOUS AREA: The sum of the impervious area on a site.
USACE: United States army corps of engineers.
USABLE SPACE: Space used for dwelling, storage, utilities, or other beneficial purposes, including, without limitation, basements.
VARIANCE: An authorization recommended by the committee or an oversight committee, and granted by the DuPage County board or the corporate
authorities of a waiver community, that varies certain requirements of this title or a waiver community ordinance in a manner in harmony with the
application of this title's or such ordinance's general purpose and intent, which variance shall be granted only in a case where there are practical
difficulties or particular hardships.
VIOLATION: Failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the regulations identified by ordinance.
WAIVER COMMUNITY: A community that has been granted either a partial waiver or a complete waiver from county enforcement of this title. See chapter
17 of this title.
WAIVER COMMUNITY ORDINANCE: An approved, valid, and effective stormwater management ordinance of a waiver community. See chapter 17 of
this title.
WATER AND SEWER IMPROVEMENT DEVELOPMENT: A development to construct, replace or upgrade infrastructure to meet current IEPA
requirements for public water supply or pollution control (water or sewer system improvements). This definition does not include buildings, substations,
pads, parking lots or other associated utility support facilities.
WATER QUALITY BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES TECHNICAL GUIDANCE: This document is a stand alone guidance manual intended to be placed
in appendix E of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and flood plain ordinance (March 2008). The guidance was published in March 2008.
WATERS OF DUPAGE: A. All waters such as lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, wetlands, sloughs, wet meadows, or natural
ponds.
B. Tributaries of waters identified above.
C. For clarification, waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the clean water act (other
than cooling ponds as defined in 40 CFR 123.11(m) which also meet the criteria of this definition) are not waters of DuPage.
D. The following are generally not considered to be waters of DuPage. However, the director, or the administrator, reserves the right on a case by case
basis to determine that a particular water body within these categories of waters is a water of DuPage:
1. Drainage, irrigation and roadside ditches excavated on dry land.
2. Artificially irrigated areas that would revert to upland if the irrigation ceased.
3. Artificial lakes, ponds or wetlands created by excavating and/or diking dry land to collect and retain water and which are used exclusively for such
purposes as stormwater storage, stock watering, irrigation, settling basins, or sediment traps.
4. Artificial bodies of water created by excavating and/or diking dry land to retain water for primarily aesthetic reasons.
5. Water filled depressions created in dry land incidental to construction activity and pits or quarries excavated in dry land for the purpose of
obtaining fill, stone, aggregate, sand, or gravel unless and until the construction or excavation operation is abandoned for a period of five (5) years
or more and the resulting body of water meets the definition of waters of DuPage.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 256/438
WATERSHED: All land area drained by, or contributing water to, the same stream, lake, or stormwater facility.
WATERSHED BASIN COMMITTEE: A technical committee established within a watershed planning area.
WATERSHED BENEFIT: A decrease in flood elevations or flood damages or an improvement in water quality, upstream or downstream of the
development site.
WATERSHED PLAN: A plan adopted by the county for stormwater management within a watershed consistent with the requirements in chapter 3 of the
plan.
WATERSHED PLAN MODEL: The hydrologic and hydraulic model meeting the standards of the plan and used in developing a watershed plan.
WATERSHED PLANNING AREA: That area considered in a specific watershed plan, adopted as part of the plan, and depicted on exhibit 1 attached to
the ordinance codified herein.
WETLAND IMPACT: Development affecting the function of any wetland.
WETLANDS: Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
WITH-DEVELOPMENT SITE: The site features illustrated on the final certified plans for a development, including unchanged areas or facilities of the
predevelopment site. (Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012; Ord. G-1003, 6-11-2013)
Chapter 20
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-20-1:TABLES:
TABLE 1
BUFFERS, WETLAND ENHANCEMENT, STREAM BANK STABILIZATION AND NATIVE PLANTED PCBMPsa,b,c
Monitoring And
Management Period As
Required By Certification
Temporary Vegetative
Cover/Permanent Soil
Stabilizationd
Percent
Cover Native
Vegetationd
Floristic
Quality
Index
(FQI)f
Coefficient Of
Conservatism
(C)f
None Of 3 Most
Dominant Species Are
Nonnative Or Invasivee
Survival Rate
For Trees And
Shrubsg
Year 1 Must meet NPDES
standards
10% - - Cover crop acceptable 100%
Year 2 No unvegetated areas
>1m2
25% - - Required 100%
Year 3 No unvegetated areas
>1m2
75% 20 3.5 Required 100%
TABLE 2
WETLAND CREATIONa,b
Monitoring And
Management Period
As Required By
Certification
Temporary
Vegetative
Cover/Permanent
Soil Stabilizationd
Percent
Cover
Native
Vegetationd
Percent Cover Of
Species As Listed
On Approved Plant
Mixesd
Floristic
Quality
Index
(FQI)
Coefficient Of
Conservatism
(C)
None Of 3 Most
Dominant
Species Are
Nonnative Or
Invasivee
Survival
Rate For
Trees And
Shrubsg
Year 1 Must meet NPDES
standards
10% 10% - - Cover crop
acceptable
100%
Year 2 No unvegetated
areas >1m2
25% 25% - - Required 100%
Year 3 No unvegetated
areas >1m2
50% 50% 15 3.0 Required 100%
Year 4 No unvegetated
areas >1m2
60% 60% - - Required 100%
Year 5 No unvegetated
areas >1m2
80% 75% 20 3.5 Required 100%
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 257/438
Notes:
a. Performance standards shall be applied to and achieved in each separate plant community zone and do not apply to designated open water
areas.
b. Upon final acceptance, it is the expectation that the PCBMP will continue to be maintained as specified in the stormwater management
certification in perpetuity or until modified by a subsequent stormwater management certification.
c. BMP standards are only for BMPs with a tributary area greater than 1 acre. There are no performance standards for BMPs with tributary areas
of less than 1 acre.
d. As measured by aerial coverage, excluding the emergent zone. The emergent zone must achieve a minimum of 50 percent vegetative cover.
e. Species include, but are not limited to: Typha angustifolia, Typha X glauca, Phragmites australis, Lythrum salicaria, Salix interior, Phalaris
arundinacea, Cirsium arvense, Melilotus sp., Poa pratensis, Dipasacus sp.
f. FQI and/or (C) can be adjusted downward when taking the context of the location into consideration. PCBMPs are not required to meet FQI or
(C).
g. Percentage can be adjusted downward based on quantities planted and when taking the context of the location into consideration.
(Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
Chapter 21
CERTIFICATION FLOW CHARTS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-21-1: CHART 1:
CHART 1: IS A STORMWATER CERTIFICATION REQUIRED?
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 258/438
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 259/438
(Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-21-2: CHART 2:
CHART 2: WETLAND REQUIREMENTS
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 260/438
(Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1149 - STORMWATER, FLOODPLAIN. Go to new ordinance.
9-21-3: CHART 3:
CHART 3: FLOODPLAIN REQUIREMENTS
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 261/438
(Ord. G-976, 7-24-2012)
Title 10
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 262/438
10-1-1: BUILDING CODES ADOPTED:
A. International Building Code: 2015 edition, including appendix chapters A, C, E, F, G, I, and K (see international building code section 101.2.1, 2015
edition), published by the International Code Council, Inc.
B. International Residential Code: 2015 edition, including appendix chapters A, B, C, D, F, G, H, I, J, K, M, O, Q, R, S, T, and U (see international
residential code section R101.2.1, 2015 edition), published by the International Code Council, Inc.
C. International Mechanical Code: 2015 edition, including appendix chapter A (see international mechanical code section 101.2.1, 2015 edition),
published by the International Code Council, Inc.
D. Illinois Plumbing Code: 77 Illinois administrative code 890 et seq., as may be amended.
E. National Electric Code (NEC): 2014 edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association.
F. Illinois Safety Code For Elevators And Escalators: State of Illinois safety code for elevators and escalators as follows:
1. American Society Of Mechanical Engineers (ASME):
a. Safety code for elevators and escalators (ASME A17.1-2013/CSA B44-2013) and performance based safety code for elevators and escalators
(ASME A17.1-2007/CSA B44.7-07);
b. Guide for inspection of elevators, escalators and moving walks (ASME A17.2-2012);
c. Safety code for existing elevators and escalators (ASME A17.3-2005), but only as required under section 35(h) and (i) of the act and subsection
F1d of this section;
d. Safety standards for platform lifts and stairway chairlifts (ASME A18.1-21011);
e. Standard for qualification of elevator inspectors (ASME QEI-1-2013).
2. American Society Of Civil Engineers (ASCE); American National Standards Institute (ANSI):
a. Automated people mover standards (ANSI/ASCE/T&DI 21-13);
G. International Property Maintenance Code: 2015 edition, including appendix chapter A, published by the International Code Council, Inc.
H. Illinois Energy Conservation Code: International energy conservation code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted
and amended by the state of Illinois.
I. International Existing Building Code: 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc.
J. International Fuel Gas Code: 2015 edition, including appendix chapters A, B, C, and D (see international fuel gas code section 101.3, 2015 edition),
published by the International Code Council, Inc.
K. International Swimming Pool And Spa Code: 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc.
L. International Plumbing Code: Those sections of the international plumbing code, 2015 edition, including appendix chapters C and F, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., which address subjects not expressly governed by the state of Illinois plumbing code, 2014 edition, published by the
Illinois department of public health. (Ord. G-1084, 9-27-2016)
10-1-2: BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS:
A. International Building Code Amendments:
Chapter 1 Administration
101.1 Title. Is amended by inserting the words "village of Oak Brook, IL."
102.4 Referenced Codes And Standards. Is amended to read as follows:
The other codes listed in sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.7 and referenced elsewhere in this code shall be considered part of the requirements
of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and referenced
standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Where differences occur between provisions of this and any other provision of the village
code, the most restrictive provision shall apply.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 263/438
103.2 Appointment. Is deleted in its entirety.
104.8 Liability. Delete reference to "member of the board of appeals."
105.1.1 Semi-Annual Permit. A semi-annual permit is required for the installation and/or continuance of boarding on a vacant building. The
building official is authorized to approve additional permit(s) for individual cases, upon application of the owner or the owner's authorized agent,
providing that the applicant demonstrates approved cause and provides an approved plan and timeframe for restoration or demolition of the
building. The details of action granting the additional permit(s) shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department of building safety.
105.1.2 Annual Permit Records. Is deleted in its entirety.
105.2 Work Exempt From Permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to
be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required
for the following:
Building:
1. One-story detached accessory structures, without foundations, used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the
floor area does not exceed 32 square feet and the cubic volume does not exceed 256 cubic feet.
2. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets & counter tops (not associated with kitchen or bath), and similar finish work with the condition
that no structural, plumbing, or electrical changes or alterations are associated with these activities.
3. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.
4. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a one- or two-family occupancy that meet all of the following:
a) Less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, and do not exceed 2,500 gallons (9,463.5 l) - when filled to the highest level that water can reach
before it spills out,
b) There is no pump, filtration or mechanical circulation of the water, and
c) Installed entirely above ground.
5. Swings and other playground equipment less than fifteen feet (15') in height above grade.
6. Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1753 mm) in height.
7. Storm windows or storm doors installed over existing fenestration.
8. Retaining walls without integral stairways that are not over 30 inches in height measured from the lowest adjacent grade to the top of the
wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding class I, II or IIIA liquids.
Electrical:
1. Repairs And Maintenance: Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical
equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.
2. Radio And Television Transmitting Stations: The provisions of this code shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and
television transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for a power supply and the installations of towers and antennas.
3. Temporary Testing Systems: A permit shall not be required for the installation of any temporary system required for the testing or
servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus.
Gas:
1. Portable heating appliance.
2. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
Mechanical:
1. Portable heating appliance.
2. Portable ventilation equipment.
3. Portable cooling unit.
4. Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code.
5. Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 264/438
6. Portable evaporative cooler.
7. Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (5 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or
less.
Plumbing:
1. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste
or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered
as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.
2. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided
such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
Tents:
Tents and membrane structures having an area in excess of 400 square feet (37 m2) shall not be erected, operated or maintained for any
purpose without first obtaining a permit and approval from the fire code official or building official.
Exceptions:
1. Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes.
2. Tents open on all sides that comply with all of the following:
2.1. Individual tents having a maximum size of 700 square feet (65 m2).
2.2. The aggregate area of multiple tents placed side by side without a fire break clearance of 12 feet (3658 mm), not exceeding 700 square
feet (65 m2) total.
2.3. A minimum clearance of 12 feet (3658 mm) to all structures and other tents.
2.4 Individual tents having an occupancy load of 49 or less - as calculated by section 1004 of this code.
105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 90 days
after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 90 days after the time the work is
commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time. The extension shall be requested in writing and
justifiable cause demonstrated.
105.5.1 Permit Expiration. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time. The extension shall be
requested in writing, prior to the expiration of the permit, and justifiable cause demonstrated. If work is not completed after the expiration of the
granted extension(s), the applicant shall pay an additional permit fee of one-half (1/2) of the original permit fee and provide the village with a new
schedule for completion of demolition and/or new construction. This provision is in addition to and does not negate the provisions of section 9-6-1
of the village code.
105.5.2 Method For Determining Permit Expiration Date. Any 90 day period of validity shall commence when the permit is issued, each time
the work is inspected by the building official, or when an extension is granted by the building official. If, at the end of any 90 day period, there has
been no subsequent request for inspection, or if an extension has not been granted, the permit shall become permanently invalid and any and all
permit fees and restoration/completion bond(s) with the village of Oak Brook for this project shall be forfeit. Forfeiture shall not constitute a waiver
of the village's right to collect from the applicant the amount of a deficiency in excess of the bond. The village shall retain the right to use all legal
and equitable remedies available to it for collection of such deficiency.
105.6.1 Suspended Permits. Permits may be suspended for no more than 60 days. Within that 60 day period, the cause or reason for
suspension shall be corrected to meet the requirements of this code, or the building official shall revoke the permit. If the cause or reason for the
suspension is corrected, the building official shall reinstate the permit with the expiration timeframe starting on the date of reinstatement. There
shall be an administrative fee of 50% of the total permit fee(s) for each reinstatement granted.
Exception: The administrative fee shall be waived if the suspension was due to no fault of the applicant, owner, or their agent(s).
105.6.2 Revoked Permits. Any permit which has been revoked shall become permanently invalid, any and all fees and/or restoration/completion
bond(s) with the village of Oak Brook for this project shall be forfeit. Forfeiture shall not constitute a waiver of the village's right to collect from the
applicant the amount of a deficiency in excess of the bond. The village shall retain the right to use all legal and equitable remedies available to it
for collection of such deficiency.
Exception: Permit fees and restoration/completion bond(s) for permits revoked due to no fault of the applicant, owner, or fee remitter may be
refunded. This provision shall not be construed to allow refund of a bond while there are outstanding fees, charges or conditions needing to be
brought into compliance. This provision shall not be construed to allow for the refund of application fees, plan review fees, inspection fees,
engineering fees, or other expenses incurred by the village of Oak Brook.
105.7 Placement Of Permit. The building permit or copy shall be kept on the site of the work until the completion of the project. The building
permit or copy shall be prominently displayed in a location that is visible and accessible to the public.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 265/438
105.8 Completion Of Work Upon Which A Permit Has Expired Or Been Revoked. A new permit shall be required for completion and/or a
certificate of occupancy. The outstanding work shall be reviewed under the codes and ordinances adopted at the time of re-submittal. All fees and
bonds shall be required as for a new permit for the entire scope of the work.
105.8.1 Premises Upon Which A Permit Has Expired Or Been Revoked. The premises shall be maintained in a safe and secure condition at
all times.
105.8.2 New Permit Application. Once a permit has expired or been revoked, the responsible party shall immediately commence a good faith
effort to obtain the required permits, including the submittal of construction plans, along with all fees and bonds within fifteen days (15 days) of
expiration or revocation. If the submittals are not received within that fifteen (15) day period, an additional permit fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) per day shall be paid by the permittee for every day thereafter until the required submittals are received. The requirement of permit(s)
for completion and/or certificate of occupancy shall not be utilized to preclude or be construed as a defense against other legal remedies available
to satisfy the intent of this code.
105.9 R-2 Permit Holder Qualifications. For permits in an R-2 occupancy, the owner, owner's employee or contractor serving as the owner's
representative shall demonstrate basic residential code knowledge by passing the test for: national standard general building contractor (A),
national standard building contractor (B), or national standard residential contractor (C) - as administered by the International Code Council - or
approved and tested equivalent, for the issuance and duration of the permit. Failure to retain at least one required qualified person, in a
supervisory role, on a project shall be cause for immediate suspension of the permit pursuant to section 105.6.1 of this code. Licensure as a
design professional shall not be considered equivalent.
Exceptions:
1. Projects where a design professional is not required by section 107.1 of this code.
2. The building official is authorized to waive the qualification requirement for a project with a total or remaining job cost less than $25,000, or
qualifies for a temporary certificate of occupancy. This waiver may be revoked for cause where the building official finds multiple and/or
repeated violations of the village of Oak Brook code in the project.
107.1 General. Submittal documents consisting of construction documents and other data shall be submitted in two or more sets with each
application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional. Where special conditions exist, the
building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.
Exceptions:
a. The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a
registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not
necessary to obtain compliance with this code.
b. The building official is authorized to waive the requirement for construction document preparation by a registered design professional where
the cost of construction does not exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000) and the submittals are adequate to accurately depict the
proposed work.
c. The building official is authorized to waive the requirement for construction document preparation by a registered design professional where
the scope of the work is limited to:
1. Replacement without modification of existing doors and windows, electrical, mechanical or plumbing fixtures,
2. Replacement of existing electrical, mechanical or plumbing fixtures,
3. Re-roofing that does not involve structural modifications,
4. Landscaping, patios, sidewalks, driveways, and flatwork that does not involve a change of grade or addition of impervious surface.
5. Other similar activities as determined by the building official.
109.2 Schedule Of Permit Fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a
fee for each permit shall be paid as those specified in section 10-4-1 of the village code.
113 Board Of Appeals. Is renamed "Appeals".
113.1 General. A person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official. For the purposes of this code, all appeals of decisions
relating to this code shall be referred to the circuit court of DuPage County.
113.2 Limitations On Authority. Is deleted in its entirety.
113.3 Qualifications. Is deleted in its entirety.
114.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects,
constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to fines and penalties as those specified in section 1-3-1 of the
village code.
115.2 Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, the owner's authorized agent, or
the person performing the work, or posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. Upon issuance of a stop work
order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the cited
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 266/438
work will be permitted to resume.
Chapter 2 Definitions
Responsible Party. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of
buildings, structures and premises. In addition, any other person or entity who may be reasonably considered to have a role or responsibility in the
creation, continuation, or correction of any violation of this code shall be a responsible party or additional responsible party for such violation.
Chapter 9 Fire Protection Systems
903 Automatic Sprinkler Systems. Is deleted and amended to read in its entirety as follows:
[F] 903.1 General. Automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with this section as required by 2015 international fire code, section 903, as adopted
and amended by the village of Oak Brook.
Chapter 14 Exterior Walls
1408.4.1 EIFS Drainage. All EIFS shall have an average minimum drainage efficiency of 90 percent when tested in accordance with the
requirements of ASTM E 2273.
1408.5.1 Height Above Grade. Standard EIFS systems shall not be installed closer than 8 feet to finished exterior grade.
Chapter 28 Mechanical Systems
2801.2 Exterior Mechanical Equipment To Be Screened. All exterior heating, air conditioning, ventilating, generators, pool heaters, or other
mechanical equipment shall be fully screened to prevent view of the equipment from any point at the finished grade along any lot line of the lot on
which the equipment is located. Screening materials shall be as approved by the building official. Deciduous or annual plants shall not be
approved as screening materials.
2801.3 Interior Mechanical Equipment To Be Identified. Approved, 3-dimensional signage is required for any of the following that are
concealed by ceiling or access panel:
1. Smoke, heat or duct detector.
2. Disconnect.
3. Air Handler.
4. Electric Reheat.
Chapter 33 Safeguards During Construction
3305.1 Facilities Required. Sanitary facilities shall be provided during construction, remodeling or demolition activities in accordance with the
international plumbing code.
3306.1 Protection Required. Pedestrians shall be protected during construction, remodeling, excavation, and demolition activities, and from
premises deemed to present imminent danger as defined in the 2015 international property maintenance code, section 109.1 as required by this
chapter and table 3306.1. Signs shall be provided to direct pedestrian traffic. Required protective measures shall remain in place until the cause
of need for such protection no longer exists, as determined by the building official. Protection, greater than or equal to the minimum required by
table 3306.1 shall form a complete and continuous enclosure, wherever protection of any type is required.
Exceptions:
1. Construction, remodeling, excavation, or demolition activities with protection equal to or greater than the requirements of this section, as
determined and approved in writing by the building official. Examples include a scope of work completely limited to the interior of a structure and
sites with existing or natural barriers that meet the intent of this section.
2. Construction, remodeling, excavation, or demolition activities that, by the scope or nature of the work, would or could not be made
substantially safer by the provision of such protection, as determined and approved in writing by the building official.
3306.4 Construction Railings And Construction Fences. Construction railings shall be at least 42 inches (1067 mm) in height and shall be
sufficient to direct pedestrians around construction areas.
3306.4.1 Construction Fence Design. Construction fences shall be designed to resist wind pressure as specified in chapter 16 and constructed
as follows:
1. Construction fence shall be at least 72 inches in height and shall form a complete enclosure around construction areas.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 267/438
2. Construction fences shall be adequate to prevent nuisance. Screening shall be required if dust or wind-blown debris is present.
3. Construction fences shall be firmly weighted to or anchored into the ground.
4. Gaps or openings in fences shall be protected by doors or gates which are normally kept closed.
5. Doors or gates shall be at least the same height as the fence in which they are installed.
6. Doors or gates shall be kept locked when the site is unattended.
7. Construction fences shall be chain link or equal, as approved by the building official.
8. Construction fence shall be built and maintained in a workmanlike manner, with appropriate connection methods. Sections joined with tie
wires, cable ties, or similar fasteners shall be rejected.
3306.5 Barriers. Barriers shall be a minimum of 8 feet (2438 mm) in height and shall be placed on the side of the walkway nearest the
construction and as required by this chapter and table 3306.1. Barriers shall extend the entire length of the construction site where adjacent to the
public way and as required by this chapter and table 3306.1 at all other locations. Openings in such barriers shall be protected by doors which are
normally kept closed. Doors shall be kept locked when the site is unattended.
3306.9 Adjacent To Excavations. Every excavation shall be protected as required by this chapter and table 3306.1. All protective structures shall
be adequate to resist wind pressure as specified in chapter 16 of this code.
3307.2 Dust Abatement. Every permit applicant shall provide a dust and debris containment and abatement plan. The plan shall conform to all
applicable environmental, safety, and health regulations, laws, rules, and guidelines. The plan shall stipulate and provide for 100% containment
within the designated work zone. The plan shall be subject to approval by the building official and made part of the approved permit. The plan
shall be in written form and kept on the jobsite for the full duration of the permitted project. Failure to contain dust and/or debris shall be cause for
immediate suspension of any or all applicable permits and/or immediate prosecution.
Exception: Activities that, by the scope or nature of the work, would or could not be made substantially safer by the provision of such
protection, as determined and approved by the building official.
Table 3306.1
Protection Of Pedestrians
Height Of Structure That Is Under Construction,
Demolition, Or Dangerous
Distance From Construction Structure To Lot Line
Or Public Right Of Way
Minimum Type Of
Protection Required
8 feet or less Less than 5 feet Construction fences
5 feet or more Construction railings
More than 8 feet Less than one-half the height of construction Barrier and covered walkway
More than 8 feet Between one-half of and the height of construction Barrier
More than 8 feet Exceeding the height of construction Construction fences
Depth Of Excavation Distance From Excavation To Lot Line Or Public
Right Of Way
Minimum Type Of
Protection Required
30 inches or less Less than 5 feet Construction railings
5 feet or more As required by the building
official
More than 30 inches Any Construction fences
Chapter 34 Special Piping And Storage Systems
Section 3401 General
3401.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the design and installation of piping and storage systems for nonflammable medical
gas systems and nonmedical oxygen systems. All maintenance and operations of such systems shall be in accordance with the international
fire code.
Section 3402 Medical Gases
[F] 3402.1 Nonflammable Medical Gases. Nonflammable medical gas systems, inhalation anesthetic systems and vacuum piping systems
shall be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 99.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 268/438
Exceptions:
1. This section shall not apply to portable systems or cylinder storage.
2. Vacuum system exhaust terminations shall comply with the international mechanical code.
Section 3403 Oxygen Systems
[F] 3403.1 Design And Installation. Nonmedical oxygen systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 55 and NFPA 51.
Chapter 36 Storm Drainage
Section 3601 General
3601.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the materials, design, construction and installation of storm drainage.
3601.2 Disposal. Rainwater from roofs and storm water from paved areas, yards, courts and courtyards shall drain to an approved place of
disposal. For one- and two-family dwellings, and where approved, storm water is permitted to discharge onto flat areas, such as streets or
lawns, provided that the storm water flows away from the building.
3601.3 Prohibited Drainage. Storm water shall not be drained into sewers intended for sewage only.
3601.4 Tests. The conductors and the building storm drain shall be tested in accordance with section 312 of the 2015 international plumbing
code.
3601.5 Change In Size. The size of a drainage pipe shall not be reduced in the direction of flow.
3601.6 Fittings And Connections. All connections and changes in direction of the storm drainage system shall be made with approved
drainage-type fittings in accordance with code table 706.3 of the 2015 international plumbing code. The fittings shall not obstruct or retard flow
in the system.
3601.7 Roof Design. Roofs shall be designed for the maximum possible depth of water that will pond thereon as determined by the relative
levels of roof deck and overflow weirs, scuppers, edges or serviceable drains in combination with the deflected structural elements. In
determining the maximum possible depth of water, all primary roof drainage means shall be assumed to be blocked. The maximum possible
depth of water on the roof shall include the height of the water required above the inlet of the secondary roof drainage means to achieve the
required flow rate of the secondary drainage means to accommodate the design rainfall rate as required by section 3606.
3601.8 Cleanouts Required. Cleanouts shall be installed in the storm drainage system and shall comply with the provisions of the 2015
international plumbing code for sanitary drainage pipe cleanouts.
Exception: Subsurface drainage system.
3601.9 Backwater Valves. Storm drainage systems shall be provided with backwater valves as required for sanitary drainage systems in
accordance with section 715 of the 2015 international plumbing code.
Section 3602 Materials
3602.1 General. The materials and methods utilized for the construction and installation of storm drainage systems shall comply with this
section and the applicable provisions of chapter 7 of the 2015 international plumbing code.
3602.2 Inside Storm Drainage Conductors. Inside storm drainage conductors installed above ground shall conform to one of the standards
listed in table 702.1 of the 2015 international plumbing code.
3602.3 Underground Building Storm Drain Pipe. Underground building storm drain pipe shall conform to one of the standards listed in table
702.2 of the 2015 international plumbing code.
3602.4 Building Storm Sewer Pipe. Building storm sewer pipe shall conform to one of the standards listed in table 3602.4.
Table 3602.4
Building Storm Sewer Pipe
Material Standard
Cast-iron pipe ASTM A 74; ASTM A 888; CISPI 301
Concrete pipe ASTM C 14; ASTM C 76; CSA A257.1M; CSA A257.2M
Copper or copper-alloy tubing (type K, L, M or DWV) ASTM B 75; ASTM B 88; ASTM B 251; ASTM B 306
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe (type DWV, SDR26, SDR35, SDR41,
PS50 or PS100)
ASTM D 2665; ASTM D 3034; ASTM F 891; CSA B182.4; CSA
B181.2; CSA B182.2
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 269/438
Vitrified clay pipe ASTM C 4; ASTM C 700
3602.5 Subsoil Drain Pipe. Subsoil drains shall be open jointed, horizontally split or perforated pipe conforming to one of the standards listed in
table 3602.5.
Table 3602.5
Subsoil Drain Pipe
Material Standard
Cast-iron pipe ASTM A 74; ASTM A 888; CISPI 301
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe (type DWV, SDR26, SDR35, SDR41,
PS50 or PS100)
ASTM D 2665; ASTM D 3034; ASTM F 891; CSA B182.4; CSA
B181.2; CSA B182.2
Stainless steel drainage systems, type 316L ASME A 112.3.1
Vitrified clay pipe ASTM C 4; ASTM C 700
3602.6 Roof Drains. Roof drains shall conform to ASME A112.6.4 or ASME A112.3.1.
3602.7 Fittings. Pipe fittings shall be approved for installation with the piping material installed, and shall conform to the respective pipe
standards or one of the standards listed in table 3602.7. The fittings shall not have ledges, shoulders or reductions capable of retarding or
obstructing flow in the piping. Threaded drainage pipe fittings shall be of the recessed drainage type.
Table 3602.7
Pipe Fittings
Material Standard
Cast-iron ASME B16.4; ASME B16.12; ASTM A 888; CISPI 301; ASTM A 74
Coextruded composite PVC DWV schedule 40 IPS-DR, PS140, PS200
(solid only)
ASTM D 2665; ASTM D 3311; ASTM F 891
Coextruded composite PVC sewer and drain DR-PS in PS35, PS50,
PS100, PS140, PS200
ASTM D 3034
Copper or copper-alloy ASME B16.15; ASME B16.18; ASME B16.22; ASME B16.23; ASME
B16.26; ASME B16.29
Gray iron and ductile iron AWWA C110/A21.10
Malleable iron ASME B16.3
Plastic, general ASTM F 409
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic ASTM D 2665; ASTM D 3311; ASTM F 1866
Steel ASME B16.9; ASME B16.11; ASME B16.28
Stainless steel drainage systems, type 316L ASME A112.3.1
Section 3603 Traps
Reserved.
Section 3604 Conductors And Connections
3604.1 Prohibited Use. Conductor pipes shall not be used as soil, waste or vent pipes, and soil, waste or vent pipes shall not be used as
conductors.
3604.2 Floor Drains. Floor drains shall not be connected to a storm drain.
Section 3605 Roof Drains
3605.1 General. Roof drains shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. The inside opening for the roof drain shall not
be obstructed by the roofing membrane material.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 270/438
3605.2 Roof Drain Flow Rate. The published roof drain flow rate, based on the head of water above the roof drain, shall be used to size the
storm drainage system in accordance with section 3606. The flow rate used for sizing the storm drainage piping shall be based on the
maximum anticipated ponding at the roof drain.
Section 3606 Size Of Conductors, Leaders And Storm Drains
3606.1 General. The size of the vertical conductors and leaders, building storm drains, building storm sewers and any horizontal branches of
such drains or sewers shall be based on the 100-year hourly rainfall rate of four inches (4").
3606.2 Size Of Storm Drain Piping. Vertical and horizontal storm drain piping shall be sized based on the flow rate through the roof drain. The
flow rate in storm drain piping shall not exceed that specified in table 3606.2.
Table 3606.2
Storm Drain Pipe Sizing
Pipe Size
(Inches)
Capacity (g.p.m)
Vertical
Drain
Slope Of Horizontal Drain
1/16 Inch
Per Foot
1/8 Inch
Per Foot
1/4 Inch
Per Foot
1/2 Inch
Per Foot
2 34 15 22 31 44
3 87 39 55 79 111
4 180 81 115 163 231
5 311 117 165 234 331
6 538 243 344 487 689
8 1,117 505 714 1,010 1,429
10 2,050 927 1,311 1,855 2,623
12 3,272 1,480 2,095 2,960 4,187
15 5,543 2,508 3,456 5,016 7,093
3606.3 Vertical Leader Sizing. Vertical leaders shall be sized based on the flow rate from horizontal gutters or the maximum flow rate through
roof drains. The flow rate through vertical leaders shall not exceed that specified in table 3606.3.
Table 3606.3
Vertical Leader Sizing
Size Of Leader
(Inches)
Capacity
(g.p.m)
2 30
2 x 2 30
11/2 x 21/2 30
21/2 54
21/2 x 21/2 54
3 92
2 x 4 92
21/2 x 3 92
4 192
3 x 41/4 192
31/2 x 4 192
5 360
4 x 5 360
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 271/438
41/2 x 41/2 360
6 563
5 x 6 563
51/2 x 51/2 563
8 1208
6 x 8 1208
3606.4 Vertical Walls. In sizing roof drains and storm drainage piping, one-half of the area of any vertical wall that diverts rainwater to the roof
shall be added to the projected roof area for inclusion in calculating the required size of vertical conductors, leaders and horizontal storm drainage
piping.
3606.5 Parapet Wall Scupper Location. Parapet wall roof drainage scupper and overflow scupper location shall comply with the requirements of
section 1503.4 of the international building code.
3606.6 Size Of Roof Gutters. Horizontal gutters shall be sized based on the flow rate from the roof surface. The flow rate in horizontal gutters
shall not exceed that specified in table 3606.6.
Table 3606.6
Horizontal Gutter Sizing
Gutter
Dimensionsa
(Inches)
Slope
(Inch Per Foot)
Capacity
(g.p.m)
11/2 x 21/2 1/4 26
11/2 x 21/2 1/2 40
4 1/8 39
21/4 x 3 1/4 55
21/4 x 3 1/2 87
5 1/8 74
4 x 21/2 1/4 106
3 x 31/2 1/2 156
6 1/8 110
3 x 5 1/4 157
3 x 5 1/2 225
8 1/16 172
8 1/8 247
41/2 x 6 1/4 348
41/2 x 6 1/2 494
10 1/16 331
10 1/8 472
5 x 8 1/4 651
4 x 10 1/2 1055
a. Dimensions are width by depth for rectangular shapes. Single dimensions are diameters of a semicircle.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 272/438
Section 3607 Siphonic Roof Drainage Systems
3607.1 General. Siphonic roof drains and drainage systems shall be designed in accordance with ASME A112.6.9 and ASPE 45.
Section 3608 Secondary (Emergency) Roof Drains
3608.1 Secondary (Emergency Overflow) Drains Or Scuppers. Where roof drains are required, secondary (emergency overflow) roof drains
or scuppers shall be provided where the roof perimeter construction extends above the roof in such a manner that water will be entrapped if the
primary drains allow buildup for any reason. Where primary and secondary roof drains are manufactured as a single assembly, the inlet and
outlet for each drain shall be independent.
3608.2 Separate Systems Required. Secondary roof drain systems shall have the end point of discharge separate from the primary system.
Discharge shall be above grade, in a location that would normally be observed by the building occupants or maintenance personnel.
3608.3 Sizing Of Secondary Drains. Secondary (emergency) roof drain systems shall be sized in accordance with section 3606 based on the
rainfall rate for which the primary system is sized. Scuppers shall be sized to prevent the depth of ponding water from exceeding that for which
the roof was designed as determined by section 3601.7. Scuppers shall have an opening dimension of not less than 4 inches (102 mm). The
flow through the primary system shall not be considered when sizing the secondary roof drain system.
Section 3609 Combined Sanitary And Storm Public Sewer
3609.1 General. Combined sanitary and storm sewer shall be prohibited.
Section 3610 Controlled Flow Roof Drain Systems
3610.1 General. The roof of a structure shall be designed for the storage of water where the storm drainage system is engineered for controlled
flow. The controlled flow roof drain system shall be an engineered system in accordance with this section and the design, submittal, approval,
inspection and testing requirements of section 105.4. The controlled flow system shall be designed based on the required rainfall rate in
accordance with section 3606.1.
3610.2 Control Devices. The control devices shall be installed so that the rate of discharge of water per minute shall not exceed the values for
continuous flow as indicated in section 3610.1.
3610.3 Installation. Runoff control shall be by control devices. Control devices shall be protected by strainers.
3610.4 Minimum Number Of Roof Drains. Not less than two roof drains shall be installed in roof areas 10,000 square feet (929 m2) or less
and not less than four roof drains shall be installed in roofs over 10,000 square feet (929 m2) in area.
Section 3611 Subsoil Drains
3611.1 Subsoil Drains. Subsoil drains shall be open-jointed, horizontally split or perforated pipe conforming to one of the standards listed in
table 3602.5. Such drains shall not be less than 4 inches (102 mm) in diameter. Where the building is subject to backwater, the subsoil drain
shall be protected by an accessibly located backwater valve. Subsoil drains shall discharge to a trapped area drain, sump, dry well or approved
location above ground. The subsoil sump shall not be required to have either a gas-tight cover or a vent. The sump and pumping system shall
comply with section 3613.1.
Section 3612 Building Subdrains
3612.1 Building Subdrains. Building subdrains located below the public sewer level shall discharge into a sump or receiving tank, the contents
of which shall be automatically lifted and discharged into the drainage system as required for building sumps. The sump and pumping
equipment shall comply with section 3613.1.
Section 3613 Sumps And Pumping Systems
3613.1 Pumping System. The sump pump, pit and discharge piping shall conform to sections 3613.1.1 through 3613.1.4.
3613.1.1 Pump Capacity And Head. The sump pump shall be of a capacity and head appropriate to anticipated use requirements.
3613.1.2 Sump Pit. The sump pit shall be not less than 18 inches (457 mm) in diameter and not less than 24 inches (610 mm) in depth, unless
otherwise approved. The pit shall be accessible and located such that all drainage flows into the pit by gravity. The sump pit shall be
constructed of tile, steel, plastic, cast iron, concrete or other approved material, with a removable cover adequate to support anticipated loads in
the area of use. The pit floor shall be solid and provide permanent support for the pump.
3613.1.3 Electrical. Electrical service outlets, when required, shall meet the requirements of NFPA 70.
3613.1.4 Piping. Discharge piping shall meet the requirements of section 3602.2, 3602.3 or 3602.4 and shall include a gate valve and a full
flow check valve. Pipe and fittings shall be the same size as, or larger than, the pump discharge tapping.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 273/438
Exception: In one- and two-family dwellings, only a check valve shall be required, located on the discharge piping from the pump or ejector.
B. International Residential Code Amendments:
Chapter 1 Administration
R101.1 Title. Is amended by inserting the words "village of Oak Brook, IL."
R102.4 Referenced Codes And Standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of
this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and referenced standards, the
provisions of this code shall apply. Where differences occur between provisions of this and any other provision of the village code, the most
restrictive provision shall apply.
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of
the listing and manufacturer's instructions shall apply.
R105.1.1 Annual Permit. An annual permit is required for the installation and/or continuance of boarding on a vacant building. The building
official is authorized to approve additional permit(s) for individual cases, upon application of the owner or the owner's authorized agent, providing
that the applicant demonstrates approved cause and provides an approved plan and timeframe for restoration or demolition of the building. The
details of action granting the additional permit(s) shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department of building safety.
R105.2 Work Exempt From Permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to
be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required
for the following:
Building:
1. One-story detached accessory structures, without foundations, used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the
floor area does not exceed 32 square feet and the cubic volume does not exceed 256 cubic feet.
2. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, and cabinets & counter tops (not associated with kitchen or bath), and similar finish work with the
condition that no structural, plumbing, or electrical changes or alterations are associated with these activities.
3. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.
4. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a one- or two-family occupancy that meet all of the following:
a) Less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, and do not exceed 2,500 gallons (9,463.5 l) - when filled to the highest level that water can reach
before it spills out,
b) There is no pump, filtration or mechanical circulation of the water, and
c) Installed entirely above ground.
5. Swings and other playground equipment less than fifteen feet (15') in height above grade.
6. Storm windows or storm doors installed over existing fenestration.
7. Retaining walls without integral stairways that are not over 30 inches in height measured from the lowest adjacent grade to the top of the
wall, unless supporting a surcharge.
Electrical:
1. Listed cord-and-plug connected temporary decorative lighting.
2. Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles but not the outlets therefor.
3. Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the required capacity in the same location.
4. Listed cord-and-plug connected electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than 25 volts, not capable
of supplying more than 50 watts of energy, and not utilized for fire, smoke, heat or carbon monoxide detection or alarm.
5. Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved
permanently installed receptacles.
Gas:
1. Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 274/438
2. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
3. Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
Mechanical:
1. Portable heating appliances.
2. Portable ventilation appliances.
3. Portable cooling units.
4. Steam, hot- or chilled-water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code.
5. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
6. Portable evaporative coolers.
7. Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower
(746 W) or less.
8. Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
Plumbing:
1. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste
or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered
as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.
2. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided
such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
Tents: Tents and membrane structures having an area in excess of 400 square feet (37 m2) shall not be erected, operated or maintained for
any purpose without first obtaining a permit and approval from the fire code official or building official.
Exceptions:
1. Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes.
2. Tents open on all sides that comply with all of the following:
2.1. Individual tents having a maximum size of 700 square feet (65 m2).
2.2. The aggregate area of multiple tents placed side by side without a fire break clearance of 12 feet (3658 mm), not exceeding 700 square
feet (65 m2) total.
2.3. A minimum clearance of 12 feet (3658 mm) to all structures and other tents.
2.4. Individual tents having an occupancy load of 49 or less - as calculated by section 1004 of this code.
R105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 90 days after its
issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 90 days after the time the work is commenced. The
building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each. The extension shall be
requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
R105.5.1 Permit Expiration. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time. The extension shall be
requested in writing, prior to the expiration of the permit, and justifiable cause demonstrated. If work is not completed after the expiration of the
granted extension(s), the applicant shall pay an additional permit fee of one-half (1/2) of the original permit fee and provide the village with a new
schedule for completion. This provision is in addition to and does not negate the provisions of section 9-6-1 of the village code.
R105.5.2 Method For Determining Permit Expiration Date. Any 90 day period of validity shall commence when the permit is issued, each time
the work is inspected by the building official, or an extension is granted by the building official. If, at the end of any 90 day period, there has been
no subsequent request for inspection, or if an extension has not been granted, the permit shall become permanently invalid and any and all permit
fees and restoration/completion bond(s) with the village of Oak Brook for this project shall be forfeit. Forfeiture shall not constitute a waiver of the
village's right to collect from the applicant the amount of a deficiency in excess of the bond. The village shall retain the right to use all legal and
equitable remedies available to it for collection of such deficiency.
R105.6.1 Suspended Permits. Permits may be suspended for no more than 60 days. Within that 60 day period, the cause or reason for
suspension shall be corrected to meet the requirements of this code, or the building official shall revoke the permit. If the cause or reason for the
suspension is corrected, the building official shall reinstate the permit with the expiration timeframe starting on the date of reinstatement. There
shall be an administrative fee of 50% of the total permit fee(s) for each reinstatement granted.
Exception: The administrative fee shall be waived if the suspension was due to no fault of the applicant, owner, or their agent(s).
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 275/438
R105.6.2 Revoked Or Expired Permits. Any permit which has been revoked or expired shall become permanently invalid, any and all fees
and/or restoration/completion bond(s) with the village of Oak Brook for this project shall be forfeit. Forfeiture shall not constitute a waiver of the
village's right to collect from the applicant the amount of a deficiency in excess of the bond. The village shall retain the right to use all legal and
equitable remedies available to it for collection of such deficiency.
Exception: Permit fees and restoration/completion bond(s) for permits revoked due to no fault of the applicant, owner, or fee remitter may be
refunded. This provision shall not be construed to allow refund of a bond while there are outstanding fees, charges or conditions needing to be
brought into compliance. This provision shall not be construed to allow for the refund of application fees, plan review fees, inspection fees,
engineering fees, or other expenses incurred by the village of Oak Brook.
R105.7 Placement Of Permit. The building permit or copy shall be kept on the site of the work until the completion of the project. The building
permit or copy shall be prominently displayed in a location that is accessible to the public.
R105.8 Completion Of Work Upon Which A Permit Has Been Revoked Or Expired. A new permit shall be required for completion and/or a
certificate of occupancy. The outstanding work shall be reviewed under the codes and ordinances adopted at the time of re-submittal. All fees and
bonds shall be required as for a new permit for the entire scope of the work.
R105.8.1 Premises Upon Which A Permit Has Been Revoked Or Expired. The premises shall be maintained in a safe and secure condition at
all times.
R105.8.2 New Permit Application. Once a permit has been revoked or expired, the responsible party shall immediately commence a good faith
effort to obtain the required permits, including the submittal of construction plans, along with all fees and bonds within fifteen days (15 days) of
expiration or revocation. If the submittals are not received within that fifteen (15) day period, an additional permit fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) per day shall be paid by the permittee for every day thereafter until the required submittals are received. The requirement of permit(s)
for completion and/or certificate of occupancy shall not be utilized to preclude or be construed as a defense against other legal remedies available
to satisfy the intent of this code.
R105.10 Permit Holder Qualifications. For new construction as defined and regulated by this code, the owner, owner's employee, or contractor
serving as the owner's representative shall demonstrate basic residential code knowledge by passing the test for: national standard general
building contractor (A), national standard building contractor (B), or national standard residential contractor (C) - as administered by the
International Code Council - or approved and tested equivalent, for the issuance and duration of the permit. Failure to retain at least one required
qualified person, in a supervisory role, on a project shall be cause for immediate suspension of the permit pursuant to section R105.6.1 of this
code. Licensure as a design professional shall not be considered equivalent.
Exception: For detached single-family dwellings, the building official is authorized to waive the qualification requirement for a project with a
total or remaining job cost less than $100,000, or qualifies for a temporary certificate of occupancy. This waiver may be revoked for cause
where the building official finds multiple and/or repeated violations of the village of Oak Brook code in the project.
R106.1 Submittal Documents. Submittal documents consisting of construction documents and other data shall be submitted in two or more sets
with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional. Where special conditions
exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.
Exceptions: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared
by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not
necessary to obtain compliance with this code.
a. The building official is authorized to waive the requirement for construction document preparation by a registered design professional where
the cost of construction does not exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000) and the submittals are adequate to accurately depict the
proposed work.
b. The building official is authorized to waive the requirement for construction document preparation by a registered design professional where
the scope of the work is limited to:
1. Replacement without modification of existing doors and windows, electrical, mechanical or plumbing fixtures,
2. Replacement of existing electrical, mechanical or plumbing fixtures,
3. Re-roofing that does not involve structural modifications,
4. Landscaping, patios, sidewalks, driveways, and flatwork that does not involve a change of grade or addition of impervious surface,
5. Other similar activities as determined by the building official.
R108.2 Schedule Of Permit Fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a
fee for each permit shall be paid as those specified in section 10-4-1 of the village code.
R112 Appeals
R112.1 Appeals. A person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official. For the purposes of this code, all appeals of decisions
relating to this code shall be referred to the circuit court of DuPage County.
Delete subsections R112.2 through R112.4.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 276/438
R113.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or
of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to fines and penalties as those specified in section 1-3-1 of the
village code.
R114.1 Notice To Owner. Upon notice from the building official that work on any building or structure is being prosecuted contrary to the
provisions of this code or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing
and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent or to the person doing the work, or posted in a conspicuous place
in or about the structure affected by such notice, and shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which work will be permitted to
resume.
R115 Safeguards During Construction. Safeguards during construction shall be as required by chapter 33 of the international building code as
adopted and amended in this code.
Chapter 2 Definitions
New Construction. For the purposes of determining automatic fire sprinkler protection requirements in section R313, and contractor qualification
requirements in section R105.10, "new construction" shall include the following:
1. Any completely new structure,
2. Any addition that adds above grade floor space equal to or greater than 75% of the existing building footprint,
3. Any alteration or addition where 75% or greater of the existing first floor exterior wall perimeter and/or first floor structure is removed, or
4. Any alteration or addition where the newly constructed first floor wall perimeter is equal to 75% or greater of the entire first floor wall
perimeter prior to construction.
Responsible Party. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of
buildings, structures and premises. In addition, any other person or entity who may be reasonably considered to have a role or responsibility in the
creation, continuation, or correction of any violation of this code shall be a responsible party or additional responsible party for such violation.
Chapter 3 Building Planning
Table R301.2.(1)
Climatic And Geographic Design Criteria
Ground snow load 25 lb/ft2
Ultimate wind design 115 mph*
Seismic design category A
Subject to damage from Weathering Severe
Frost line depth 42"
Termite Moderate to severe
Winter design temperature -4°F, 971/2%
Summer design temperature 89°F dry bulb, 21/2%
76°F wet bulb, 21/2%
Ice barrier underlayment Required
Flood hazards FIRM #170214
Panels 0606H-0609H
12/16/2004
Air freezing index 1543 (°F - days)
Annual mean temperature 49.4°F
Heating degree days (HDD) 6,155
Cooling degree days (CDD) 942
Climate zone 5A
Indoor design conditions Max. 72°F - heating
Min. 75°F - cooling
100-year hourly rainfall rate 4"
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 277/438
*Ultimate Design Wind Speed replaces Basic Wind Speed as found in earlier editions. Although the values are different, there is very
little practical difference in the design or construction requirements.
R302.12 Draftstopping. In combustible construction where there is usable space both above and below the concealed space of a floor-ceiling
assembly, draftstops shall be installed so that the area of the concealed space does not exceed 500 square feet (46.51 m2) or have a dimension
of more than 25 feet in any direction. Draftstopping shall divide the concealed space into approximately equal areas. Where the assembly is
enclosed by a floor membrane above and a ceiling membrane below, draftstopping shall be provided in floor-ceiling assemblies under the
following circumstances:
1. Ceiling is suspended under the floor framing.
2. Floor framing is constructed of prefabricated wood I-joists, truss-type open-web, perforated members or similar construction.
R304.1 Minimum Area. Habitable rooms shall have a floor area of not less than 70 square feet (6.5 m2). Every living room shall contain at least
120 square feet (11.2 m2) and every bedroom shall contain a minimum of 70 square feet (6.5 m2) and every bedroom occupied by more than one
person shall contain a minimum of 50 square feet (4.6 m2) of floor area for each occupant thereof.
Exception: Kitchens.
R310.6 Conversion Into Habitable Space. When any area previously not approved or utilized as habitable space is converted into and/or
utilized as habitable space - regardless of the amount of construction work done in this area - it shall be considered as reconstruction and be
subject to the requirements of this chapter and the provisions of section R310 of this code.
R310.7 Conversion Into A Sleeping Room. When any area previously not approved or utilized as a sleeping room is converted into and/or
utilized as a sleeping room - regardless of the amount of construction work that was or was not done in this conversion or change of utilization - it
shall be subject to all requirements for new construction of a sleeping room as found in this code.
R310.8 Egress From Highest Habitable Space. Where residential building heights exceed thirty feet (30'), the highest space that meets the
criteria of sections R304, R305 & R311.4 for habitable space shall have an emergency escape and rescue opening in compliance with section
R310 at a maximum elevation of thirty two feet (32') above grade. This section shall be applied regardless of the usage designation on the
construction documents, including "storage" or "bonus" rooms.
R311.7.8.1 Height. Handrail height, measured above stair tread nosings, or finish surface of ramp slope, shall be uniform, not less than 34 inches
(864 mm) and not more than 38 inches (965 mm). Handrail height of alternating tread devices and ships ladders, measured above tread nosings,
shall be uniform, not less than 30 inches (762 mm) and not more than 34 inches (864 mm).
R312.1 Guards shall be located along open-sided walking surfaces, including stairs, ramps and landings, permanent benches or other walkable
horizontal planes - 4 inches or greater in width, measured perpendicular to the open side - that are located more than 30 inches (762 mm)
measured vertically to the floor or grade below at any point within 36 inches (914 mm) horizontally to the edge of the open side. Insect screening
shall not be considered as a guard.
R313.3 Notification Devices Required. The following notification devices shall be required on all new and/or modified automatic sprinkler
systems installed to comply with this code:
1. A listed and approved exterior audio visual notification device shall be installed at an approved location that is readily visible from the public
way.
Exception: The code official may approve an alternate location if it is technically infeasible to install the device where it is readily visible from
the public way and the proposed location provides substantially equivalent notification.
2. Listed and approved device(s) shall be installed to provide audible notification throughout the residence. For notification device(s) affixed to
HVAC systems, a separate device shall be utilized for each HVAC system.
3. Each automatic fire sprinkler system shall have a listed and approved water flow detection device that is monitored by an approved agency.
4. Each control valve shall be supervised by a listed and approved switch that is monitored by an approved agency.
R314 Smoke Alarms. Is amended by the addition of the following section:
Additional Locations. In addition to the locations specified in R314.3, 200°F heat detectors shall be installed in the following locations:
1. In each attic area that is provided with access as required in section R807.
2. In each attached garage.
Chapter 5 Floors
R506 Concrete Floors (On Ground), Patios, Sidewalks, Aprons And Driveways
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 278/438
R506.1 General. Concrete slab-on-ground floors, patios, sidewalks, aprons, and driveways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the provisions of this section or ACI 332. Floors, patios, sidewalks, aprons and driveways shall be a minimum 31/2 inches (89mm) thick. The
specified compressive strength of concrete shall be as set forth in section R402.2.
Chapter 7 Wall Covering
R703.1 General. Exterior walls shall provide the building with a weather-resistant exterior wall envelope. The exterior envelope shall include
flashing as described in section R703.4. Wall assemblies shall be finished with an approved material. In addition to any material not permitted by
this code, the following finish materials shall be prohibited:
a. Unfinished, painted, sealed, or clear-coated above grade wall assemblies of the following types:
1. Cast-in-place concrete.
2. Precast concrete.
3. Smooth-face concrete masonry unit (CMU).
b. Any wall assembly - excluding windows - that causes a nuisance by the nature of its reflectivity.
For the purposes of this section, an above grade "wall assembly" shall be defined as a wall portion having the same construction type and/or
finish:
1. More than 50 percent above the adjacent finished grade, and/or
2. Having any part more than forty eight inches (48") above the adjacent finished grade.
Chapter 13 General Mechanical Systems Requirements
M1301.6 Mechanical Equipment To Be Screened. All exterior heating, air conditioning, ventilating, generators, pool heaters, or other
mechanical equipment shall be fully screened to prevent view of the equipment from any point along the finished grade at any front lot line or side
lot line of the lot on which the equipment is located. Screening materials shall be as approved by the building official. Deciduous or annual plants
shall not be approved as screening materials.
1301.7 Geothermal Well And Piping Locations. Geothermal well and piping locations shall be completely within the property lines of the subject
property and as prescribed by 1301.7.1 and 1301.7.2.
1301.7.1. No geothermal well or water intake shall be located in any easement and/or within ten feet (10') from any property lot line.
Exception: A geothermal well may be located at any location adjacent to public right-of-way provided that it is completely within the property
lines.
1301.7.2 No geothermal piping, intake or discharge shall be located in any body of water that is not completely contained within the property lines.
Chapter 29 Water Supply And Distribution
P2904.3.2 Shutoff Valves. Shutoff valves shall serve the entire water distribution system. The fire sprinkler system piping shall not have separate
shutoff or control valve(s) installed unless supervised by one of the following methods:
1. Central station, proprietary or remote station alarm service.
2. Local alarm service that causes the sounding of an audible signal at a constantly attended location.
3. Valves that are locked open.
P2904.5.1 Water Supply. Fire sprinkler water shall be supplied by the municipal water source and taken off after it has passed through the water
meter, as detailed in 2013 NFPA 13D figure A.6.2(c) "acceptable arrangement with valve supervision - option 2".
P2904.5.2 Reserved.
Appendix J Existing Buildings And Structures
AJ102.10 Conversion Into Habitable Space. When any area previously not approved or utilized as habitable space is converted into and/or
utilized as habitable space - regardless of the amount of construction work done in this area - it shall be considered as reconstruction and be
subject to the requirements of this chapter and the provisions of section R310 of this code.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 279/438
AJ102.11 Conversion Into A Sleeping Room. When any area previously not approved or utilized as a sleeping room is converted into and/or
utilized as a sleeping room - regardless of the amount of construction work that was or was not done in this conversion or change of utilization - it
shall be subject to all requirements for new construction of a sleeping room as found in this code.
C. International Mechanical Code Amendments:
Chapter 1 Administration
101.1 Title. Is amended by inserting the words "village of Oak Brook, IL."
102.8 Referenced Codes And Ordinances. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this
code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and referenced standards, the
provisions of this code shall apply. Where differences occur between provisions of this and any other provision of the village code, the most
restrictive provision shall apply.
106.4.3 Expiration. Every permit issued by the code official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if
the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 90 days from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 90 days. Before such work recommences, a new permit shall
be first obtained and the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided that changes have not been
made and will not be made in the original construction documents for such work, and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has
not exceeded one year.
106.5.2 Fee Schedule. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each
permit shall be paid as those specified in section 10-4-1 of the village code.
108.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects,
constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to fines and penalties as those specified in section 1-3-1 of the
village code.
109.1 Application For Appeal. A person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official. For the purposes of this code, all
appeals of decisions relating to this code shall be referred to the circuit court of DuPage County.
Subsections 109.2 through 109.7. Are deleted in their entirety.
Chapter 3 General Regulations
303.9 Mechanical Equipment To Be Screened. All exterior heating, air conditioning, ventilating, generators, pool heaters, or other mechanical
equipment shall be fully screened to prevent view of the equipment from any point at the finished grade along the front lot line or side lot line of
the lot on which the equipment is located. Screening materials shall be as approved by the building official. Deciduous or annual plants shall not
be approved as screening materials.
303.10 Geothermal Well And Piping Locations. Geothermal well and piping locations shall be completely within the property lines of the subject
property and as prescribed by 303.10.1 and 303.10.2.
303.10.1. No geothermal well or water intake shall be located in any easement and/or within ten feet (10') from any property lot line.
Exception: A geothermal well may be located at any location adjacent to public right-of-way provided that it is completely within the property
lines.
303.10.2 No geothermal piping, intake or discharge shall be located in any body of water that is not completely contained within the property lines.
309.1 Space-Heating Systems. Interior spaces intended for human occupancy shall be provided with space-heating systems capable of
maintaining a minimum indoor temperature of 65°F (18°C) at a point 3 feet (914 mm) above the floor on the design heating day.
Chapter 6 Duct Systems
602.3 Stud Cavity And Joist Space Plenums. Stud wall cavities and the spaces between solid floor joists shall not be utilized as ducts or
plenums.
D. State Of Illinois Plumbing Code Amendments:
Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Admin. Code 890 et seq adopted in section 10-1-1 of the village code is amended as follows:
All fees specified in the state of Illinois plumbing code shall be superseded and replaced by those set forth in section 10-4 of the village code.
Section 890.510 Grease Interceptor Requirements. Is amended by replacing subsection 2), entitled "Minimum Size," of subsection a), with the
following:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 280/438
"Minimum Size. A grease interceptor installed on the same floor as the fixture shall have 100 percent the liquid holding capacity of the fixture. A
grease interceptor located on a floor below the fixture shall have 100 percent of the liquid-holding capacity of the fixture. To determine the liquidholding
capacity in gallons of a plumbing fixture, the length is multiplied by the width by the height in inches and divided by 231. Where two or
more sinks or receptacles are connected to an interceptor the liquid holding capacity shall be based on the combined volume of the fixtures
served."
Section 890.630 Installation. Is amended by replacing the last sentence of subsection e, entitled "Portable Water Supply Connection," with the
following:
"Where present, each lavatory sink faucet shall have supply pipes that are accessible."
Section 890.640 Prohibited Fixtures. Is amended by replacing subsection a) with the following:
"Drinking fountains shall not be installed in public toilet rooms, colonic irrigation therapy rooms, or laboratories for removing blood, pus or other
bodily fluids."
Section 890.746 Colonic Irrigation Units. Add a new section 890.746 as follows:
"Section 890.746 Colonic Irrigation Units.
a) Colonic irrigation systems connected to the water supply shall be provided with backflow protection.
b) A reduced pressure principle backflow assembly conforming to ASSE 1013, or a fixed air gap, shall be installed on each colonic irrigation unit
or group of colonic irrigation units.
c) If a colonic irrigation unit has a water outlet below the flood rim level of an attached drain, then an approved reduced principle pressure
backflow preventer assembly, a fixed air gap, an air vent hole, or an approved vacuum breaker shall protect the water supply from each unit."
Section 890.1140 Special Applications And Installations.
d) Lawn Sprinklers. Any lawn sprinkler system connected to a potable water supply shall be equipped with an RPZ. The RPZ may be located
outside provided that it is protected from freezing or is removed at the end of the season, and it complies with section 890.1130(g)(1). All new
plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed after the effective date of this ordinance shall bear the WaterSense label (as designated by the
U.S. environmental protection agency WaterSense program), when such labeled fixtures are available.
h) 1) A) Aspirators. If aspirators are used in operating rooms, emergency rooms, recovery rooms, delivery rooms, autopsy rooms, dental offices,
colonic irrigation rooms, and laboratories for removing blood, pus or other fluids, a vacuum breaker shall be installed on the discharge side of the
control valve, at ceiling height (a minimum of 7 feet, 6 inches) and the water supply shall be protected against backflow and back siphonage by an
air gap; or an RPZ shall be used.
Section 890.1150 Water Service Pipe Installation. Replace subsection 3) of subsection a), entitled "Underground Water Service," with the
following:
3) The minimum depth for any water service pipe shall be at least 60 inches.
Section 890.1200 Water Service Sizing.
a) Water Service Pipe Sizing. The water service pipe from the street main (including the tap) to the water distribution system for the building shall
be sized in accordance with appendix A, tables M, N, O, P and Q. Water service pipe and fittings shall be at least 11/2 inch diameter. If
flushometers or other devices requiring a high rate of water flow are used, the water service pipe shall be designed and installed to provide this
additional flow.
Section 890.1230 Safety Devices. In subsection 2) of subsection d), entitled "Relief Discharge Outlet," add "but no closer than as specified in
appendix A, table C," between "receptor" and "the end,".
Section 890 Illustrations For Subpart I. In illustration L and illustration M, replace "Relief Valve Discharge Piping Lower End To Be Open With A
Minimum 6" Air Gap" with the following:
"Relief Valve Discharge Piping Lower End To Be Open With A Maximum 6" Air Gap But No Closer Than As Specified In Appendix A, Table C."
Section 890.1320 Drainage System Installation. Delete from subsection l), entitled "Fixture Connections", "and fittings for circuit vented fixtures".
Section 890.1340 Determination Of Sizes For Drainage System.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 281/438
b) 2) Pressure building drains may be installed to prevent sewer back up in a basement, cellar, crawl space or other area where any portion of the
floor surface is below grade. Pressure-building drains shall not be used where gravity drains may otherwise be installed. Pressure-building drains
shall be sized in accordance with the ejector pump manufacturer's recommendation, but shall not be less than 2 inches in diameter.
b) 4) No portion of the drainage system installed underground or below a basement or cellar shall be less than 4 inches in diameter. The venting
system is excluded from this requirement.
Section 890.1370 Floor Drains. In subsection b), entitled "Size," replace "2 inches" with "4 inches".
Section 890.1390. Add a new section 890.1390 as follows:
Section 890.1390.
Section 890.1390.1 Building Subdrains. Building subdrains that cannot be discharged to the sewer by gravity flow shall be discharged into a
tightly covered and vented sump from which the liquid shall be lifted and discharged into the building gravity drainage system by automatic pumping
equipment or other approved method. In other than existing structures, the sump shall not receive drainage from any piping within the building
capable of being discharged by gravity to the building sewer.
Exception: Sanitary pump (ejector) pits with overhead drainage may be installed to prevent sewer back up in a basement, cellar, crawl space, or
other area where any portion of the floor surface is below grade.
Section 890.1390.2 Valves Required. A check valve and a full open valve located on the discharge side of the check valve shall be installed in the
pump or ejector discharge piping between the pump or ejector and the gravity drainage system. Access shall be provided to such valves. Such
valves shall be located above the sump cover or, where the discharge pipe from the ejector is below grade, the valves shall be located outside the
sump below grade in an access pit with a removable access cover.
Section 890.1390.3 Sump Design. The sump pump, pit, and discharge piping shall conform to the requirements of sections 890.1390.3.1 through
890.1390.3.5.
890.1390.3.1 Sump Pump. The sump pump capacity and head shall be appropriate to anticipated use requirements.
890.1390.3.2. Sump Pit. The sump pit shall be not less than 18 inches (457 mm) in diameter and 24 inches (610 mm) deep, unless otherwise
approved. The pit shall be accessible and located such that all drainage flows into the pit by gravity.
The sump pit shall be constructed of tile, concrete, steel, plastic or other approved materials. The pit bottom shall be solid and provide permanent
support for the pump. The sump pit shall be fitted with a gas-tight removable cover adequate to support the anticipated loads in the area of use.
The sump pit shall be vented in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code.
890.1390.3.3 Discharge Piping. Discharge piping shall meet the requirements of section 890.1390.2.
890.1390.3.4 Maximum Effluent Level. The effluent level control shall be adjusted and maintained to at all times prevent the effluent in the sump
from rising within 2 inches (51mm) of the invert of the gravity drain inlet into the sump.
890.1390.3.5 Ejector Connection To The Drainage System. Pumps connected to the drainage system shall connect to the building sewer or shall
connect to a wye fitting in the building drain a minimum of 10 feet (3048 mm) from the base of any soil stack, waste stack or fixture drain. Where the
discharge line connects into horizontal drainage piping, the connector shall be made through a wye fitting into the top of the drainage piping.
890.1390.4 Sewage Pumps And Sewage Ejectors. A sewage pump or sewage ejector shall automatically discharge the contents of the sump into
the building drainage system.
890.1390.4.1 Reserved.
890.1390.4.2 Capacity. A sewage pump or sewage ejector shall have the capacity and head for the application requirements. Pumps or ejectors
that receive the discharge of water closets shall be capable of handling spherical solids with a diameter of up to and including 2 inches (51 mm).
Other pumps or ejectors shall be capable of handling spherical solids with a diameter of up to and including 1 inch (25.4 mm). The minimum
capacity of a pump or ejector based on the diameter of the discharge pipe shall be in accordance with table 890.1390.4.2.
Exceptions:
1. Grinder pumps or grinder ejectors that receive discharges of water closets shall have a minimum discharge opening of 1.25 inches (32 mm).
2. Macerating toilet assemblies that serve single water closets shall have a minimum discharge opening of 0.75 inch (19 mm).
Table 890.1390.4.2:
Minimum Capacity Of Sewage Pump Or Sewage Ejector
Diameter Of The
Discharge Pipe (Inches)
Capacity Of Pump Or
Ejector (g.p.m.)
2 21
21/2 30
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 282/438
3 46
Section 890.1450 Vent Grades And Connections. Delete subsection d), entitled "Heel Or Side-Inlet Bend".
Section 890.1480 Type Of Fixture Trap Vents. Delete subsections c) and d).
Section 890.1490 Installation Of Vents For Fixture Traps. Replace section 890.1490 with the following:
"Section 890.1490 Installation Of Vents For Fixture Traps.
a) Hydraulic Gradient. Fixture drains shall be vented within the hydraulic gradient between the trap outlet and the junction with another drain. The
hydraulic gradient as applied to a gravity drain and its vent connection is interpreted as the grade line.
b) Different Level. If any stack has fixtures entering at different levels, the fixtures other than the fixtures entering at the highest level shall be
vented, except as otherwise provided. (See section 890.1510.)
c) Horizontal Branch Drains. Where a water closet discharges into a branch drain, each fixture discharging into that branch drain shall be
individually vented."
Section 890.1500 Installation Of Wet Venting. Delete section 890.1500 in its entirety.
Section 890.1520 Circuit And Loop Venting. Delete section 890.1520 in its entirety.
Section 890 Table A Approved Materials And Standards. Delete numbers 1, 4, and 8-12 under "Approved Materials For Water Service Pipe".
Section 890 Table B Minimum Number Of Plumbing Fixtures. Add the following to table B:
Type of building Medical or therapeutic occupancies where colonic irrigation or other similar activities occur.
Water closet 1 water closet - directly accessed from the treatment room - in addition to any other fixtures required by this code*.
Lavatories 1 lavatory - in or accessed directly from the treatment room - in addition to any other fixtures required by this code.*
*Drinking fountains Prohibited in the treatment room.
Other fixtures 1 service sink per suite or office, in addition to any other fixtures required by this code.
*It is the intent of this section to allow a single toilet room to directly connect multiple treatment rooms - provided that there is no travel required
through any adjacent hall, room, or other space.
E. National Electrical Code Amendments:
Article 90 Introduction
Subsection 90-4 Enforcement. Is amended by adding the following:
In addition to the responsibilities set forth in section 2-3-2 of the village code for the electrical commission, a person shall have the right to appeal
a decision. For the purposes of this code, all appeals of decisions relating to this code shall be referred to the circuit court of DuPage County.
Article 100 Definitions
Qualified Person. One who has skills and knowledge related to the construction and operation of the electrical equipment and installations and
has received safety training to recognize and avoid the hazards involved.
For the purposes of installing, constructing, altering, repairing, maintaining, or performing similar electrical work on class 1 circuits as regulated by
this code, a qualified person shall be required to personally perform the permitted work. The qualified person shall provide the village of Oak
Brook with current and valid documentation of such qualifications - as evidenced by:
5. An electrician's license - valid for the proposed scope of work- issued, after testing, by a unit of government, or
6. A certification of qualifications - valid for the proposed scope of work - issued, after testing, by IEIA, ICC or similar certifying agency or
7. Other documentation as acceptable to the building official.
Exception: Owner-occupants of single-family dwellings. This exception does not include any person who is not an owner-occupant of the
premises - regardless of relationship to owner, occupant, or financial considerations.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 283/438
Article 110 Requirements For Electrical Installations
110.26 (B) Clear Spaces. In other than dwelling units, the required clear space shall be clearly and permanently delineated by construction or
floor pattern, material or color, or as otherwise approved by the authority having jurisdiction.
Article 210 Branch Circuits
210.12 (B) Guest Rooms, Guest Suites, Dormitories, Assisted Living, And Similar Occupancies. All 120-volt, single-phase, 15- and 20-
ampere branch circuits supplying outlets installed in bedrooms, living rooms, hallways, closets, and similar rooms shall be protected by a listed
arc-fault circuit interrupter meeting the requirements of 210.12(A)(1) through (6) as appropriate.
210.60 Guest Rooms, Guest Suites, Dormitories, Assisted Living, and Similar Occupancies.
(A) General. Guest rooms or guest suites in hotels, motels, sleeping rooms in dormitories, assisted living, and similar occupancies shall have
receptacle outlets installed in accordance with 210.52(A) and (D). Guest rooms or guest suites provided with permanent provisions for cooking
shall have receptacle outlets installed in accordance with all of the applicable rules in 210.52.
(B) Receptacle Placement. In applying the provisions of 210.52(A), the total number of receptacle outlets shall not be less than the minimum
number that would comply with the provisions of that section. These receptacle outlets shall be permitted to be located conveniently for
permanent furniture layout. At least two receptacle outlets shall be readily accessible. Where receptacles are installed behind the bed, the
receptacle shall be located to prevent the bed from contacting any attachment plug that may be installed or the receptacle shall be provided
with a suitable guard.
Article 334 Nonmetallic-Sheathed Cable: Types NM, NMC AND NMS
334.10 Uses Permitted. Type NM, type NMC, and type NMS cables shall be permitted to be used as temporary wiring by special permission of
the authority having jurisdiction, except as prohibited in 334.12:
334.10 (A) Type NM cable shall be permitted as a component of a listed and approved assembly only when both of the following conditions are
met:
(a) To replace the type NM would void the listing of the assembly or component.
(b) The type NM is terminated at the closest reasonable location.
334.10 (B) Type NMC cable shall be permitted as a component of a listed and approved assembly only when both of the following conditions are
met:
(a) To replace the type NMC would void the listing of the assembly or component.
(b) The type NMC is terminated at the closest reasonable location.
334.10 (C) Type NMS cable shall be permitted as a component of a listed and approved assembly only when both of the following conditions are
met:
(a) To replace the type NMS would void the listing of the assembly or component.
(b) The type NMS is terminated at the closest reasonable location.
Article 362 Electrical Nonmetallic Tubing Type ENT
362.12 Uses Not Permitted. ENT shall not be used in the following:
(1) In any hazardous (classified) location, except as permitted by other articles in this code.
(2) For the support of luminaires and other equipment.
(3) Where subject to ambient temperatures in excess of 50°C (122°F) unless listed otherwise.
(4) For direct earth burial.
(5) Where the voltage is over 600 volts.
(6) In exposed locations, except as permitted by 362.10(1), 362.10(5), and 362.10(7).
(7) In theaters and similar locations, except as provided in 518.4 and 520.5.
(8) Where exposed to the direct rays of the sun, unless identified as sunlight resistant.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 284/438
(9) Where subject to physical damage.
(10) Where the voltage is over 50 volts.
F. State Of Illinois Safety Code For Elevators And Escalators: State of Illinois safety code for elevators and escalators is adopted without amendment per
agreement between the village of Oak Brook and the office of the state fire marshal dated October 15, 2008.
G. International Property Maintenance Code Amendments:
Chapter 1 Administration
101.1 Title. Is amended by inserting the words "village of Oak Brook, IL".
102.7 Referenced Codes And Standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in chapter 8 and
considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of
this code, the referenced standards and the village codes, the more restrictive provisions apply.
103.1 General. The official responsible for administration and enforcement of this code shall be known as the building official. Where references
are made to the chief code official through the code, the title building official shall be substituted.
103.2 Appointment. Is deleted in its entirety.
103.3 Deputies. The building official is authorized to designate one or more employees as deputies who may exercise all powers of the building
official under the direction of the official.
103.6 Fees. Is deleted in its entirety.
104.4 Right Of Entry. The building official, or his designee, is authorized to enter the structure or premises during reasonable times to conduct an
inspection. Prior to entering into a space not otherwise open to the general public, the building official, or his designee, shall make a reasonable
effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises, present proper identification and request entry. If
requested entry is refused or not obtained, the building official, or his designee, shall pursue recourse as provided by law including, but not limited
to, the obtaining of a warrant.
106.1 Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, maintain, fail to maintain,
provide, fail to provide, occupy, let to another or occupy or permit another person to occupy any premises, property, structure or equipment
regulated by this article, or cause same to be done contrary to or in conflict with or in violation of the provisions of this article, or to fail to obey a
lawful order of the building official, or his designee, or to remove or deface a placard or notice posted under the provisions of this article.
107.3 Method Of Service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
1. Delivered personally; or
2. Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or
3. Posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice.
110.1 General. The code official shall order the owner or owner's authorized agent of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in
the code official's or owner's authorized agent judgment after review is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be
dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to
demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to
board up and hold for future repair or to demolish and remove at the owner's option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction
of any structure for a period of more than ninety (90) days, the code official may order the owner or owner's authorized agent to demolish and
remove such structure, or board up until future repair. Boarding the building up for future repair shall not extend beyond one hundred eighty (180)
days, unless approved by the building official.
110.1.1 Semi-Annual Permit. A semi-annual permit is required for the installation and/or continuance of boarding on a vacant building. The
building official is authorized to approve additional permit(s) for individual cases, upon application of the owner or the owner's authorized agent,
providing that the applicant demonstrates approved cause and provides an approved plan and timeframe for restoration or demolition of the
building. The details of action granting the additional permit(s) shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department of building safety.
110.2 Notices And Orders. Notices and orders shall comply with section 107.
110.3 Failure To Comply. If the owner of a premises or owner's authorized agent fails to comply with a demolition order within the time
prescribed, the code official shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by contract or
arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure
is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
111.2 Membership Of Board. For the purposes of this code, all appeals of decisions relating to this code shall be referred to the circuit court of
DuPage County.
111.2.1 - 111.8. Are deleted in their entirety.
Chapter 2 Definitions
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 285/438
"Responsible Party. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance
of buildings, structures and premises. In addition, any other person or entity who may be reasonably considered to have a role or responsibility in
the creation, continuation, or correction of any violation of this code shall be a responsible party or additional responsible party for such violation."
Chapter 3 General Requirements
301.2 Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements,
except as otherwise provided for in this code. In addition, any other person or entity who may be reasonably considered to have a role or
responsibility in the creation, continuation or correction of any violation of this code shall be a responsible party or additional responsible party for
such violation.
A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and
which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for
keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they occupy
and control.
302.4 Weeds.
1. Weeds And Overgrown Lawns Declared A Nuisance. All weeds and grass exceeding eight inches in height found growing in any lot or tract
of land in the village are hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful to permit any such weeds or grass to grow in excess of eight
inches.
Exception: Property owned by a unit of government, dedicated for recreation, flood control, and/or conservation.
2. Removal Notice. The village may serve a notice upon the owner of any premises on which weeds or grass are permitted to grow in
violation of the provisions of this section demanding the cutting of such weeds and grass within five (5) days from the date of such notice. The
notice shall be personally served on, or sent by certified mail to the person who was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for
the last preceding year.
3. Costs Of Removal. If a person so served does not cut the weeds or grass within five days of the personal service or mailing of the notice,
the village may proceed to cut the weeds or grass keeping an account of the expense of the cutting and such expense shall be charged to
and paid by such owner.
4. Lien. Charges for weed or grass cutting shall be a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all other liens and encumbrances except
tax liens; provided that within 60 days after such cost and expense is incurred, the village, or the person performing the service by authority of
the village files a notice of lien in the office of the recorder of deeds. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out a description of
the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service,
and the date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the village. A notice and copy of the lien shall be personally served on, or
sent by certified mail to, the person who was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the last preceding year.
302.10 Maintenance Of Water Features. All existing private and public water features, including stormwater retention/detention facilities, must be
kept clear of garbage and debris, and any such area not occupied by water must be kept mowed in accordance with the provisions of this code.
Facilities designed to hold water on a continuous basis must be maintained so as to prevent such water from becoming a breeding site for
mosquitoes or from becoming a nuisance due to odor or stagnation. Whenever any facility in the village that is designated and approved as a
stormwater management facility does not function as was originally designed, whether because of damage or because of falling into a state of
disrepair, it shall be repaired and brought into compliance with its original design specifications, subject to the approval of the village engineer.
302.11 Storage Of Construction Materials. Construction materials, including, but not limited to, bricks, lumber, piles of dirt, stone, aggregate or
other debris, shall not be stored in any exterior property area except in cases where construction is taking place. In such cases, compliance must
be achieved within thirty (30) days of completion of the construction activity.
302.12 Storage Of Non-Construction Materials. Non-construction materials, including, but not limited to machinery, discarded appliances,
furniture, household items and other similar items, shall not be stored in any exterior property area unless completely screened by view from all
adjacent properties and rights of way.
302.13 Trees, Shrubs, Vines And Other Greenery Causing Obstructions Or Other Dangerous Conditions. Trees, shrubs, vines and other
greenery causing obstructions or other dangerous conditions shall be subject to section 8-4-2 of the village code.
302.14 Storage Of Refuse. Storage of refuse shall be subject to section 4-3-9 of the village code.
304.3 Street Numbers. New and existing buildings shall be provided with approved address identification. The address identification shall be
legible and placed in a position that is visible from the street or road fronting the property. Address identification characters shall contrast with their
background. Address numbers shall be arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be not less
than 4 inches (102 mm) in height with a stroke width of not less than 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). Where required by the fire code official, address
identification shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road and
the building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure.
Address identification shall be maintained.
304.14 Insect Screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food
service areas, or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or
stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than sixteen (16) mesh per inch (16 mesh/25mm) and every swinging
door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 286/438
Exception: Screen doors shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellant fans, are employed.
302.15 Exterior Lighting Nuisance. New and existing exterior lighting shall be designed, installed, and maintained to prevent nuisance:
1. Appropriate lighting zones and exterior power allowances for new and/or modified systems shall be per table 302.15.
2. The direct light from individual luminaries and light reflected from solid surfaces on the site shall not exceed the threshold values defined in
table 302.15 at any point along the property line of the impacted property.
Table 302.15
Maximum Line Of Sight Illuminance At
Any Vertical Plane Boundary
Impacted
Property Lighting
Zone 0
Lighting
Zone 1
Lighting
Zone 2
Lighting
Zone 3
Lighting
Zone 4
Undeveloped
areas of parks,
forest land, and
rural areas
Developed areas
of parks, forest
land, and rural
areas
Areas predominantly consisting of residential zoning,
neighborhood business districts, light industrial with
limited nighttime use and residential mixed use areas
All
other
areas
High-activity commercial
districts as designated by
the community
development department
Maximum
illuminance
0.5 lux
(0.05 fc)
1.0 lux
(0.10 fc)
3.0 lux
(0.30 fc)
8.0 lux
(0.8 fc)
15.0 lux
(1.5 fc)
309.1 Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be
promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent
infestation. All exterior premises in which insects or rodents are found to be detrimental to public health, safety or welfare shall be promptly
exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
reinfestation.
Chapter 6 Mechanical And Electrical Requirements
602.3 Heat Supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or
guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period of October 15 to May
15 to maintain a temperature of not less than sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (65°F) (18°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
Exception: When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room
temperature shall not be required, provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design
temperature shall be as indicated in the village of Oak Brook amendments to the international residential code.
602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. Is amended by the insertion of the following dates: "October 15 to May 15".
Chapter 7 Fire Safety Requirements
704.1 General. Systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall
be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the international fire code. At the time of construction, a clear and
unobstructed, accessible floor space with the minimum dimensions of 30"w x 36"d x 80"h shall be provided at each of the following:
a. Fire alarm pull station.
b. Fire hydrant.
c. Standpipe.
Appendix A Boarding Standard
A101.1 Windows and doors shall be secured in an approved manner to prevent entry by unauthorized persons, opaque surfaces shall be painted
to correspond to the color of the existing structure.
A101.1.1 A semi-annual permit shall be required for new and existing boarding.
H. International Energy Conservation Code: International energy conservation code is adopted - as amended by title 71: Public Buildings, Facilities, And
Real Property, chapter I: Capital Development Board, subchapter d: Energy Codes, part 600 Illinois energy conservation code, section 1060. Appendix
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 287/438
A supplanted and additional 2015 international energy conservation code sections.
I. International Existing Building Code Amendments:
Chapter 1 Scope And Administration
101.1. Is amended by inserting "village of Oak Brook".
112 Board Of Appeals. Is renamed "Appeals".
112.1 General. A person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official. For the purposes of this code, all appeals of decisions
relating to this code shall be referred to the circuit court of DuPage County.
112.2 Limitations On Authority. Is deleted in its entirety.
112.3 Qualifications. Is deleted in its entirety.
113.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects,
constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to fines and penalties as those specified in section 1-3-1 of the
village code.
Chapter 8 Alterations - Level 2
804.2.2 Automatic Sprinkler Protection In Work Areas. Work areas shall be provided with automatic sprinkler protection where all of the
following conditions occur:
1. The work area is required to be provided with automatic sprinkler protection in accordance with the international fire code, as adopted and
amended by the village of Oak Brook, as applicable to new construction;
2. The cumulative work area exceeds 1,000 square feet within a five year period;
Where more than 50 percent of the total floor area of the building or structure have been or are proposed to be involved in an alteration within a
five year period, level 3 provisions for automatic sprinkler protection shall apply.
Exceptions:
1. Existing, legally occupied R-2 occupancies.
2. Existing, legally occupied R-3 single family occupancies as regulated by the international residential code.
Chapter 9 Alterations - Level 3
904.1 Automatic Sprinkler Protection. Buildings undergoing level 3 alterations shall be provided with automatic sprinkler protection in
accordance with the international fire code, as adopted and amended by the village of Oak Brook, as applicable to new construction;
Where more than 50 percent of the total floor area of the building or structure have been or are proposed to be involved in an alteration within a
five year period, level 3 provisions for automatic sprinkler protection shall apply.
Exceptions:
1. Existing, legally occupied R-2 occupancies.
2. Existing, legally occupied R-3 single family occupancies as regulated by the international residential code.
Chapter 14 Performance Compliance Methods
1401.2. Is amended by inserting the date December 12, 1958.
J. International Fuel Gas Code Amendments:
Chapter 1 Scope And Administration
101.1. Is amended by inserting "village of Oak Brook".
106.6 Fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit
shall be paid as those specified in section 10-4-1 of the village code.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 288/438
108.4 Violation Penalties. "Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects,
constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to fines and penalties as those specified in section 1-3-1 of the
village code."
109 Means Of Appeal. Is renamed "Appeals".
109.1 through 109.7. Are deleted in their entirety and are replaced to read as follows:
109.1 Appeals. A person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official. For the purposes of this code, all appeals of decisions
relating to this code shall be referred to the circuit court of DuPage County.
K. International Swimming Pool And Spa Code Amendments:
Chapter 1 Scope And Administration
101.1. Is amended by inserting "village of Oak Brook".
105.5.3 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 90 days after its
issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 90 days after the time the work is commenced. The
code official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for a period not more than 90 days. The extension shall be
requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
105.6.2 Fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit
shall be paid as those specified in section 10-4-1 of the village code.
107 Violation Penalties. "Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects,
constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to fines and penalties as those specified in section 1-3-1 of the
village code."
108 Means Of Appeal. Is renamed "Appeals".
108.1 through 108.7. Are deleted in their entirety and are replaced to read as follows:
108.1 Appeals. A person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official. For the purposes of this code, all appeals of decisions
relating to this code shall be referred to the circuit court of DuPage County.
L. International Plumbing Code Amendments:
Chapter 1 Scope And Administration
101.1. Is amended by inserting "village of Oak Brook".
101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall be limited to subjects not expressly governed by the state of Illinois plumbing code, 2014 edition,
published by the Illinois department of public health. This code shall also regulate nonflammable medical gas, inhalation anesthetic, vacuum
piping, nonmedical oxygen systems and sanitary and condensate vacuum collection systems. The installation of fuel gas distribution piping and
equipment, fuel-gas-fired water heaters and water heater venting systems shall be regulated by the international fuel gas code. Provisions in the
appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted. Appendices C & F are specifically adopted.
102.8 Referenced Codes And Standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those listed in chapter 13 and such codes
and standards shall be considered as part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each reference. Where differences occur
between the provision of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall be the minimum requirements. Where
differences occur between provisions of this code and any other provision of the village code, the most restrictive provision shall apply.
106.6 Fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit
shall be paid as those specified in section 10-4-1 of the village code.
108.4 Violation Penalties. "Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects,
constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to fines and penalties as those specified in section 1-3-1 of the
village code."
109 Appeal. "A person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official. For the purposes of this code, all appeals of decisions
relating to this code shall be referred to the circuit court of DuPage County."
Chapter 3 General Regulations
305.6.1. Is amended by the insertion of the numbers 18 and 48.
Chapter 4 Installation Of Fixtures
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 289/438
Chapter 4. Is deleted in its entirety, and replaced with:
401.1 Installation Of Water Closets, Urinals, Lavatories And Bidets. A water closet, urinal, lavatory or bidet shall not be set closer than 15
inches (381 mm) from its center to any side wall, partition, vanity or other obstruction, or closer than 30 inches (762 mm) center to center between
adjacent fixtures. There shall be not less than a 21-inch (533 mm) clearance in front of the water closet, urinal, lavatory or bidet to any wall, fixture
or door. Water closet compartments shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in width and not less than 60 inches (1524 mm) in depth for floor
mounted water closets and not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in width and 56 inches (1422 mm) in depth for wall hung water closets.
Chapters 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 & 10. Are deleted in their entirety, without replacement.
Chapter 11 Storm Drainage
1106.1 General. The size of the vertical conductors and leaders, building storm drains, building storm sewers and any horizontal branches of
such drains or sewers shall be based on the 100-year hourly rainfall rate of four inches (4").
Appendices C and F. Are adopted without amendment.
(Ord. G-1084, 9-27-2016)
10-1-3: DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT:
Whenever in this title the term "building official" is used, it shall mean the director of community development, or his designee, who are authorized and
directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this title, making such determinations, interpretations and orders as are necessary therefor and
requiring such plats, plans and other descriptive material as are necessary for him to judge compliance with this title. (Ord. G-160, 6-11-1974; Ord. G-652,
12-14-1999)
10-1-4: NUMBERING BUILDINGS:
A. Except as otherwise passed by the board approval, on the recommendation of the director of community development, building numbers within the
village shall correspond with the grid lines established on the annexed plat of the village, which said plat is hereby incorporated by reference. Such
numbers shall progress uniformly to meet the number designation on the next succeeding grid line.
B. All houses or buildings located on the north and west sides of respective streets shall bear even numbers and all houses or buildings located on the
east and south sides of respective streets shall bear odd numbers.
C. It shall be the duty of the office of the director of community development, upon request, to issue and designate numbers for all buildings within the
village in accordance with the system hereby adopted.
D. The numbering system within the confines of the Ginger Creek Subdivision shall correspond to the system designated on the attached plat of that
subdivision, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this section. (Ord. G-30, 12-12-1961)
10-1-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this title,
including provisions adopted by reference, or who refuses to remedy a violation of any such provisions, shall be fined as prescribed in section 1-3-1 of
this code for each offense; and each day upon which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Any person licensed or registered by the state or a subdivision thereof to do work regulated by this title, or to render professional architectural or
engineering service, who violates the law or provisions of this title under which licensed or registered shall be subject to proceedings or action to
revoke the certificate of license or registration.
C. When a building or structure or part or appurtenance thereof is found by competent authorities to be maintained in a condition not reasonably safe from
the hazards of fire, explosion, collapse, contagion or spread of infectious disease, the owner thereof, upon order from the village president and board
of trustees, and after due notice, shall be liable for correction or removal of the condition or the cost thereof upon failure to act.
D. A penalty, shall be added to all permits upon the issuance of said permit in cases where work has commenced prior to the issuance of said permit.
(Ord. G-160, 6-11-1974; Ord. G-426, 3-14-1989)
10-1-6: DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION SITE MANAGEMENT:
An applicant for a building permit shall be responsible for safe and orderly construction site management during all phases of permitted work. The
following minimum requirements shall be met prior to the commencement of work and throughout the duration of the project. In addition, all applicable
sections of the village code shall be met.
A. Safeguards: Safeguards during commercial and residential construction shall conform to international building code chapter 33 as adopted and
amended within this title.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 290/438
B. Debris Control And Site Cleanup: Debris and refuse containment shall be required for all job sites. Containment shall occur on the property that is the
subject of the permit (and not on public property) and shall be within either a covered dumpster or container of sufficient size to prevent windblown
debris. The dumpster or container shall be set back on the site as far as possible and be no closer than ten feet (10') from any side lot line. All such
dumpsters or containers shall be maintained to prevent windblown debris when work is not being performed on the property. At the end of each
workday, all windblown material, debris and litter shall be picked up and placed in the dumpster or container.
C. Construction Traffic Management: Prior to the issuance of a permit for demolition or construction of a new principal structure, the applicant shall submit
a plan to the building official showing the location that the construction and worker vehicles will park. Parking of vehicles must not obstruct or limit the
use of any adjacent roadway, private driveway, mailbox, fire hydrant or create a site distance problem with an adjacent intersection. The parking plan
shall be subject to approval by the department of community development, shall be a part of the permit, and a copy shall be posted on the construction
site. The permittee shall be responsible for compliance with the approved parking plan. Failure to post a copy of the plan on the site will be cause for
possible issuance of a stop work order.
D. Sanitation Facilities: Sanitation facilities in conformance with the international plumbing code shall be available on site prior to any work commencing
on the property. Portable toilet(s) shall not be located on public property, including any street, parkway or sidewalk. Such facility shall not be located
within ten feet (10') of any property line and shall be serviced on a regular basis.
E. Dust Abatement: Dust and debris abatement for all construction activities shall be in conformance with international building code section 3307.2 as
adopted and amended within this title.
F. Weeds And Grass: Weeds and grass shall conform to international property maintenance code section 302.4 as adopted and amended within this title.
In addition, the application for a permit shall constitute notice to the applicant and permit holder, no additional notice shall be required until a final
certificate of occupancy is issued. Failure to maintain grass and weeds shall be adequate cause for the immediate posting of a "stop work" order.
Repeat and/or continued offenses shall be adequate cause for the building official to suspend the permit pursuant to section 105.6.1 of the
international building code or section R105.6.1 of the international residential code as adopted and amended within this title.
G. Written Notice Of Applicant: Notice of the filing of an application for a demolition permit of a single-family dwelling shall be given to all residents of
property within two hundred fifty feet (250') of any part of the subject property and applicable homeowner association by the applicant. Such notice
shall be on a form provided by the village and shall be given by first class mail. The applicant shall provide the names and addresses of all notified
property owners to the village along with a certificate of mailing. The notices shall be sent at least ten (10) days prior to the permit being approved and
said permit will not be approved without said ten (10) days' notice.
H. Schedule And Cash Bond: The permit application for demolition and/or construction of a new principal structure shall include a schedule of all planned
activities including:
1. Installation of fencing.
2. Installation of temporary erosion control measures.
3. Building demolition.
4. Excavation.
5. Backfilling of the building excavation.
6. Building under roof.
7. Completion of exterior finishes.
8. Rough and final grading.
9. Six inch (6") topsoil placement.
10. Seeding or sodding of all disturbed areas.
Such schedule shall be subject to approval by the department of community development. The applicant shall provide the estimated area of
disturbance and provide an estimate of the cost for the planned activities (excluding the cost of demolition and subsections H6 and H7 of this
section) which shall be reviewed and approved by the village engineer. The village engineer shall approve said estimated area and costs or require
them to be corrected. The applicant shall post with the village a cash bond in an amount equal to not less than one hundred ten percent (110%) of
the approved estimated cost. Said cash bond shall meet the requirements of subsection 9-6-1B1 of this code. Upon completion of the required work
listed in this subsection H, said cash bond, or any unused balance shall be refunded.
I. Expiration Of Permit: Residential permits shall conform to section R105.5 of the international residential code as adopted and amended herein, all other
permits shall conform to section 105.5 of the international building code as adopted and amended herein. This provision is in addition to and does not
negate the provisions of subsection 9-6-1B1 of this code.
J. Tree Preservation And Protection: For all demolition permits, the applicant shall submit a detailed tree survey which shows the location of all trees with
a minimum diameter of eight inches (8") as measured twelve inches (12") above ground. The plan shall be subject to approval by the building official
and shall be a part of the permit and include a statement of anticipated damage to or removal of trees on the subject property and measures to be
taken to protect the trees such as pruning, root pruning, use of retaining walls or protective fencing, auguring of utility lines to improve the survivability
of the trees and any other protective measures to be taken by the permittee.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 291/438
K. Hours Of Construction: Except as provided in subsections A, B, C and D of this section no person or entity shall perform construction activities, perform
any activity requiring a building permit, or operate heavy equipment, except as follows:
Location
Day Of
The Week
Permitted Time
Residential zone districts - interior or exterior:
Hand tools may be used at any time within the interior of a fully enclosed structure provided that
there is no construction related sound heard at the property line
Monday -
Friday
Heavy equipment - between
7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M.
Other tools - between 7:00 A.M.
and 8:00 P.M.
Saturday Heavy equipment - between
9:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M.
Other tools - between 8:00 A.M.
and 7:00 P.M.
Sunday Heavy equipment - not
permitted
Other tools - between 9:00 A.M.
and 6:00 P.M.
All other zone districts - exterior* Any Heavy equipment - between
6:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M.
Other tools - between 6:00 A.M.
and 8:00 P.M.
*Exception: Any property that shares a lot line with a residential zone district, within 500 feet of
the residential zone district
Any Heavy equipment - same as
residential zone districts
All other zone districts - interior Any Other tools - any
Hand tools - any
1. Definitions: For the purposes of this subsection:
HAND TOOLS: Tubing cutters, volt-ohm meters, manual pipe benders, pliers, wrenches, screwdrivers, paint brushes, rollers, torches, brooms, and
similar tools that are substantially silent in operation. "Hand tools" shall not include hammers or any other item used as a striking implement.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT: Gasoline or diesel powered air compressors, gasoline or diesel powered saws, bulldozers, jackhammers, pile drivers, power
hammers, graders, riveters, earthmovers, tree and stump grinders, trenchers, cement mixers, tractors, power hoists or derricks, demolition balls,
power shovels, dump trucks, and power equipment on wheels or traction chains, or other similar equipment, but shall not include garbage trucks,
which are governed by separate agreement within the village, nonconstruction delivery vehicles, trucks operating on designated truck routes, or
snow removal equipment.
OTHER TOOLS: Any construction tool that is neither defined herein as "hand tools" or "heavy equipment". Other tools shall include, but not be
limited to: electric compressors, nailers, hammers, cord connected electric saws, drills, or similar equipment. It is anticipated that "other tools" will
create a sound level that can be heard at the property line.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICT: Shall include all zone districts R1, R2, R3, R4 and R5 with the additional inclusion of any contiguous street, right of
way, or public owned property.
2. Exceptions:
a. Emergencies: The limitations stated in this subsection shall not apply in any situation which requires heavy equipment or other tools in
emergencies to assist or avoid a problem related to health or to safety of persons or property, or to sewer, water, power, utility, or telephone
interruptions.
b. Work By Public Agencies: The limitations stated in this subsection may be waived by the board of trustees by resolution for work undertaken by
any public body or agency for the benefit of the public. The board of trustees may attach to any such waiver all conditions it deems necessary to
protect the public health, safety or welfare.
c. Waiver: The limitations stated in this section may be waived by the building official in areas of the village zoned for nonresidential uses pursuant
to the village zoning ordinance; provided, however, that no such waiver shall be granted unless the building official finds that:
(1) The party seeking the waiver will suffer a unique or unusual hardship unless the waiver is granted; and
(2) The granting of a waiver will not cause a substantial or undue adverse impact upon adjacent property or upon the public health, safety and
welfare.
(3) The village manager may attach to such waiver all conditions he deems necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare.
d. Building Permits: Work undertaken pursuant to any permit issued by the village shall be subject to the provisions of this subsection. (Ord. G-1089,
10-11-2016)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 292/438
L. Off Site Maintenance: In addition to the provisions of title 8 of this code and international property maintenance code section 302.1 no permittee shall
allow any runoff, dirt, mud, debris or similar materials to be deposited upon and remain on any area outside of the premises upon which the permit
was issued. Such premises shall include, but not be limited to, public or private: streets, rights of way, sanitary or storm sewers, and/or any other
premises not included within the scope of the permit. Any such materials shall be immediately removed and the area shall be restored to a clean
condition with no visible residue. The application for a permit shall constitute notice to the applicant and permit holder, no additional notice shall be
required until a final certificate of occupancy is issued. Failure to maintain any off site area in conformance with this section shall be adequate cause
for the immediate posting of a "stop work" order. Repeat and/or continued offenses shall be adequate cause for the building official to suspend the
permit pursuant to section 105.6.1 of the international building code or section R105.6.1 of the international residential code as adopted and amended
within this title.
M. Construction Site Sign: The building official may require a construction site sign to be posted on any commercial or residential project where a
protective barrier, fence, barricade, or canopy is required by this code. The sign format and required information shall be as specified by the building
official. (Ord. G-1084, 9-27-2016; Ord. G-1089, 10-11-2016)
Chapter 2
FIRE PREVENTION
10-2-1: FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
A. International fire code: 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc. (Ord. G-1084, 9-27-2016)
10-2-2: AMENDMENTS:
A. International Fire Code Amendments:
Chapter 1 Administration
Subsection 101.1 Title. Is amended by inserting the words "village of Oak Brook, IL."
101.2.1 Appendices. "Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted. Appendices B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I & J are hereby
adopted and amended as noted below."
103.2 Appointment. The fire code official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction; and the fire code official shall
not be removed from office except for cause and after full opportunity to be heard on specific and relevant charges by and before the appointing
authority. All references to fire code official within this code shall refer to the fire chief and/or deputies as designated in section 103.3 of this
code.
103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the fire
code official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy fire code official, other related technical officers, inspectors and other employees.
105.7.5 Fire Alarm And Detection Systems And Related Equipment. A construction permit is required for installation of or modification to
fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment. Routine maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered a
modification and does not require a permit. Any maintenance, correction or repair performed to correct a cited violation shall not be considered
routine and shall require a permit.
105.7.6 Fire Pumps And Related Equipment. A construction permit is required for installation of or modification to fire pumps and related fuel
tanks, jockey pumps, controllers, and generators. Routine maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered a modification
and does not require a permit. Any maintenance, correction or repair performed to correct a cited violation shall not be considered routine and
shall require a permit.
Section 108 Appeals
108.1 General. A person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the fire chief and/or building official. For the purposes of this code, all
appeals of decisions relating to this code shall be referred to the circuit court of DuPage County.
108.2 Limitations. An appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder has been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed.
109.3 Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official,
or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to fines and penalties as those specified in section 1-3-1 of
the village code.
Chapter 2 Definitions
Accessible, Readily (Readily Accessible). Capable of being reached quickly for operation, renewal, or inspections without requiring those to
whom ready access is requisite to climb over or remove obstacles or to resort to portable ladders, and so forth.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 293/438
Responsible Party. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of
buildings, structures and premises. In addition, any other person or entity who may be reasonably considered to have a role or responsibility in the
creation, continuation, or correction of any violation of this code shall be a responsible party or additional responsible party for such violation.
Chapter 5 Fire Service Features
505.1.1 Emergency Response Building Access Identification. New and existing buildings shall be provided with building access identification
at each exterior hinged, sliding or overhead door or door group that provides immediate access into the same area. The main entry - as
determined by the code official - shall be designated as door "1". Numbering shall continue in a clockwise sequential manner for all doors or door
groups providing building access. Identification numbers shall be on the interior and exterior of each door, affixed to or directly adjacent to the
door. Identification numbers shall contrast with their background. Identification numbers shall be arabic numbers. Numbers shall not be spelled
out. Each character shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm). Where any door cannot be
readily viewed from the exterior, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the door or door group. Identification numbers
shall be maintained.
Exceptions:
1. Existing buildings in malls and existing anchor buildings that meet all of the following conditions:
1.1 There is an existing and properly maintained alternate door identification system in place for all exterior doors.
1.2 The alternate door identification system is approved.
1.3 The mall area is greater than 500,000 square feet.
2. Doors to dedicated spaces - such as mechanical rooms, electrical rooms, storage rooms, fire sprinkler rooms, etc. - shall be labeled to
indicate the use of the space and shall not be included in the numbering sequence unless this space may also be accessed from the interior of
the building.
3. Buildings having less than four (4) exterior doors or door groups as regulated by this section.
4. Occupancy group R-3.
5. Any building that is one or more of the following:
5.1 Listed, or certified as eligible for listing by the state historic preservation officer or the keeper of the national register of historic places, in the
national register of historic places.
5.2 Designated as historic under an applicable state or local law.
5.3 Certified as a contributing resource within a national register-listed, state-designated or locally designated historic district.
506.1 Where Required. In any new or existing structure, other than one- and two-family dwellings, where access to or within the structure or an
area is restricted because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or fire-fighting purposes, the fire code
official shall require one or more key boxes to be installed in approved locations. The key box shall be of an approved type listed in accordance
with UL 1037, and shall contain properly and permanently labeled keys to gain necessary access as required by the fire code official., including
- but not limited to: all gates, doors, hatches, ladder guards, elevators, and fire protection systems. Additional and/or larger boxes shall be
provided if manufacturer's box fill specifications are exceeded. Each key, key ring, tag, or keycard shall be counted as a separate item when
calculating box fill. There shall be a separate box for each individual occupant.
Exception: Separate boxes shall not be required where the fire code official finds that a multiple occupant box provides equivalent access
due to:
1. A properly maintained master key system that provides all necessary access.
or
2. A limited number of occupants that utilize a common exterior entrance.
or
3. Approval of a modification as detailed in section 104.8 of this code.
Chapter 9 Fire Protection Systems
901.4.7 General. Systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall
be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the international fire code. At the time of construction, clear and
unobstructed, accessible floor space with the minimum dimensions of 30"w x 36"d x 80"h shall be provided at each of the following:
a. Fire alarm pull station.
b. Fire hydrant.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 294/438
c. Standpipe.
901.6.2.2 Records. The responsible party shall maintain current records of all system inspections, tests and maintenance required by the
referenced standards by:
a. Submitting written documentation of any such activity to the fire code official within 30 days of its occurrence,
and
b. Maintaining a complete set of current records on site, accessible, and available to the fire code official upon request.
Section 903 Automatic Sprinkler Systems. Is amended as follows:
903.1 General. (As written in model code.)
903.2 Where Required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided, for all group H occupancies,
and all other occupancies in the locations as follows:
1. The fire area exceeds 1,000 square feet (93 m2);
2. The building has more than one story;
3. The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge;
4. The building has a basement.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building or structure to sell, transfer, mortgage, or otherwise dispose of such building or structure to
another until the automatic sprinkler system requirements of this section are fully met.
Exceptions:
a. Existing, legally occupied R-2 occupancies.
b. Existing, legally occupied R-3 single family occupancies as regulated by the international residential code.
903.2.1 Group A. Per section 903.2.
903.2.2 Ambulatory Care Facilities.
903.2.2.1 Ambulatory Care Facilities. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the entire floor containing an ambulatory care
facility where either of the following conditions exists at any time:
1. Four or more care recipients are incapable of self preservation, whether rendered incapable by staff or staff has accepted responsibility for
care recipients already incapable.
2. One or more care recipients that are incapable of self-preservation are located at other than the level of exit discharge serving such a facility.
In buildings where ambulatory care is provided on levels other than the level of exit discharge, an automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout the entire floor where such care is provided as well as all floors below, and all floors between the level of ambulatory care and the
nearest level of exit discharge, including the level of exit discharge.
903.2.3 Group E. Per section 903.2.
903.2.4 Group F. Per section 903.2, with the following addition:
903.2.4.1 Woodworking Operations. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all group F-1 occupancy fire areas that contain
woodworking operations in excess of 500 square feet in area (46 m2) which generate finely divided combustible waste or which use finely divided
combustible materials.
903.2.5 Group H. (As written in model code.)
903.2.6 Group I. Per section 903.2.
903.2.7 Group M. Per section 903.2.
903.2.7.1 High-Piled Storage. (As written in model code.)
903.2.8 Group R. Per section 903.2.
903.2.9 Group S-1. Per section 903.2, with the addition of:
903.2.9.1 Repair Garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as repair garages in accordance with
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 295/438
the international building code where one of the following conditions exists:
1. The fire area exceeds 1,000 square feet (93 m2).
2. The building has more than one story.
3. The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge.
4. The building has a basement.
5. The building is used for repair or storage of commercial trucks or buses.
903.2.9.2 Bulk Storage Of Tires. Buildings and structures where the area for the storage of tires exceeds 2,000 cubic feet (57 m3) shall be
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1.
903.2.10 Group S-2. Per section 903.2, with the addition of:
903.2.10.1 Commercial Parking Garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings used for storage of commercial
trucks or buses.
903.2.11 Specific Buildings And Hazards. (As written in model code.)
903.2.12 During Construction. (As written in model code.)
903.2.13 Group U. Per section 903.2.
903.3.9 Control Valve Accessibility. Fire sprinkler control valves shall be installed in a readily accessible location where either of the following
conditions occurs:
1. A new or replacement valve is installed.
2. A fire sprinkler system is reconfigured to add and/or modify the location of 20 or more sprinkler heads.
903.4.1 Monitoring. Alarm, supervisory and trouble signals shall be distinctly different and shall be automatically transmitted to the DuPage
public safety communications (DuComm) in accordance with NFPA 72.
903.5 Testing And Maintenance. (As written in model code.)
903.6 Existing Buildings. (As written in model code.)
907.5.2.4 Audio Visual Alarms. An audiovisual alarm shall be installed in an approved location; above, or in close proximity to the exterior main
entrance to each occupancy or tenant space.
907.7.3 Zones. Each floor shall be zoned separately and shall comply with all of the following conditions:
1. No one fire zone shall exceed twenty thousand (20,000) square feet (1,858 m2)
2. No automatic sprinkler zone shall exceed fifty-two thousand (52,000) square feet (4,831 m2) for any one floor.
3. There shall be a minimum of four zones per floor for the installed alarm system:
a. Pull stations.
b. Water flow.
c. Heat detection.
d. Smoke detection.
4. The length of any zone shall not exceed 300 feet (91.440 meters) in any direction.
Exception: Automatic sprinkler system zones shall not exceed the area permitted by NFPA 13.
907.7.5 Monitoring. All fire protection equipment shall be supervised/monitored and shall terminate with the DuPage public safety
communications (DuComm) in accordance with NFPA 72. Unless specifically permitted by the fire chief, all new construction and panel
replacements shall be monitored utilizing approved wireless communications.
Exceptions: (As written in model code.)
Chapter 31 Tents And Membrane Structures
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 296/438
3103.2 Approval Required. Tents and membrane structures having an area in excess of 400 square feet (37 m2) shall not be erected, operated
or maintained for any purpose without first obtaining a permit and approval from the fire code official or building official.
Exceptions:
1. Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes.
2. Tents open on all sides that comply with all of the following:
2.1. Individual tents having a maximum size of 700 square feet (65 m2).
2.2. The aggregate area of multiple tents placed side by side without a fire break clearance of 12 feet (3658 mm), not exceeding 700 square
feet (65 m2) total.
2.3. A minimum clearance of 12 feet (3658 mm) to all structures and other tents.
2.4 Individual tents having an occupancy load of 49 or less- as calculated by section 1004 of this code.
Appendix B Fire-Flow Requirements For Buildings
Section B101.1 Scope. Is hereby amended by the addition of the following "This appendix shall not be construed to mandate infrastructure
improvements at village of Oak Brook expense."
Section B103.1. Is hereby amended to read as follows "The fire chief is authorized to reduce the fire-flow requirements for isolated buildings or a
group of buildings where development of full fire-flow requirements is impractical."
Appendix C Fire Hydrant Locations And Distribution
Section C101.1 Scope. Is hereby amended by the addition of the following "This appendix shall not be construed to mandate infrastructure
improvements at village of Oak Brook expense."
Appendix D Fire Apparatus Access Roads
D102.1 Access And Loading. Facilities, buildings or portions of buildings hereafter constructed shall be accessible to fire department apparatus
by way of an approved fire apparatus access road with an asphalt, concrete or other approved driving surface capable of supporting the imposed
load of fire apparatus weighing at least 75,000 pounds (34 020 kg). Parking or paved areas that are not capable of supporting fire apparatus
weighing at least 75,000 pounds (34 020 kg) shall be clearly identified by arches or other structure as approved by the fire code official.
D102.1.1 Areas For Aerial Apparatus Setup. Any paved area where the fire code official determines that aerial apparatus may set up shall be
capable of supporting the imposed point load from an outrigger of at least 75,000 pounds per square foot.
D103.6 Signs. Unless otherwise approved by the fire code official, all new and existing fire apparatus access roads shall be marked with
permanent No Parking-Fire Lane signs complying with figure D103.6. Signs shall have a minimum dimension of 12 inches (305 mm) wide by 18
inches (457 mm) high and have red letters on a white reflective background. Signs shall be posted on one or both sides of the fire apparatus road
as required by section D103.6.1 or D103.6.2.
Figure D103.6
Fire Lane Signs
D103.6.1 Roads 20 To 26 Feet In Width. Fire lane signs as specified in section D103.6 shall be posted on both sides of fire apparatus access
roads that are 20 to 26 feet wide (6096 to 7925 mm). Fire lane signs shall be located so that there is one sign at the beginning of the designated
fire lane, with additional signs as required to maintain signage in a clearly visible and readable location from every point throughout the
designated fire lane. Unless otherwise approved by the fire code official, spacing between fire lane signs shall not exceed 50 feet, as measured
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 297/438
along the side of the road.
D103.6.2 Roads More Than 26 Feet In Width. Fire lane signs as specified in section D103.6 shall be posted on one side of fire apparatus
access roads more than 26 feet wide (7925 mm) and less than 32 feet wide (9754 mm). Fire lane signs shall be located so that there is one sign
at the beginning of the designated fire lane, with additional signs as required to maintain signage in a clearly visible and readable location from
every point throughout the designated fire lane. Unless otherwise approved by the fire code official, spacing between fire lane signs shall not
exceed 50 feet, as measured along the side of the road.
(Ord. G-1084, 9-27-2016)
10-2-3: RESERVED:
(Ord. G-1084, 9-27-2016)
10-2-4: RESERVED:
(Ord. G-1084, 9-27-2016)
10-2-5: ALARM SYSTEMS:
A. False Fire Alarm Service Charge: A fire alarm user shall be charged a service charge of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each false fire alarm if
such false fire alarm is: 1) due to or caused by a lack of required maintenance as specified in the Oak Brook fire prevention code; or 2) resulting from
any test, repair, alteration or addition to the fire protection system without prior notification thereof to the fire department. For all other false fire alarms,
an alarm user shall be charged a service charge of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each such false fire alarm in excess of one in any three (3)
month period. All false fire alarm service charges shall be remitted to the village by the alarm user upon receipt of the statement for such service
charge.
B. Security Service Monitoring Charge: Each person subscribing to a security service which is monitored by the village shall pay a monthly charge
effective October 1, 2009, of twenty dollars ($20.00) to the village, with a three percent (3%) yearly escalation increase starting January 1, 2011. Said
charge may be paid to the agency supplying the monitoring board, provided that said agency promptly remits the monthly fee to the village.
C. Liability Of Village Limited: The village assumes no liability for:
1. Any defects in the operation of an alarm system.
2. Failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm.
3. Failure or neglect of any person in connection with the installation, operation or maintenance of an alarm system.
4. The transmission of alarm signals, prerecorded alarm messages or the relaying of such signals and messages. (Ord. G-329, 9-28-1982; Ord. G-
486, 4-14-1992; Ord. G-898, 9-8-2009; Ord. G-911, 12-8-2009)
10-2-6: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any
order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified
by the village president and board of trustees or by a court of competent jurisdiction, with the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such
violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of an offense against the village, punishable as prescribed in section 1-3-1 of this code. The imposition
of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. G-101, 1-28-1969; 2000 Code)
Chapter 3
BUILDING PERMITS
10-3-1: PERMITS REQUIRED:
A. Permit Required: It is hereby required that a permit be obtained in advance and that all other requirements of this title be complied with whenever a
building or structure or parts or appurtenances thereof located within the village and regulated by this title are erected, installed, altered, converted,
remodeled, structurally repaired, demolished, moved or its use or occupancy is established or changed.
B. Permit Prerequisites:
1. No permit may be issued on any unrecorded lot or tract of land until such lot or tract has been surveyed, platted and filed in the recorder's office as
required by statute; provided, however, such restriction shall not otherwise preclude the issuance of a permit for work on any existing structure
which does not involve any exterior building addition or exterior structural alteration.
2. No permit may be issued until satisfactory proof has been submitted that approved water supply and sewage treatment facilities are available.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 298/438
C. Grading And Excavation: No construction grading or excavation authorized by permit may be made on any property until after the installation of an
access drive extending from the street to the excavation or site of structure and a culvert as required and approved by the highway authority having
jurisdiction.
D. Timeliness Of Work:
1. Commencement Of Work: A permit under which no work is commenced within ninety (90) days after issuance, or if no work is done for a period of
more than ninety (90) days, shall expire by limitation, and a new permit shall be secured before such work is started or continued. Nothing in this
section shall prevent the extension of the expiration date by the director of community development where it can be shown that a hardship would
occur in enforcing the strict letter of this provision.
2. Permit Prior To Commencement: Any work started without the issuance of a permit shall be ordered stopped by the director of community
development until such time as the proper permit application is filed and permit issued. An additional charge shall be added to all permit fees
covering work started without permit.
E. Condition For Final Inspections: All temporary installations and equipment (i.e., tanks, trailers, signs, etc.) shall be removed from all construction sites
before the final inspection is made.
F. Bond Requirements:
1. Cash Bond: In the case of all building construction or street, curb or grading work, a cash bond shall be deposited with the director of community
development. The condition of said bond will be such that if the applicant shall clean all mud and debris resulting from construction work from the
streets and public ways as shall from time to time be required by the director of community development, and restore all streets, curbs and public
ways, and grades to specifications, then such cash street bond will terminate upon posting of a cash performance bond or upon the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy and the amount of such cash street bond refunded. If the applicant fails to provide such cleanup, restoration or grading,
then such work shall be performed by the village and the cost of same shall be deducted from such performance bond and the amount, if any
remaining, shall be refunded to the applicant.
2. Performance Bond: Following the final inspection, a performance bond shall be posted by the applicant to guarantee that all unfinished work will be
completed within a prescribed time period. Such bond will terminate upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and the amount of such bond
refunded to the applicant, less any reinspection fees.
G. Certificate Of Occupancy: No building or structure shall be occupied or used for any purpose, in whole or in part, until a certificate of occupancy shall
have been issued by the director of community development, unless a performance bond has been posted. The use for any purpose of buildings and
structures already erected or moved into position which do not comply with the requirements of this title is prohibited.
H. Soil Erosion And Sedimentation: No permit shall be issued for any work involving any "land modification" as defined in title 9 of this code unless such
work conforms to the standards set forth in title 9 of this code. (Ord. G-160, 6-11-1974; Ord. G-299, 7-14-1981; Ord. G-311, 10-27-1981; Ord. G-559,
7-25-1995; Ord. G-620, 9-22-1998)
10-3-2: ORA1, ORA2 OR O4 ZONING DISTRICT CONSTRUCTION:
A. No building permit shall be issued in ORA1, ORA2 or O4 zoning districts with respect to a development which utilizes, intends to utilize, or is
reasonably expected to utilize, the following incremental increases:
* In the case of ORA1, a structure height greater than thirty five feet (35'); and/or
* In the case of ORA2, a floor area ratio (FAR) which exceeds 0.8 for office uses, financial uses or accessory uses thereto and/or a structure height
greater than eight (8) stories; and/or
* In the case of O4, a floor area ratio (FAR) which exceeds 0.45 and/or a structure height greater than thirty five feet (35'),
until and unless the following procedures have been followed:
1. The party owning or controlling said parcel (the "applicant") shall apply for the increased FAR and/or height by submitting to the director of
community development:
a. A site plan for the proposed development showing the approximate location and approximate size of:
(1) All buildings and parking structures; and
(2) Driveway access; and
(3) Curb cuts; and
(4) Surface parking areas; and
b. A statement indicating:
(1) The proposed maximum floor area of all buildings and structures; and
(2) The proposed maximum height of all buildings and structures; and
(3) The approximate number of proposed on site parking spaces; and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 299/438
c. A report of a professional traffic consultant describing the impact of the proposed development on the neighboring street system and
recommending whatever traffic infrastructure may be required to accommodate traffic generation specifically and uniquely attributable to the
proposed development.
2. Within a reasonable time after the submission of the application and materials described in subsection A1 of this section, and upon receipt of the
recommendation of the village engineer, the village board of trustees (the "village board"), at either a regular meeting or a special meeting of the
village board, shall:
a. Determine whether the proposed development requires the installation of traffic infrastructure in order to accommodate traffic generation
specifically and uniquely attributable to the applicant's proposal, and, if so, how the installation of said traffic infrastructure should be staged;
b. Determine whether either the construction of such traffic infrastructure or the applicant's entry into an agreement with the village respecting the
construction of such traffic infrastructure, should be a condition precedent to issuing a building permit which seeks the incremental increases in
floor area ratio and/or height set forth in this subsection A; and
c. At the request of the applicant, determine whether the installation of such traffic infrastructure will benefit properties either located outside
developer's application under this section or located on a lot other than the lot for which applicant intends to file its initial building permit
application seeking to take advantage of the incremental increases in floor area ratio and/or height set forth in this subsection A.
B. In the event either the material provided by the applicant or the investigations of the village indicate that the proposed development reasonably requires
the installation of traffic infrastructure in order to accommodate traffic specifically and uniquely attributable to the proposed development, the village
board may, as a condition precedent to the issuance of those building permits which take advantage of the incremental increases in floor area ratio
and/or height set forth in subsection A of this section (and only those building permits), either:
1. Require the construction of such traffic infrastructure which is reasonably required to accommodate traffic generation specifically and uniquely
attributable to the development as a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit; or
2. With respect to large projects either on one lot or on multiple lots owned or controlled by the applicant which will be constructed in phases over time,
require the applicant to enter into a written agreement with the village prior to the issuance of a building permit which takes advantage of the
incremental increases in floor area ratio and/or height set forth in subsection A of this section (and only such building permits) providing that the
traffic infrastructure or relevant portions thereof which are reasonably required to accommodate traffic generation specifically and uniquely
attributable to the development or a given phase thereof will be in place prior to occupancy of the proposed development or a given phase thereof.
Developers of large projects are to be encouraged to follow the procedures set forth in this section as soon as possible to facilitate the joint longrange
planning efforts of both the village and the applicant. The formal submittal of a building permit application and supporting documentation is not
a condition precedent to initiating, following and completing the application and procedures set forth herein. Agreements reached pursuant to this
subsection B2 may contain other and further provisions and agreements concerning or relating to the construction of such traffic infrastructure
reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, including provisions which state that any modifications to the site plan
attached to the agreement which are substantially inconsistent with said site plan incorporated into the agreement shall require the prior approval of
the village board, provided such modifications do not materially increase traffic specifically and uniquely attributable to the development or materially
and negatively injure the public health, safety and welfare.
C. In the event the applicant has requested a determination pursuant to subsection A2c of this section, the village board shall proceed to make such
determination upon receipt of the recommendation of the village engineer. If the village board determines that such other property or lot may
reasonably be expected to benefit from traffic infrastructure provided by the applicant and development on such property utilizes, intends to utilize, or
is reasonably expected to utilize the incremental increases in floor area ratio and/or height set forth in subsection A of this section, the village may
contractually agree to reimburse the applicant for a portion of the cost of the traffic infrastructure from fees charged to owners of such other property
when and as collected from the owners of such other property, but only at such time (if any) that said owner utilizes the incremental increases in floor
area ratio and/or height set forth in subsection A of this section by applying for a building permit for the same. Such contract may contain the features
described in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-5-1, including provisions which shall:
1. Describe such other property that may reasonably be expected to benefit from the traffic infrastructure that is required of the applicant;
2. Specify the amount or proportion of the cost of the traffic infrastructure that is to be incurred primarily for the benefit of such other property; and
3. Provide that the village shall collect fees charged to the owners of such other property which utilizes the incremental increases in floor area ratio
and/or height set forth in subsection A of this section, before any building permit for such property is issued which takes advantage of the
incremental increase in floor area ratio and/or height set forth in subsection A of this section.
D. In the event an application filed pursuant to subsections A through C of this section, is denied or withdrawn, the applicant may revise its plans in a
manner which does not take advantage of the increases in FAR and/or height set forth in subsection A of this section, in which case the procedures
set forth in this section would no longer be applicable; however, all other village ordinances respecting building permits and similar permits shall
continue to apply.
In the event an applicant enters into a written agreement with the village pursuant to the terms of subsection B of this section, the applicant shall be
entitled to rely upon the village's continuing compliance with its terms and the village shall be entitled to rely on the applicant's continuing compliance
with its terms, provided, that in the event such a written agreement is recorded as a covenant running with the land, an applicant shall be entitled to
assign its rights and obligations to its successors in interest to the property. (Ord. G-160, 6-11-1974; Ord. G-299, 7-14-1981; Ord. G-311, 10-27-1981;
Ord. G-559, 7-25-1995; Ord. G-620, 9-22-1998; Ord. G-673, 2-13-2001)
10-3-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMITS:
All applications for permits so to construct, erect, alter or repair any building, structure or part thereof, for which a work permit is required by this chapter,
shall be in writing over the signature of the owner or his authorized agent on printed forms to be furnished by the village. Every such application shall have
the location of the proposed work, that is, the legal or taxable description of the land upon which the building, structure or part thereof is to be erected,
constructed, moved, demolished, altered, or repaired, as the case may be, and shall be filed with the director of community development. Said application
shall be accompanied by plans signed by the author of said plans.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 300/438
All plans shall be in sufficient detail to enable the director of community development to obtain full and complete information as to the character of the
work proposed to be done under the permit sought. Complete framing drawings shall be submitted of all structural steel, mill or reinforced concrete
construction, said drawings to show the dead and live loads used in the design.
One copy of the plans on which the permit is issued shall remain on file in the office of the director of community development and a duplicate copy shall
be kept continuously at the building during construction. A plat of the building site made by a registered surveyor shall be furnished upon request of the
director of community development.
One copy of the plans of all attached dwelling units, institutional, commercial or industrial buildings, shall be delivered by applicant to the fire chief and the
said fire chief within seven (7) days of receipt of the same shall examine said plans to determine whether they comply with the applicable fire protection
standards of the community development department. If said plans do meet said standards, then the fire chief shall endorse said plans accordingly and
deliver the same to the director of community development. If the said plans do not meet said standards then the plans shall be returned to the applicant
with a memorandum of the specific deficiencies noted.
The director of community development shall not issue any building permit for attached dwelling units, institutional, commercial or industrial buildings
unless or until the plans for the same have been approved by the fire chief.
When it shall appear to the director of community development that an application has been made and plans filed in due form and manner as prescribed
by this chapter, that the proposed use, manner of construction, kind and quality of material and workmanship are in all respects in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, he shall thereupon approve the issuance of the permit sought and it is hereby made the duty of said director of community
development to approve or reject any plan filed with him pursuant to the provisions of this chapter within a reasonable time.
All work performed and all materials used shall be in accordance with the plans and specifications submitted with the application for permit, and any
revisions or changes from the plans submitted shall be deemed a violation unless approved by the director of community development.
In addition to all other documents herein required the applicant shall submit topographical information in sufficient detail to indicate the natural drainage of
the lot or parcel involved and the proposed final grade with intended waterflow. Grade pitch shall be away from the building and at a rate of not less than
one-eighth inch (1/8") per foot. Except in unusual cases where the director of community development shall determine that hardship exists, final grades at
lot lines shall be established at the existing elevations. Foundation heights shall be established at least six inches (6") above final grade. (Ord. G-160, 6-
11-1974; Ord. G-673, 2-13-2001)
10-3-4: REVIEW OF APPLICATION FOR FLOOD CONTROL:
A. The village engineer, under the direction of the village manager, shall review all building permit applications for new construction or substantial
improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a location that has a
flood hazard, any proposed new construction or substantial improvement (including prefabricated and mobile homes) must:
1. Be designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure;
2. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage; and
3. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
B. The village engineer, under the direction of the manager, shall review subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments to assure that:
1. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
2. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located, elevated, and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage; and
3. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
C. The village engineer under the direction of the manager, shall require new or replacement water supply systems or sanitary sewage systems to be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters, and require on site
waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding.
D. Construction on any property designated at any time since 1981, as an "area of special flood hazard" (as defined in section 9-19-2 of this code) shall
be in accordance with the provisions of article 21 of the BOCA national building code (1987) or most recent revision thereof adopted by the village,
notwithstanding whether or not the property is designated as an area of special flood hazard at the time of the application for permit. (Res. 169, 12-14-
1974; Ord. G-450, 9-25-1990)
10-3-5: NOTICE FOR INSPECTION REQUIRED:
The owner or contractor shall give twenty four (24) hours' advance notice to the director of community development:
A. Before concrete is poured and after footing excavation has been completed.
B. Before backfilling and after footing drain tile has been placed and foundation wall has been waterproofed.
C. After foundation has been poured and prior to framing, an on site location and top of foundation elevation, prepared by a registered land surveyor, is to
be submitted to the director of community development.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 301/438
D. At the time of water connection and before backfilling the water service.
E. Before any interior wall finish is applied and after the framing is completed.
F. Before any interior wall finish is applied and after the rough plumbing is completed.
G. Before any interior wall finish is applied and after rough electrical installation is completed.
H. Before any siding or brick veneer or shingles are applied and after the application of the sheathing paper.
I. Before any backfilling and after the septic tank and seepage system have been installed.
J. Before final inspection. (Ord. G-160, 6-11-1974)
Chapter 4
FEES AND BONDS
10-4-1: FEE AND BOND SCHEDULE:
Before a permit required by this title is issued, the director of community development shall collect a fee and bond calculated according to the following
schedule:
A. Volume Computation: Volume shall be computed on the exterior dimensions of the building and shall include all space above the lowest level of the
foundation wall and to the highest point of the main roof and to include all projections.
B. Unit Of Volume Cost: Figure a fraction larger than one-half (1/2) as a full unit.
C. Multi-Component Building Permit Fees: The majority of the permits issued by the village are for new construction (new structures and
additions/alterations to existing structures). The permit fee for these activities is calculated to cover the costs associated with the various permit
components (i.e., preapplication meetings, application processing, plan review, base fee for the various construction elements, inspections, and
issuance of final occupancy). These fee components are listed in the following schedule:
Fees1
1. Minimum permit fee $75.00
2. New buildings:
Commercial, office and industrial 2% of
construction
costs2
Residential:
Base permit fee $775.00
Plus $6.00 per each additional 1,000 cubic feet 6.00
3. Residential additions, repairs and alterations: 80.00
Plus $6.00 per $1,000.00 construction cost 6.00
Residential accessory structure3 (each) (no engineering; no utilities): 75.00
Plus fee per square foot 0.50
Nonresidential accessory structures3 (each): 115.00
Plus fee per square foot 0.50
4. Commercial additions, alterations and repairs 2% of
construction
costs2
5. Plumbing work:
Commercial 2% of
construction
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 302/438
costs2
Residential:
Base fee: $75.00
Plus each fixture 6.00
Sewer, septic system, storm sewer, sump pump (each) 75.00
6. Electrical work:
Commercial electrical 2% of
construction
costs2
Residential electrical permit (base fee): $90.00
Residential panel (per amp) 0.75
Commercial panel (per amp) 2% of
construction
costs2
Commercial circuits (each) 2% of
construction
costs2
Commercial openings (each) 2% of
construction
costs2
Commercial devices - alarms, strobes, detectors (each) 2% of
construction
costs2
Commercial motors (each) 2% of
construction
costs2
Commercial appliances (each) 2% of
construction
costs2
Commercial low voltage - repair/
relocation
2% of
construction
costs2
Commercial - temporary installations $110.00
Fire alarm - commercial - including panels and keltron:
Relocate only (each): 175.00
Plus fee per opening 6.00
New or added devices: 175.00
Plus fee per opening 6.00
Fire sprinkler - commercial:
Repair/relocate only (each): 175.00
Plus fee for hydro if more than 10 150.00
Plus fee per head 6.00
New or added devices: 175.00
Plus fee per head 6.00
Commercial new communication/alarm (signal/low voltage) systems (each) 75.00
7. Driveway, parking lot:
Commercial 2% of
construction
costs2
Residential $100.00
8. Certificates of occupancy and compliance (each) 60.00
9. Elevators, escalators, dumbwaiters (commercial): 2% of
construction
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 303/438
costs2
Plus any reinspection fee (each) $ 75.00
Pit ladder (includes initial inspection) 175.00
Pit ladder reinspection (each) 130.00
Inspection certificate, biannually (each) 130.00
10.
Mechanical heating, cooling, ventilating including chimneys:
Commercial 2% of
construction
costs2
Residential, per appliance $75.00
11.
Canopies, marquees 2% of
construction
costs2
12.
Tanks, flammable and nonflammable:
500 gallons or less, base fee $110.00
Over 500 gallons, plus each additional 100 gallons 6.00
13.
Signs:
Per square foot 5.00
Minimum 75.00
14.
Moving buildings 400.00
15.
Wrecking demolition, shoring, raisings, underpinning 2% of
construction
costs2
16.
Plan and application examination and review:
Each, per hour (or portion thereof) $ 75.00
Minimum fee 75.00
In the event that any outside consulting plan review services are used, the applicant shall reimburse the village for any fees
associated with that service as a prerequisite to the issuance of any permits.
17.
Inspection fee (each) 75.00
A fee based on the estimated number of inspections will be assessed prior to permit issuance. Additional inspections will
require payment of an additional fee prior to final inspection approval.
18.
Annual fire inspection fee - nonresidential occupancy (each) 75.00
A fee assessed for each inspection required to determine compliance with previously cited violations to the building codes of
the village. For annual fire inspections, the fee will be assessed for continued noncompliance after the issuance of a 30 day
correction notice. For violations that continue 90 days after the first correction notice will be assessed the reinspection plus
an additional administrative fee of $100.00 for each subsequent inspection.
19.
Cleanup and street bond:
Commercial 825.00
Residential 450.00
20.
Performance/completion bond (each) 750.00
21.
Starting work without a permit (each) 750.00
22.
Occupancy of a building or structure without final inspection and/or issuance of occupancy permit (each) 750.00
23.
Application fee (required for each permit application) 50.00
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 304/438
24.
Canceled permits 75.00/hour
Once a permit application has been submitted to the village for review and approval, any staff time devoted to plan review
shall be billed to the applicant at a rate of $75.00/hour if the applicant makes a formal request to cancel the permit
application or if applicant fails to obtain the permit within 90 days of approval, including any outside consultant fees.
25.
Fast track permit review - added to permit fee 2% of
construction
costs2
- Not less
than $75.00
- Not to
exceed
$750.00
Notes:
1. In addition to the fee, there is also included an application fee, inspection fee, plan review fee, and certificate fee. This does not apply to flat
fees or calculated percentage permits, unless noted otherwise.
2. Construction cost is intended to reflect the total prevailing local rates for labor, management, and materials for the entire job.
Construction costs shall reflect, but not be limited to, all costs for demolition, erosion control, construction site protection, excavation, concrete and
the provision and installation of masonry, structural, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, roof covering, interior/exterior finishes, and any other work
on the building or site.
Construction costs shall not include fees paid to other units of government, architectural design fees, engineering design fees, or furniture that is
not affixed or electrically connected.
The permit applicant shall provide verification of total construction cost to the building official prior to issuance of the final certificate of occupancy.
The building official shall have the right to reject any verification that is incomplete or construction costs that are less than 90 percent of those
shown by an established current construction cost source for an equivalent project. Established sources shall include, but not be limited to: ICC,
R.L. Means, Dodge and Hometech. Any such rejection shall be made in writing.
3. Applies to structures that are not listed in subsection D, "Flat Fee Permits", of this section.
D. Flat Fee Permits: The following permit types are assessed a flat fee. The majority of these fee types involve smaller structures and improvements that
are ancillary to the principal use of the property.
Fees
1. Residential permits:
Burglar alarm (security system installation) $220.00
Door replacement: 75.00
Plus fee per each opening 5.00
Elevator (includes initial inspection): 250.00
Elevator reinspection, each 130.00
Fences new and alteration 130.00
Fire sprinkler 250.00
Furnace replacement 75.00
Garage sale signs No fee
Generator $300.00
HVAC replacement 75.00
Hot water heater replacement 75.00
Lawn sprinkler (includes a recording fee) 260.00
Low voltage 220.00
Mailbox - permanent structure (includes a recording fee) 135.00
Portable storage unit (POD) 50.00
Roof - recoat/recover/repair:
Base fee: 75.00
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 305/438
Plus 1% job (construction costs1)
Repairs - under 25% of any roof No fee
Sheds, decks, patios, outdoor fireplace, outdoor kitchen: $75.00
Base fee: 75.00
Plus $0.50 per square foot 0.50
Tents (each):
Less than 120 square feet and no utilities No fee
Less than 120 square feet and utilities $ 75.00
Larger than 120 square feet and no utilities 75.00
Larger than 120 square feet and utilities 150.00
Trailer (construction) - temporary 155.00
Window replacement: 75.00
Plus fee per each opening 5.00
2. Commercial permits:
Construction crane - base fee: 110.00
Plus $50.00 per story 50.00
Office/construction trailer - temporary and no utilities: 155.00
Plus utilities 155.00
Roof - recoat/recover: 2% of construction costs1
Plus reinspection, each $ 75.00
Tents - fees per tent:
Larger than 120 square feet and no utilities 125.00
Under 120 square feet and no utilities (utilities extra) No fee
Plus utilities $ 75.00
3. Temporary signs (each):
Per week or portion thereof 100.00
Note:
1. See note 2 at the end of table in subsection C of this section.
(Ord. G-1067, 11-24-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
Title 11
LIBRARY
Chapter 1
MUNICIPAL LIBRARY1
11-1-1: LIBRARY CREATED:
Pursuant to 75 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq., there is hereby created the Oak Brook free public library. The operations of the Oak Brook free
public library shall be governed by the general policy adopted by the village board, as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. S-225, 5-25-1971; Ord.
G-539, 8-9-1994; Ord. G-565, 12-12-1995)
11-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
SENIOR CITIZEN: Any person sixty (60) years of age or older.
STUDENT: Any person eighteen (18) years of age or under who is enrolled as a student in preschool through twelfth grade. (Ord. G-565, 12-12-1995;
Ord. G-583, 2-25-1997)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 306/438
11-1-3: FEES AND CHARGES:
The following fees and charges are hereby established governing the Oak Brook free public library:
Fee Or Charge Fee Amount
Nonresident cards Established annually by Illinois state law
Nonresident computer user card $5.00
Videocassettes, laser disks, DVDs, per circulation period $1.00
Replacement library card $5.00
Returned checks As determined by the village finance
officer
Interlibrary loan transactions including loans and photocopies which need not be returned As determined by the lending institution
Overdue charges, per day, per item, not to exceed $10.00 per item
Books, periodicals, audiocassettes, compact disks, CD-ROMs, kits, circulating software, vertical file
items
$0.10
Overdue charges, per day, per item, not to exceed $10.00 per item
Videocassettes, laser disks, DVDs $1.00
Material checked out to "in house" use $0.50 per hour
The maximum charge for any item not returned shall not exceed the replacement cost of such item plus any overdue fines (such fines not to exceed
$10.00) plus a five dollar ($5.00) processing fee.
Library users shall pay the costs incurred by the library in providing photocopies, printouts from computers and microform reader/printers or other services
requiring specialized equipment; the library director shall determine these costs on a per unit basis from time to time.
In house online searches and outsourced searches will be used at the discretion of the librarians. If an Oak Brook cardholder requests online or
outsourced searches, the requester shall pay the database charges incurred by the search before search results are provided. Charges are determined
by the actual cost of the search. No service charge is added. (Ord. G-256, 8-26-1979; Ord. G-322, 5-11-1982; Ord. G-387, 9-9-1986; Ord. G-436, 11-14-
1989; Ord. G-460, 2-12-1991; Ord. G-532, 3-8-1994; Ord. G-539, 8-9-1994; Ord. G-565, 12-12-1995; Ord. G-583, 2-25-1997; Ord. G-614, 7-28-1998;
Ord. G-699, 6-25-2002)
Title 12
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
Chapter 1
SPORTS CORE
12-1-1: SPORTS CORE DEFINED:
The Village of Oak Brook Sports Core consists of the Oak Brook Golf Club and the Oak Brook Bath and Tennis Club as outlined herein. (Ord. G-1095, 1-
10-2017; Ord. G-1102, 4-11-2017; Ord. G-1125, 2-27-2018; Ord. G-1144, 1-22-2019)
12-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
BATH AND TENNIS GUESTS: Individuals registered by a family or individual member, to utilize the tennis courts and swimming pools and shall be limited
to four (4) visits per year. Guests may not charge vouchers and must be accompanied by the member at all times. A member shall not be permitted to
have more than five (5) guests per day without the approval of the Bath and Tennis Club Manager. Individual guest fees per person are set out in
subsection 12-3-2D of this title.
CORPORATE RESIDENT: A full time employee whose primary place of employment is within the corporate limits of the Village.
DRIVING RANGE MEMBERSHIP: Range members are entitled to unlimited practice ball usage within designated areas of the driving range.
FULLY ALLOCATED COST: The variable cost of each function, plus a reasonable allocated portion of the Bath and Tennis Club administrative overhead
and marketing costs allocated to the clubhouse and the annual debt service.
JUNIOR MEMBER - GOLF: A minor child under twenty one (21) years of age. Junior members may play without payment of additional green fees at any
time the course is open, except on weekends or holidays. A junior member under age twelve (12) may not play at any time unless accompanied by an
adult.
LIMITED SWIM MEMBERSHIP: Allows for anyone over the age of eleven (11) fifteen (15) passes to utilize the swim facilities. Only one limited
membership can be purchased per residence. Fifteen (15) passes allows member to bring anyone they choose to use their fifteen (15) passes, however
the member must be present at all times. Once all fifteen (15) passes are used and if the member decides they want to still use the swimming facilities,
they may upgrade their limited swim membership to an unlimited swim membership. The difference between the two (2) membership fees will be charged
plus an additional fifty dollar ($50.00) transfer fee.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 307/438
NONRESIDENT: Any person residing outside the corporate limits of the Village who is not a corporate resident.
NONRESIDENT LIMITED MEMBERSHIP - GOLF: Limited members may play without payment of additional green fees anytime, except Fridays after
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon, Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. Members may play during these excepted times by paying the prevailing green fees.
RESIDENT: Any person permanently residing within the corporate limits of the Village and all full time employees of the Village, as defined in article 3 of
the "Village of Oak Brook Personnel Manual", and full time employees of the Oak Brook Park District.
RESIDENT GOLF DISCOUNT FOR JUNIORS, SENIORS: Any resident sixty (60) years of age or older (senior) or under twenty one (21) years of age
(junior), will pay a reduced rate.
SEASON MEMBERS OR MEMBERS: Persons paying season pass fees. In the case of bath and tennis, this shall include family, individual and couple
membership fees.
SENIOR: Any person sixty (60) years of age or older.
SENIOR MEMBER - GOLF: Senior members may play without payment of additional green fees anytime, except weekends or holidays. Members may
play during these excepted times by paying the prevailing green fees.
TENNIS ADD ON MEMBERSHIP: Eligible to individuals or families who have purchased an unlimited swim membership to enjoy an unlimited tennis
membership at a discounted rate.
UNLIMITED COUPLES SWIM MEMBERSHIP: Includes spouses living in the same residence and allows unlimited use of the swim facilities.
UNLIMITED FAMILY SWIM MEMBERSHIP: Includes spouses and all children under the age of twenty one (21) and allows unlimited use of the swim
facilities. One nanny/babysitter can be added to the membership at no additional cost.
UNLIMITED FAMILY TENNIS MEMBERSHIP: Includes spouses and all children under the age of twenty one (21) permanently residing in the household
and allows unlimited use of the tennis courts. No swimming privileges are included with this membership.
UNLIMITED INDIVIDUAL SWIM MEMBERSHIP: Includes anyone over the age of eleven (11) and allows unlimited use of the swim facilities.
UNLIMITED INDIVIDUAL TENNIS MEMBERSHIP: Includes anyone over the age of ten (10) and allows unlimited use of the tennis courts. No swimming
privileges are included with this membership.
UNLIMITED SEASON MEMBERSHIP - GOLF: Permits holder to play without payment of additional green fees at any time the course is open.
UNLIMITED SENIOR FAMILY SWIM MEMBERSHIP: Includes spouses, one or both over the age of sixty (60) and all grandchildren under the age of
twenty one (21) and allows unlimited use of the swim facilities. Children of the senior member would be considered a guest.
UNLIMITED SENIOR INDIVIDUAL SWIM MEMBERSHIP: Includes any individual over the age of sixty (60) and allows unlimited use of the swim facilities.
VARIABLE COST: The full direct costs of hosting each function, including the cost of food and beverages served, food preparation, service, setup and
tear down, opening, cleaning, and closing the facility. (Ord. G-1095, 1-10-2017; Ord. G-1102, 4-11-2017; Ord. G-1125, 2-27-2018; Ord. G-1144, 1-22-
2019)
12-1-3: SCHEDULING AND PERMITS:
A. Reservations:
1. Requests to utilize the open field areas for recreational sporting events shall be made in writing to the Sports Core Director at least thirty (30) days
in advance for field 3 or sixty (60) days in advance for field 2; and
2. Reservations will be taken on a first come, first serve basis and confirmed only upon receipt of a deposit.
B. Use Regulations:
1. Uses of open fields for polo must be arranged by separate agreement with the Village;
2. Other use of open fields or show field areas must be arranged by separate agreement with the Village; and
3. All events shall be subject to the ordinances and regulations of the Village with respect to licenses and permits. (Ord. G-1095, 1-10-2017)
12-1-4: FEES:
A fee schedule for the use of the open fields shall be established from time to time by the Corporate Authorities. The fee schedule shall only include the
field as it normally exists. Additional facilities or services may be required for a particular event as shall be determined by the Village Manager or his
designee. The cost of the additional facilities or services shall be the responsibility of the user. (Ord. G-1095, 1-10-2017)
12-1-5: RENTAL INSURANCE:
Any person renting outdoor Sports Core facilities shall be required to provide proof of insurance for the proposed activity as required by the Village
Manager two (2) weeks prior to the event. (Ord. G-1095, 1-10-2017)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 308/438
12-1-6: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Events: Whenever an event involves an admission fee or concessions:
1. Security services acceptable to the Village will be required;
2. A cash cleanup bond in an amount reflective of the magnitude of the event, as established by the Village Manager, or his designee, and agreed to
by the applicant, must be provided two (2) weeks in advance of event. A minimum cash cleanup bond of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be
established for each event;
3. Portable restroom facilities must be arranged by the event sponsor in accordance with the approval of the Village;
4. Field setup must be arranged exclusively through the Village. Billing for all services detailed in subsections A1 and A3 of this section and this
subsection A4 shall be through the Village and all fees must be prepaid two (2) weeks prior to the event; and
5. A deposit with reservation applications in an amount consistent with overall service requests, as determined by the Village Manager, shall be
required.
B. Bridle And Walking Paths: Sports Core bridle and walking paths shall be open to the general public.
C. Parking: Limited parking may be available for open field events, weather permitting. The Village reserves the right to require off site parking at its
discretion. All costs associated with off site parking must be paid by the holder of the event.
D. Sponsorship: The Sports Core may, subject to the approval of the Village Board, accept sponsorship fees and grant approved forms of advertisement
in return for such fees. The appropriate sponsorship fees for specific events shall be established on an individual basis by the Village Board. (Ord. G-
1095, 1-10-2017)
12-1-7: PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
A. There shall be no camping or picnicking on the Sports Core, except as specifically authorized in connection with an approved event.
B. No events shall be authorized or scheduled which require the installation of permanent facilities or the alteration or obstruction of open field areas.
C. Cross country skiing shall be permitted on any area of the Sports Core, except the golf course.
D. Practice hitting of golf balls is permitted only on designated driving ranges and practice areas.
E. Snowmobiles, motorbikes, motorcycles and other off the road vehicles shall not be operated on the Sports Core. Motorcycles may be operated only on
paved roadways.
F. No skateboards, scooters or in-line skates shall be permitted in any area of the Sports Core with the exception of the pedestrian/bicycle paths.
G. No person may go in or upon any pond or other body of water, whether liquid or frozen, in the Sports Core except maintenance personnel authorized
by the Sports Core Director; notwithstanding the foregoing general prohibition, at the pond adjacent to the Bath and Tennis Club, wading shall be
permitted in a designated roped off area when a lifeguard is present, and canoeing and paddleboating shall be permitted in strict conformity with
subsection 12-3-5D of this title.
H. Operation of mechanical airborne devices, whether radio remote controlled, tethered or mechanically/fuel propelled, is prohibited in all areas of the
Sports Core. Such prohibited devices include, but are not limited to, motorized model airplanes and toy rockets.
I. Unless authorized in writing by the Village Manager or his/her designee, no person shall sell or offer for sale anywhere on the Sports Core any food,
beverage, merchandise or service.
J. No person may sell or use sparklers in any area of the Sports Core. (Ord. G-1095, 1-10-2017; Ord. G-1102, 4-11-2017; Ord. G-1125, 2-27-2018; Ord.
G-1144, 1-22-2019)
Chapter 2
OAK BROOK GOLF CLUB
12-2-1: POLICIES:
A. Oak Brook Businesses: Corporate residents shall be entitled to purchase corporate resident season memberships to the Oak Brook Golf Club. Anyone
purchasing a season membership under this policy shall be required to present a current certification of employment from his or her employer.
Corporate residents not holding a season membership shall pay the nonresident greens fees rates.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 309/438
B. Golf Club Season Membership:
1. Season members will be issued a plastic card indicating the type of season membership and the member's name. Such cards will be used for
identification and for charging at the Oak Brook Golf Club. Junior memberships shall include charging privileges only upon the written consent of the
parent or legal guardian.
2. All accounts will be payable upon receipt of statements. Any balance not paid within thirty (30) days of the statement date shall be charged an
interest fee of one and five-tenths percent (1.5%) monthly (18 percent annual rate). Charging privileges on any accounts with an unpaid balance
over sixty (60) days old will be canceled. Memberships will not be renewed until any balance from previous seasons has been paid in full, including
any costs that the Village incurs due to collection discounts and fees.
3. Golf Club season memberships shall entitle members to the associated playing privileges only during those times when the course is declared open
for play by the Sports Core Director and only during the year indicated on such membership.
C. Bath And Tennis Club: Season memberships at the Bath and Tennis Club shall not include season membership privileges at the Oak Brook Golf Club.
However, Bath and Tennis Club season membership cards can be used at the Oak Brook Golf Club to qualify for appropriate greens fees' rates and
may also be used for charging privileges at the Oak Brook Golf Club.
D. Golf Outings: A golf outing may be arranged through the Golf Club Manager, if, in his/her judgment, such a function will not significantly affect daily fee
play. Greens fees' rates for such functions may be set by separate agreement approved by the Village Manager.
E. Golf Lessons: Lessons will be available for a fee through the Oak Brook Golf Club professional staff.
F. Golf Season: The Oak Brook Golf Club and driving range will be open between April 1st and November 1st, weather and conditions permitting. The
course and driving range shall not be open during the period of any multiple-day golf tournament authorized to be played on the premises. Some or all
of the golf course may be closed for maintenance purposes at the discretion of the Golf Club Manager.
G. Attire: Appropriate attire, including shirts with sleeves and collar, shall be worn at all times by persons utilizing the Golf Club.
H. Rain Check Policy: Rain checks are issued as a courtesy to our customers for inclement weather, family emergencies or being called away to work.
We reserve the right not to issue a rain check if inclement weather is present at the start of play. Rain checks are valid for one year after issue date.
Rain checks are redeemable for green fees and cart fees only. Rain checks are issued in the form of a redeemable dollar value that is based on the
fees paid and the number of holes remaining on the rain shortened round (rain check = dollars paid divided by the number of holes paid times the
number of holes not played). Depending upon the day of the week and the time of play, you may be paying for golf at a more expensive rate than
when the rain check was issued, and a balance may be owed. If the new fee is less than the rain check amount, a new rain check will be issued for
that balance remaining. (Ord. G-1124, 2-27-2018; Ord. G-1144, 1-22-2019)
12-2-2: FEES AND RATES:
A. Summer Greens Fees: Nonmembers, including surcharge (April 1st through October 15th):
Resident Nonresident
Resident -
Junior/Senior
Nonresident
Junior/Senior
(Guest
Of Member)
Monday through Friday:
18 holes $34.50 $53.00 $27.00 $38.50
9 holes 25.00 32.50 20.00 27.50
Twilight 26.50 38.50 22.00 27.50
Saturday, Sunday and holidays:
18 holes 36.50 58.00 28.50 38.50
9 holes 25.00 35.50 22.00 27.50
Twilight 29.00 38.50 24.00 27.50
B. Spring/Fall Greens Fees: Non-members, including surcharge (Opening day through March 31st and October 15th through course closing date. This
rate also applies to the 7 days following putting green/fairway aerification.):
Resident Nonresident Resident - Junior/Senior
Non-Resident
Junior/Senior
Monday through Sunday:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 310/438
18 holes $27.00 $38.50 $20.00 $30.50
9 holes 20.00 27.50 14.50 22.50
Twilight 20.00 27.50 14.50 22.50
C. Season Membership Fee Schedule: Membership fees are non-refundable and/or transferable and are established as follows. (See subsection F of this
section for golf surcharge. Any individual who has either a family or individual membership at the Bath and Tennis Club will qualify for a 20 percent
discount applied to their golf season membership.):
Resident
Corporate
Nonresident Nonresident
Membership:
Unlimited $1,500.00 $1,650.00 $2,000.00
Senior 850.00 n/a n/a
Senior limited n/a n/a 1,250.00
Junior 700.00 n/a n/a
Junior limited n/a n/a 875.00
Junior range and play n/a n/a 1,075.00
D. Golf Cart Rental Fees:
18 Holes 9 Holes
Hand carts $ 4.00 $ 3.00
Power carts 34.00 21.00
Twilight cart rental 20.00 n/a
E. Driving Range Fees: The cost of a bucket of sixty (60) balls is nine dollars ($9.00) for residents and ten dollars ($10.00) for nonresidents. A driving
range token card (20 tokens) may be purchased for seventy two dollars ($72.00) for residents and eighty dollars ($80.00) for nonresidents. The cost of
range memberships is five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) for golf members, six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) for residents and seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for nonresidents.
F. Surcharge: In addition to any greens fees or membership fees paid, each person utilizing the golf course at the Oak Brook Golf Club shall pay a
surcharge of three dollars ($3.00) per round of golf played. (Ord. G-1124, 2-27-2018; Ord. G-1144, 1-22-2019)
12-2-3: PERMANENT RESERVED WEEKEND STARTING TIMES:
A. Availability: Tee times will be available for eighteen (18) holes on Saturdays and Sundays for the period from approximately the last Saturday in April
through the last weekend in September at such times as designated by the Golf Club Manager, provided that there shall be no permanent reserved
starting times on any multiple-day golf tournament authorized to be played on the premises.
B. Deposit: A deposit of two hundred dollars ($200.00) will be required for each foursome either in cash, or by credit card guarantee provided by the
foursome captain. The deposit will be refunded in December if no forfeiture has occurred.
C. Tee Time Forfeiture: If a tee time is not canceled at least one day prior to play, and the foursome does not show for play, it will be the responsibility of
the foursome to fill these spots with other golfers. Should a foursome not show up or fails to fill their spot, they will be charged a no-show fee of twenty
five dollars ($25.00), notwithstanding the membership status of the missing member(s) of the foursome. A foursome that asserts that a missing
member will join the group during the round will be charged a no-show fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00), if the missing member fails to join the group
by the completion of the ninth hole. A season membership will not preclude or absolve a foursome from these charges. All charges will be made by
charging the foursome captain. If the captain fails to pay the above fees, the tee time will be forfeited. (Ord. G-1124, 2-27-2018)
12-2-4: NON-PERMANENT STARTING TIMES:
On weekends and holidays forfeited, canceled and undrawn permanent times and all other weekend times will be available for reservation not more than
eight (8) days in advance. Weekday times will be available for reservation not more than eight (8) days in advance. Residents and members may reserve
tee times up to eight (8) days in advance. Non-residents may reserve tee times up to seven (7) days in advance. No more than two (2) tee times may be
reserved for the same day unless authorized by the Golf Club Manager. Tee times may be reserved more than eight (8) days in advance by the Golf Club
Manager for golf outings. All tee times will be guaranteed by credit card. Cancellations will be accepted up to twenty four (24) hours in advance of the tee
times. (Ord. G-1124, 2-27-2018)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 311/438
12-2-5: GOLF LEAGUES:
A. Policy; Types: A golf league is any group of golfers of significant size for which a standard block of starting times is reserved on a consistent basis,
normally weekly. There will be at most two (2) golf league categories, twilight golf leagues and morning golf leagues.
1. Twilight golf leagues will be assigned to Oak Brook businesses or Oak Brook organizations on a first-come, first-served basis.
2. Morning leagues will be assigned annually: first to those leagues who had times the previous year, then to all other groups on a first-come, firstserved
basis.
B. Scheduling:
1. The golf league schedule times listed below may be extended for an Oak Brook organization or business golf league, provided the Golf Club
Manager determined that such an extension is into a time period with a low level of play where the daily fee use would not be significantly affected.
2. Golf league tee times will be scheduled only between the following times:
Monday 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
Tuesday 8:30 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
Wednesday 8:30 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
Thursday 7:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
C. Fees: Golf league participants shall pay the applicable greens fees' rate, except as arranged by separate agreement approved by the Village Manager.
(Ord. G-1124, 2-27-2018)
12-2-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Oak Brook Golf Club operating rules and regulations are as follows:
A. All golfers must check in with the cashier prior to tee off.
B. Proper golf attire must be worn at all times, including shirts with sleeves and collar, and golf shoes or flat-soled shoes.
C. No food or alcoholic beverages may be brought onto the golf course or Sports Core property, other than those purchased from the golf course or Bath
and Tennis Club refreshment areas, unless authorized by the Golf Course Superintendent/Manager.
D. Players may be grouped into foursomes or smaller groups.
E. No fivesomes or more will be allowed, except with the approval of a golf professional.
F. Golf carts must be picked up and returned to the cart area.
G. Parking for all activities, including use of the driving range, is limited to the parking lot.
H. Golf bags are not permitted in the clubhouse.
I. Players shall replace divots and repair all ball marks.
J. Golf rules and etiquette must be followed at all times.
K. All golfers must report to the starter on the first tee.
L. Card playing in the clubhouse is not permitted at any time.
M. Players are expected to keep pace with the group in front of them.
N. No domestic animals or pets are permitted on the golf course except as authorized by the Sports Core Director.
O. On Saturdays and Sundays between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and one o'clock (1:00) P.M. each tee-time group is responsible for four (4) greens fees.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 312/438
P. Only daily fee players, driving range customers, and season members may utilize the practice greens.
Q. Only daily fee players, season members, and persons authorized by the Golf Club Manager or his/her staff, may utilize the grounds and paths at the
Oak Brook Golf Course.
R. No person may go in or upon any pond or other body of water, whether liquid or frozen, on the Oak Brook Golf Course except maintenance personnel
authorized by the Golf Club Manager. (Ord. G-1124, 2-27-2018; Ord. G-1144, 1-22-2019)
12-2-7: DRIVING RANGE RULES:
The driving range rules and regulations are as follows:
A. Keep bags and golf carts behind fence.
B. Return pails to ball dispenser.
C. Practice only between tee markers.
D. Aim at yardage markers only.
E. Do not retrieve balls in front of tee markers.
F. The driving range is open from April 1st to November 1st, seven (7) days a week, weather permitting. Hours of operation are from the first tee time until
one-half (1/2) hour before dusk, except on Mondays when the range opens at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon.
G. Purchase tokens or range cards in pro shop for range balls in ball dispenser.
H. Users of range may not walk across the golf course.
I. Parking for driving ranges is limited to the golf course parking lot.
J. Shirts must be worn on the driving range. (Ord. G-1124, 2-27-2018)
Chapter 3
OAK BROOK BATH AND TENNIS CLUB
12-3-1: FACILITIES:
The Oak Brook Bath and Tennis Club consists of:
A. A clubhouse, including:
Bar facilities;
Covered patio facilities;
Dining room facilities;
Kitchen facilities;
Locker and shower facilities.
B. Outdoor swimming pools, including:
A diving pool;
A 25-yard competition pool;
A wading pool.
C. A lake with water recreation equipment.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 313/438
D. A snack pavilion with picnic tables.
E. Outdoor tennis courts.
F. A sand volleyball court. (Ord. G-1144, 1-22-2019)
12-3-2: SEASON MEMBERSHIP AND FEE SCHEDULE:
A. General Membership: Membership fees are non-refundable and/or transferable and are established as follows:
Residents:
Family swim Unlimited $ 800.00
Individual swim Unlimited 500.00
Senior residents:
Couple Unlimited 700.00
Individual swim Unlimited 385.00
Corporate membership:
Family swim Unlimited 1,200.00
Individual swim Unlimited 800.00
Non-resident:
Family swim Unlimited 1,350.00
Individual swim Unlimited 950.00
Senior - couple swim Unlimited 1,000.00
Senior - individual swim Unlimited 550.00
Tennis membership:
Family tennis Unlimited 450.00
Individual tennis Unlimited 350.00
Senior +1 Unlimited 400.00
Individual Unlimited 300.00
B. Discounts:
1. A discount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for fees paid by May 1 will be afforded to each unlimited swim membership category, with the exclusion
of senior memberships, which will be afforded a fifty dollar ($50.00) discount.
C. Swim Team Fee Schedule:
First child in family $200.00
Second child in family 175.00
Each additional child in family 75.00
D. Guest Fees:
1. Individual guest fees per person are set forth below:
Children under 24 months Free
Ages 2 - 17 $ 7.00
Ages 18+ 10.00
Usage Cost
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 314/438
(Ord. G-1144, 1-22-2019)
12-3-3: MEMBERSHIP IDENTIFICATION AND CHARGING:
A. Members will be issued photo identification cards indicating the type of membership and the holder's name. Such cards will be required for admission
and as identification for charging privileges at all Sports Core facilities.
B. All accounts will be payable upon receipt of statements. Any balance not paid within thirty (30) days of the statement date shall be charged an interest
fee of one and five-tenths percent (1.5%) (18 percent annual rate). Membership privileges on any accounts with unpaid balances over forty five (45)
days will be canceled, and any accounts with unpaid balances over ninety (90) days will be terminated from the club. Memberships will not be
renewed until any balance from previous seasons has been paid in full, including any costs that the Village incurs due to collection discounts and fees.
C. All fees for lessons and programs shall be charged through the Bath and Tennis Club. Fee schedules for lessons shall be posted. There will be no
refunds unless programs are cancelled.
D. Locker use shall be available on a first-come, first-served basis and in accordance with policies of the Bath and Tennis Club established by
management and posted in the locker areas.
E. A challenge to a charge on a member account must be lodged within forty five (45) days of the statement date or the charge will stand. (Ord. G-1144,
1-22-2019)
12-3-4: OPERATION OF CLUBHOUSE:
A. Hours: The Bath and Tennis Club facilities will maintain hours as follows:
1. Clubhouse Office: Hours of operation for the clubhouse between May 1 to Labor Day (in season), and Labor Day to May 1 (off-season), will be
established by the Village Manager (or designee) and posted at the Clubhouse Office. Customers will be advised to contact the Sports Core
Administration when the Clubhouse Office is closed.
2. Poolside Food And Beverage Service: Weather permitting, poolside food and beverage service will generally operate in conjunction with swim
hours, unless otherwise posted, from Memorial Day weekend to Labor Day.
B. Rules And Regulations: The Oak Brook Bath and Tennis Clubhouse operating rules and regulations are as follows:
1. Persons under twenty one (21) years of age will not be served alcoholic beverages. The Bath and Tennis Club staff reserves the right to refuse
service to any person who has had, in their judgment, too much to drink or may be otherwise impaired.
2. Food and beverage services may be paid for through the club member's account. A ticket for these services will be signed by the member.
3. No alcoholic beverages or food may be brought onto the Bath and Tennis Club or Sports Core property other than those purchased from the golf
course or Bath and Tennis Club refreshment areas.
4. Children, guests and members are asked to use the outside entrances to the locker rooms.
5. The Bath and Tennis Club is not responsible for the loss of personal property.
C. Clubhouse Rental And Food And Beverage Service:
1. Space at the clubhouse may be rented for private parties or events subject to availability and so as not to conflict with scheduled membership
events and commitments.
2. Use of the Bath and Tennis Clubhouse may be arranged by the Village Manager, his/her designee, or a third party specifically contracted by the
Village for such purposes. The following rental fee shall be collected for usage of the Bath and Tennis Clubhouse unless amended with the
authorization of the Village Manager:
Monday through Thursday:
7:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M. $ 500.00
4:30 P.M. to 12:00 midnight 1,000.00
Friday:
9:00 A.M. to 2:30 P.M. 1,000.00
4:30 P.M. to 12:00 midnight 3,600.00
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 315/438
Saturday:
9:00 A.M. to 2:30 P.M. 1,600.00
4:30 P.M. to 12:00 midnight 3,200.00
Sunday:
9:00 A.M. to 2:30 P.M. 1,400.00
4:30 P.M. to 12:00 midnight 2,800.00
Rental fees are non-refundable.
Rental fees for Homeowners' Association Board meetings are as follows:
Monday through Thursday, all year round: Rental fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00).
Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays: Rental fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
If food will be served there will be an additional one hundred dollar ($100.00) charge applied to the rental fee for cleanup.
D. Bath And Tennis Club Grounds Rental: Any use of the grounds of the Bath and Tennis Club in the off-season (after Labor Day and prior to the
Federally-observed Memorial Day) may be authorized by the Bath and Tennis Club Manager, subject to individual arrangements. (Ord. G-1144, 1-22-
2019)
12-3-5: OPERATION OF SWIMMING POOLS:
A. The pools may be utilized by Sports Core members and their registered guests according to the privileges associated with the applicable class of
membership.
B. Weather permitting, the pools will be open between the Saturday immediately before the Federally-observed Memorial Day and the day after Labor
Day, or as determined by the Bath and Tennis Club Manager subject to availability of certified lifeguarding staff and weather.
C. Group and individual swimming and diving lessons will be available from instructors employed by the club.
D. The Oak Brook Bath and Tennis Club swimming pool and canoeing rules and regulations are as follows:
1. No inner tubes, non-safety flotation devices, or pool toys will be allowed in the pool areas.
2. Non-swimmers who cannot stand in the shallow area must have someone at least the age of fourteen (14) in the water with them at all times.
3. There will be no cutoff shorts or gym shorts allowed in the pool. All swimmers must be wearing a swimsuit. No thong swimsuits will be permitted.
4. No one is permitted to be in the pool area, unless a lifeguard is on duty.
5. No diving is permitted in the shallow area of the pools.
6. No running, pushing, rough housing or inappropriate behavior will be permitted.
7. Only one person is permitted on the diving board at a time; no double bouncing will be permitted.
8. Swimmers must stay off of the pool divider ropes.
9. The diving boards are restricted to those able to meet deep water requirements as established by the swimming staff.
10. Children under the age of eleven (11) must be accompanied by someone age fourteen (14) or older at all times, except for organized swim team
activities.
11. There will be no use of water recreation equipment on the lake unless a lifeguard is on duty. Persons using said equipment must wear a life jacket
at all times.
12. Swimming is not allowed in the lake at any time.
13. No person with open sores, skin disease, inflamed eyes or any other condition that would endanger the health of the other members and guests
are allowed at the pool facility until the condition has been reported to be non-contagious/corrected by a medical professional.
14. DuPage County Health Department regulations shall be posted and in effect at all times.
15. No tanning aids or lotions are allowed in the water. (Ord. G-1144, 1-22-2019)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 316/438
12-3-6: OPERATION OF TENNIS COURTS:
A. The outdoor tennis courts may be utilized by Bath and Tennis Club members with the appropriate membership.
B. The outdoor tennis courts will be supervised by a tennis professional and staff from May 15 to September 15 (weather permitting). The nets will be up
and the courts will be open on a first-come, first-served basis from approximately April 15 to October 15 (weather permitting). The outdoor courts will
be open during these dates seven (7) days per week from dawn until dusk.
C. The Oak Brook Bath and Tennis Club's tennis courts operating rules and regulations are as follows:
1. Courts may be taken out of service due to moisture or dryness or any other reason at the discretion of the Bath and Tennis Club Manager.
2. Club-sponsored activities have priority for the use of the courts over general play. Activities are controlled by the Bath and Tennis Club Manager and
are posted in advance.
3. Play is limited to one hour when people are waiting for a court.
4. Tennis attire and tennis shoes must be worn at all times at the tennis courts. No running shoes, cutoff shorts or swim suits are allowed. Swimmers
are required to wear a cover-up when visiting the tennis courts. Only soft court shoes are acceptable on Har-Tru clay courts.
5. Children under the age of eleven (11) shall not be left unattended by someone age fourteen (14) or older at the tennis courts.
6. All bicycles shall be stored in the bicycle rack. Motorcycles must be parked in the parking lot.
7. Quiet is requested so that players can concentrate on their games. Absolutely no horseplay will be tolerated at the courts.
8. All trash shall be deposited in trash containers.
9. Members will be charged a fee for participation in any drills or competitions.
10. Food, beverages or other amenities which are part of a tennis activity will require an additional fee.
11. All adults representing an Oak Brook Bath and Tennis competitive team, in-house league, Ladies' or Men's Interclub or USTA must have an
unlimited tennis membership. (Ord. G-1144, 1-22-2019)
Title 13
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
13-1-1: TITLE:
This Title shall be known, cited and referred to as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF OAK BROOK, ILLINOIS OF 1966. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-
1966)
13-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. Purpose: This Title is adopted to the end that:
1. Adequate natural light, pure air and safety from fire and other dangers may be secured.
2. Value of land and structures throughout the Village may be conserved.
3. Congestion in the public streets may be lessened or avoided.
4. Hazards to persons and damage to property resulting from the accumulation or runoff of storm or flood waters may be lessened or avoided.
5. Aesthetic values throughout the Village may be preserved and enhanced.
6. Public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience and general welfare may otherwise be promoted.
B. Intent: To achieve these ends, this Title sets forth regulations and standards to:
1. Regulate and limit the height and bulk of structures hereafter erected.
2. Establish, regulate and limit setback lines along streets.
3. Regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas, and to regulate and determine the area of open spaces within the surrounding structures.
4. Classify, regulate and restrict the location of trades and industries and the location of structures designed for industrial, business, residential and
other specified uses.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 317/438
5. Divide the entire Village into districts of such number, shape, area and of such different classes as may be suitable.
6. Prohibit structures or uses incompatible with the character of such districts.
7. Fix standards to which structures therein shall conform.
8. Prevent additions to, and alteration or remodeling of, exiting structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations lawfully imposed
under this Title.
9. Provide for the gradual elimination of structures and uses which are incompatible with the character of the districts in which they are located.
10. Define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies as provided in this Title.
11. Prescribe penalties for the violation of the provisions of this Title, or of any amendment thereto. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-1-3: INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion and protection of the
public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience and general welfare. In addition:
A. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Title upon the: 1) use of land or structures; 2) height and bulk of structures; 3) floor area
requirements; 4) lot area and width requirements; and 5) yard and other open space requirements are more restrictive or less restrictive than
comparable standards imposed by any other provision of this Title or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the
regulations which are more restrictive, or which impose higher standards or requirements, shall govern.
B. This Title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or other private agreement.
C. No use or structure not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this Title shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of this
Title; and to the extent that, and in any manner that, said unlawful structures or use are in conflict with the requirements of this Title, said structure or
use remains unlawful under the provisions of this Title. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-1-4: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Village President and Board of Trustees that the several provisions ofthis Title are separable, in accordance
with the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provisions of this Title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this
Title not specifically included in said judgment.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this Title to a particular property or structure, such
judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property or structure not specifically included in said judgment. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-
1966)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
13-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this Title the rules and definitions contained in this Section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
In addition:
A. The present tense includes the future and the future the present; the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular; the word "shall" is
mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
B. The material under each caption or heading in this Title shall be construed and limited in a manner consistent with the applicable captions or headings
and subheadings. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, when used in this Title, shall have the meaning set forth after each:
ABUTTING: To have a common property line or district line.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 318/438
ACCESSORY: A use, structure, or part of a structure, which:
A. Is subordinate to and serves the principal use or structure.
B. Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal use or structure.
C. Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal use or structure.
D. Is located on the same lot as the principal use or structure served, with the exception of accessory off-street parking facilities as are permitted
elsewhere than on the same lot with the use or structure.
ADJACENT: Touching, as distinguished from lying near.
ADJOINING: Touching or contiguous, as distinguished from lying near.
AGRICULTURE: Farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and animal and poultry husbandry and accessory uses
customarily incidental to normal agricultural activities.
AIRPORT: A lot which is used, or intended, for the landing and takeoff of aircraft, together with all structures located thereon.
ALLEY: A public or private right of way, other than a street, less than thirty feet (30') in width, which right of way normally affords secondary means of
access to abutting properties.
ALTERATION: A change in size, shape, character or use of a structure.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY: A building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing more than two (2) motor vehicles, using production line method.
AUTOMOBILE MINI-MARKET: An automobile service station which includes the retail sale of merchandise or services not related to the maintenance,
service or repair of motor vehicles in addition to the sale of fuel, oil and accessories for motor vehicles. Such use shall be located entirely within the
buildable area and the building floor area, including all storage for such use, which may not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A building or portion thereof or lot used for offering for sale at retail to the public, fuels, oils and accessories for motor
vehicles; where repair service is incidental, where no storage or parking space is offered for rent and where no motor vehicles or boats are offered for sale
or rent. When such dispensing, sale or offering for sale is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises are classified as a public garage.
AWNING: A roof like projection, rigid or retractable in operation, which projects from the wall of a building.
BASEMENT: A story having part but not more than one-half (1/2) of its floor to clear ceiling height below grade. When a basement is used for storage, or
garages for use of occupants of the building, or other facilities common for the operation and maintenance of the entire building, it shall not be counted as
a story.
BI-LEVEL: A dwelling having one story at approximate grade level and a second story one-half (1/2) story higher over a habitable basement approximately
one-half (1/2) of which basement is above grade level.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of street, railroad rights of way, public parks, permanent open space and other lines of
demarcation. A block may be located in part beyond the corporate limits of the village.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES: The president and board of trustees of the village of Oak Brook, Illinois.
BUILDABLE AREA: That portion of a lot which meets at least the minimum width requirements and setback lines of the district within which it is located
(see definition of Lot Width).
BUILDING: A structure having a roof designed or built for the enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any
kind and which is permanently affixed to the land.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A subordinate building or portion of a principal building, the use of which is incidental to that of the principal building and
customary in connection with that use.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building with a permanent roof separated on all sides from the adjoining open space or from other structures,
by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal entrance and exit doors.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which the primary use of the lot on which it is located is conducted.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: A building not designed or intended to be permanently located at the place where it is, or where it is intended to be, placed or
affixed.
BULK: The term used to indicate the size, location and number of structures, including: a) size and height of structures; b) location of exterior walls; c)
floor area ratio; d) open space allocated to structures; and e) lot area and lot width.
BURIAL STRUCTURES: Aboveground structures within cemeteries, other than community burial structures, used, or intended to be used, for the
entombment of human remains, including, without limitation, mausoleums, columbaria, and other similar structures.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 319/438
BUSINESS: An occupation, employment or enterprise which occupies time, attention, labor and materials; or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold or
services are offered.
CANDLEPOWER: The luminous intensity, as evaluated in effectiveness of stimulating visual sensation, of any radiation in a given direction. The
international candle was adopted in 1940 as one-sixtieth (1/60) of the brightness of freezing platinum.
CARPORT: A roofed automobile shelter, with two (2) or more open sides.
CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its floor to clear ceiling height below grade. A cellar is not included in computing the number of stories
for the purpose of height measurement.
CEMETERY: Any land or structure dedicated to and used, or intended to be used, for the burial, interment, or entombment of human remains, and related
accessory uses.
CEMETERY ACCESSORY STRUCTURES: Structures used in support of and accessory to a cemetery use, including, without limitation, caretaker or
similarly used residences, greenhouses, sales offices, storage buildings, administrative offices, and other similar structures accessory to a cemetery.
CLINIC, MEDICAL OR DENTAL: A building or portion thereof, the principal use of which is for offices of physicians or dentists, or both, for the
examination and treatment of persons on an outpatient basis.
CLOSED CUP FLASHPOINT: The lowest temperature at which a combustible liquid under the most favorable condition will give off a flammable vapor
which will burn immediately.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: A structure or part thereof used by a not for profit association of persons who are bona fide members and where facilities
are restricted to members and their guests. Food and alcoholic beverages may be served on its premises provided they are secondary and incidental to
the principal use.
COCKTAIL LOUNGE: An establishment where refreshments having alcoholic contents, as stipulated by law, are sold to be consumed on the premises,
but not including restaurants where the principal business is the serving of food, except restaurants where accessory cocktail lounges are permitted by
district regulations of this title.
COMMERCIAL THOROUGHFARE: A "roadway", as defined in this section, depicted or described as a principal arterial street or a collector route in the
official comprehensive plan and official map of the village, and those local roadways that have substantial footage abutting and adjoining properties zoned
ORA or business.
COMMUNITY BURIAL STRUCTURES: Aboveground structures over twenty feet (20') in height used, or intended to be used, for the entombment of
human remains, located in or near the center of a cemetery in accordance with their specific applicable regulations in this title, including, without limitation,
mausoleums, columbaria, and other similar structures.
CONDOMINIUM: A multiple dwelling or development containing individually owned dwelling units and jointly owned and shared common areas and
facilities. These dwelling units may be attached horizontally or vertically.
CONFORMING STRUCTURE: Any structure which: a) complies with all the regulations of this title governing the district in which said structure is located;
or b) is designed or intended for a permitted use or special use, as allowed in this title in the district in which it is located.
CORNER: The meeting place of two (2) converging surfaces.
COURT: An open unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, and which is bounded on two (2) or more
sides by such building or buildings.
DAYCARE CENTER: A facility in which are received three (3) or more children, not of common parentage, apart from their parents or guardians, for part
or all of the day, but not later than nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. The term "daycare center" includes, but is not limited to, nursery schools, childcare centers, day
nurseries and playgroups, but does not include kindergartens or nursery schools operated by public or private elementary or secondary school systems.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A proposal for the development of a parcel of land zoned or to be zoned ORA3 containing a statement setting forth the
information specified in subsection 13-10C-6C1 of this title, and a plat setting forth graphically the information specified in subsection 13-10C-6C2 of this
title.
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT: The official of the village, duly appointed and designated as its director of community development.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: A structure or part thereof in which are provided facilities primarily for serving patrons parked in automobiles on the
premises.
DUPLEX: A structure containing two (2) dwelling units, each of which has separate and direct access to the outside.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential uses, including single-family and multiple-family dwellings, but not
including mobile homes or other trailers, or lodging rooms in hotels, motels or lodging houses.
DWELLING, ATTACHED (TOWNHOUSE, GROUP, ROW OR GARDEN APARTMENT): A multiple-family dwelling originally designed and constructed to
accommodate three (3) or more dwelling units, with the dwelling units joined together by party wall or walls. Each unit shall have its own ground floor
entrance and living space.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is surrounded on all sides by open spaces on the same lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SEMIDETACHED (TOWNHOUSE, GROUP, ROW OR GARDEN APARTMENT): A dwelling joined to one other dwelling by a party wall, or
vertical cavity wall, and aboveground physically unifying horizontal structural elements.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling containing one dwelling unit only.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 320/438
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as living quarters for one family only. Individual bathrooms and complete
single kitchen facilities, permanently installed to serve the entire family, shall always be included within each dwelling unit.
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room, exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets and may contain dining alcove
directly off the principal room provided that such dining alcove does not exceed one hundred twenty five (125) square feet in area.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION CENTER: A terminal at which electric energy is received from the transmission system and is delivered to the distribution
system only.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION: A terminal at which electric energy is received from the transmission system and is delivered to other elements of the
transmission system and, generally to the local distribution system.
ENCLOSED PARKING: Parking which is housed in a parking structure, or in a portion of the principal building on a lot, which is completely under a
permanent roof and with sidewalk enclosures so designed as to screen the parked cars from view from the exterior of the structure. Completely open wall
sections shall be permitted only for entrance and exit driveways. Access to all parking spaces shall be from aisles within the structure.
ERECT: To construct or reconstruct or excavate, fill, drain or conduct physical operation of any kind in preparation for or in pursuance of construction or
reconstruction or to move a structure upon a lot.
ESTABLISHMENT, BUSINESS: A structure or lot used in whole or in part as a place of business, the ownership or management of which is separate and
distinct from the ownership or management of any other place of business located on the same or other lot.
EXISTING CEMETERIES AND STRUCTURES: Any cemetery, and the cemetery structures existing therein, existing as of January 22, 2013.
FALLOUT SHELTER: An accessory structure and use which incorporates the fundamentals for fallout protection - shielding mass, ventilation, and space
to live, and which is constructed of such materials, in such a manner, as to afford to the occupants substantial protection from radioactive fallout. It shall
not be used for storage purposes, other than for food, clothing, medical supplies and materials required for temporary shelter.
FAMILY: One person or two (2) or more persons each related to the other by blood, marriage or legal adoption, or a group of not more than three (3)
persons not all so related, together with his or their domestic servants, maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit. A family may include, in
addition thereto, not more than two (2) roomers, boarders or permanent guests - whether or not gratuitous.
FENCE: A structure used to delineate a boundary, or as a barrier, or as a means of confinement or for confinement.
FENCE, OPEN: A fence, including gates, which has, over its entirety, fifty percent (50%) of the surface area in open space as viewed from an angle of
ninety degrees (90°) from the fence line, except that the required open space in louver-type fences may be viewed from any angle, and excluding metal
fences with more than seventy five percent (75%) of its surface area open space.
FENCE, SOLID: A fence, including gates, which conceals from view from adjoining properties, streets or alleys, activities conducted behind it.
FLOOR AREA FOR DETERMINING FLOOR AREA RATIO: The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several stories including the basement of a
building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, or from the center lines of walls separating two (2) buildings. The floor area shall also
include the horizontal areas on each story devoted to: a) elevator shafts and stairwells; b) mechanical equipment, except that located on roofs whether
open or enclosed, i.e., bulkheads, water tanks, and cooling towers; c) habitable attic space as permitted by the building code of the Village; d) interior
balconies and mezzanines; e) enclosed porches; and f) accessory uses. The horizontal area in every story of a building devoted to enclosed off-street
parking and off-street loading facilities shall not be included in the floor area.
FLOOR AREA FOR DETERMINING OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS: Floor area when prescribed as the basis of determining
off-street parking and off-street loading requirements shall be the sum of the gross horizontal area of the several stories of a structure taken from glass
line to glass line and including the structure's primary and permanent working area, but excluding the basement.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The numerical value obtained by dividing the floor area within a building or buildings on a lot by the area of such lot. (The floor
area ratio as designated for each district, when multiplied by the lot area in square feet, shall determine the maximum permissible floor area for the
building or buildings on the lot).
FOOT-CANDLE: A unit of illumination, equivalent to the illumination at all points which are one foot (1') distance from a uniform point source of one
candlepower.
FOOT-LAMBERT: A unit of brightness, usually of a reflecting surface. A diffusion surface of uniform brightness reflecting or emitting the equivalent of the
light from one candle at one foot (1') distant over one square foot has a brightness of one foot-lambert.
FREE-BURNING: The rate of combustion of a material which burns actively and easily supports combustion.
FREQUENCY: Signifies the number of oscillations per second in a sound wave and is an index of the pitch of the resulting sound.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof, other than a storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing motor vehicles. Hiring,
selling and storing of motor vehicles may be included.
GARAGE, STORAGE: A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for storage of motor vehicles and in which fuels and oils are not sold,
except as regulated in this Title, and in which no motor vehicles are equipped, repaired, hired and sold.
GATE: A structure that may be swung, drawn or lowered to block an entrance or passageway. A gate may be part of a fence or may exist separately.
GROSS DENSITY: Ratio between total number of dwelling units on a lot and total lot area in acres. The area to include local streets.
GUEST, PERMANENT: A person who occupies or has the right to occupy a lodging house, hotel, apartment hotel or motel accommodation as his place of
permanent residence.
HABITABLE VEHICLE: A vehicle designed, constructed or modified to permit its use as temporary or permanent living or working quarters.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 321/438
HEALTH CLUB: The meeting place of a group of persons organized for the purpose of improving the general condition of their health through exercise.
HELICOPTER: Any rotary wing aircraft which depends principally for its support and motion in the air upon the lift generated by one or more power driven
rotors rotating on a substantially vertical axis.
HELIPORT (NOT FOR FREIGHT): Any area of land, water or structural surface which is designed, used or intended to be used for the landing and takeoff
of helicopters and any pertinent areas which are designed, used or intended to be used for a heliport building or other facilities which have received a
certificate of approval from the Division of Aeronautics, State of Illinois, Department of Transportation and a special use permit from the Village to operate
said heliport.
HOME OCCUPATION: A gainful occupation or profession conducted entirely within a dwelling unit.
HOTEL: A building or buildings, sometimes designated as a motel, motor inn or highway hotel, containing not less than fifty (50) lodging rooms, where
lodgings are provided for compensation, but excluding apartment hotels as defined in this Section. A hotel may include dining and meeting rooms, and
business uses commonly incidental to a hotel operation.
HOTEL, APARTMENT: A hotel in which more than fifty percent (50%) of the accommodations are in dwelling units occupied or intended for occupancy by
permanent guests.
IMPROVEMENT PLAN: A plat setting forth graphically the location and layout of all or a part of the proposed land improvements and buildings to be
constructed on a parcel of land zoned ORA3 and for which a development plan has been approved, together with such additional information as may be
required by the applicable provisions of the subdivision regulations1.
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a religious, educational, scientific or charitable not-for-profit corporation or organization, wholly for public or semipublic
use.
JUNKYARD: A lot, with or without accessory structures, used for the abandonment, storage, keeping, collecting, buying, selling, exchanging, baling,
packing, disassembling or handling scrap or discarded materials, including vehicles, machinery and equipment not in operable condition, or parts thereof,
and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles.
KENNEL: A place or premises where dogs, cats or other household domestic animals are maintained, boarded, bred or cared for, in return for
remuneration, or are kept for the purpose of sale.
LAMBERT: 1/929 of a foot-lambert, usually used to designate intrinsic brightness of light sources.
LAUNDERETTE: A business that provides coin-operated self-service washing, drying, dry-cleaning or ironing facilities, provided no pickup or delivery
service is maintained.
LOADING BERTH: A space within the principal building or on the same lot as the principal building providing for the standing, loading or unloading of
trucks and with access to a street or alley.
LODGING HOUSE: A building originally designed for and used as a single or two-family dwelling, all or a portion of which contains lodging rooms which
accommodate persons who are not members of the keeper's family and where lodging or meals, or both, are provided for compensation for three (3) or
more persons.
LODGING ROOM: A room or suite of rooms rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without cooking facilities. In a suite of rooms, each room which
provides sleeping accommodations shall be counted as one lodging room for the purpose of this Title.
LOT: A parcel of land consisting of adjoining parts which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a parcel to
be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Therefore, a "lot" may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by lot lines. For the purposes of meeting minimum lot area requirements, the land area of a lot used
for providing private access rights of way shall not be included.
LOT, CORNER: A lot of which at least two (2) adjacent sides abut for their full lengths upon streets; provided, that the interior angle of the intersection of
such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot that is not a corner lot.
LOT LINE ADJOINING A STREET: A front lot line, the side lot line of a corner lot which abuts a street, or a rear lot line of a through lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The boundary of a lot abutting a street. On a corner lot, either lot line may be construed to be the front lot line by the owner.
LOT LINE, INTERIOR: A lot line which does not abut a street.
LOT LINE, REAR: An interior lot line which is most distant from and is or is almost parallel to the front lot line, and in the case of an irregular- or triangularshaped
lot, a line ten feet (10') in length within the lot, which is parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: An interior lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT LINES: The property lines bounding a lot.
LOT OF RECORD: A single lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage
County, Illinois, which has a minimum lot area equal to or greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet and a minimum lot width equal to or greater than
sixty feet (60'); or any lot legally created prior to November 9, 1971, which: a) has a minimum lot area equal to or greater than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet and a minimum width equal to or greater than sixty feet (60'); b) for which an assessment plat has been filed with the recorder of deeds of
DuPage County, Illinois, pursuant to the provisions of 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/35.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the street side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 322/438
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having frontage on two (2) streets, but excluding corner or reversed corner lots.
LOT WIDTH: The length of a line parallel to the street measured at the front lot line, except on a curvilinear street where it shall be a line parallel to the
street measured at the setback line.
MANUFACTURING ESTABLISHMENT: A lot and structure, the principal use of which is manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembling, repairing,
storing, cleaning, servicing or testing of materials, goods or products.
MARQUEE: A rooflike structure of a permanent nature which projects from the wall of a building.
MEMORIAL STRUCTURES: Aboveground structures within cemeteries: a) installed for the purpose of marking, commemorating, or honoring a deceased
person and b) not used for the aboveground entombment of human remains, including, without limitation, grave stones, family estate markers, ornamental
benches, vases and other decorative structures, and similar aboveground structures.
MICRON: A unit of length, equal to one-thousandth part of one millimeter (0.001 mm).
MOBILE HOME: A trailer designed and constructed or used for dwelling purposes which contains cooking, sanitary and electrical facilities, and has a
gross floor area of four hundred twenty (420) square feet or more.
MOTOR VEHICLE: A passenger vehicle, habitable vehicle, truck, truck trailer, trailer or semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name and address of a building, or the name of an occupant thereof, and the practice of a permitted occupation
therein.
NATURAL GROUND LEVEL: The existing elevation, prior to any movement of organic or nonorganic matter which would require the issuance of a permit
under the ordinances of the village, or the proposed elevation as depicted on a subdivision grading plan approved by the village, or as otherwise
reasonably determined by the village engineer.
NO ACCESS STRIP: A strip of land within and along a rear lot line of a through lot adjoining a street which is designated on a recorded subdivision plat or
property deed as land over which motor vehicular travel shall not be permitted.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A structure lawfully established which: a) does not comply with all the regulations of this title governing the bulk of the
district in which such structure is located; or b) is designed or intended for a nonconforming use.
NONCONFORMING USE: A structure and the use thereof or the use of land that does not conform with the regulations of this title governing use in the
district in which it is located but which conformed with all of the codes, ordinances and other legal requirements applicable at the time such structure was
erected, enlarged or altered, and the use thereof or the use of land was established.
NURSERY SCHOOL: A building containing facilities for the part time care of five (5) or more children of preelementary school age in addition to the
dwelling unit of the family residing therein.
NURSING HOME: A building containing facilities for the care of and occupancy by aged, chronically ill, infirm or incurable persons, or a place of rest for
those persons suffering bodily disorders, in which three (3) or more persons not members of the family residing on the premises are received, and
provided with food, shelter and care, but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease
or injury, maternity cases or mental illness.
OCTAVE BAND: A method of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves in order to classify sound according to pitch.
ODOR: The minimum concentration of odorous matter in the air that can be detected as an odor.
ODOR THRESHOLD: The minimum concentration of odorous matter in the air that can be detected as an odor. Odor thresholds for many materials and
compounds can be found in table III, chapter 5, of "Air Pollution Abatement Manual", copyrighted 1951 by the Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc.,
Washington, D.C.
OFF STREET PARKING FACILITY: A lot which is improved and used or a structure which is designed and used exclusively for the storage of passenger
motor vehicles, either for accessory off street parking spaces or commercial off street parking spaces. When the parking structure is an accessory
building, it shall be compatible in appearance with the principal building.
OPEN LAND: A single parcel of land in its natural state or used for agriculture, or outdoor recreational uses upon which there are located only structures
incidental to the operation of such uses and upon which building coverage does not exceed two percent (2%) of the area.
OPEN SALES LOT: A lot occupied or used for the purpose of buying, selling, or renting merchandise stored or displayed out of doors prior to sale. Such
merchandise includes automobiles, trucks, motor scooters, motorcycles, boats or similar commodities.
PARKING SPACE: A space, enclosed in a building or unenclosed, used for the parking of one automobile and which is accessible to and from a street or
alley.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Finely divided solid or liquid matter, other than water, which is released into the atmosphere.
PARTY WALL: An interior wall of adjoining buildings extending from its footing to the underside of the roof, and which separates and is in common use by
such adjoining buildings.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: Criteria established to control smoke and particulate matter, noise, odor, toxic matter, vibration, fire and explosion
hazards, glare and heat and radiation hazards generated by or inherent in uses of land or structures.
PLAN COMMISSION: The plan commission of the village of Oak Brook, Illinois2.
PRESERVATION PLAN: A proposal for residential development of existing building or buildings of historical, architectural or cultural significance
containing the information required in subsection 13-6-4D2 of this title.
PRESERVATION RESTRICTION: A right, whether or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 323/438
instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land or in any order of taking, appropriate to the preservation of areas, places, buildings or
structures to forbid or limit acts of demolition, alteration, use or other acts detrimental to the preservation of the areas, places, buildings or structures of
historical, architectural or cultural significance.
PRESERVATION VISTA: A required open area on a lot measured from the principal structure to the lot lines or right of way, whichever is closer, within
which no building or structure is permitted, except as specifically authorized pursuant to an approved preservation plan.
PRINCIPAL CORNERS: Not more than five (5) corners of a structure, two (2) of which are the corners having the lowest and next lowest elevations of all
corners in the structure at the point where they intersect natural ground level.
PYROPHORIC DUST: A dust in a finely divided state in such concentration as to be combustible or explosive in air.
RADIATION HAZARDS: The deleterious and harmful effects of all ionizing radiation which shall include all radiation capable of producing ions in its
passage through other matter. Such radiations shall include, but not be limited to, electromagnetic radiations such as X-rays and gamma rays and
particulate radiations such as electrons or beta particles, protons, neutrons and alpha particles.
RESEARCH LABORATORY: A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation,
but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
RESERVOIR PARKING SPACES: Those off street parking spaces allocated for temporary standing of automobiles awaiting entrance to a particular
establishment.
RINGELMANN CHART: The chart described in the U.S. bureau of mines information circular 6888, on which are illustrated graduated shades of gray for
use in estimating the light obscuring capacity of smoke and smoke density.
RINGELMANN NUMBER: The number of the area on the Ringelmann chart that coincides most nearly with the visual density of emission or the light
obscuring capacity of smoke.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street which is used or intended to be used for the movement of vehicles.
SENIOR HOUSING: A multiple-family structure containing dwelling units controlled by a public body, nonprofit corporation for persons fifty five (55) years
or older. Types of projects that fall under this definition include: independent living; assisted living; congregate care and residential care facilities.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a street line/property line, required side yard or required rear yard and any part of a structure or
any edge of the area of operation of a principal use when no structure is involved. For single-family homes, the setback is measured between the street
line, side yard or rear yard and the outside edge of the structure and/or eave (excluding gutters).
SIGN, POLITICAL: A sign or poster concerning candidates for office, public issues or similar matters. Such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in
size, shall not be illuminated in any manner, shall not be affixed to any public utility, pole, tree or natural object, nor be located within a public right of way,
nor create a safety or sight distance problem.
SMOKE: The visible discharge from a chimney, stack vent, exhaust or combustion process which is made up of particulate matter.
SMOKE UNIT: The number obtained when the smoke density in the Ringelmann number is multiplied by the time of emission in minutes. For the purpose
of this calculation: a) a Ringelmann density reading shall be made at least once a minute during the period of observation; b) each reading is then
multiplied by the time in minutes during which it is observed; and c) the various products are then added together to give the total number of smoke units
observed during the entire observation period.
SOUND LEVEL: The intensity of sound of an operation or use as measured in decibels.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument standardized by the American Standards Association for the measurement of the intensity of sound.
SPECIALTY RETAIL PROGRAM: One or more of the following uses and structures, when located within designated, interior areas of a shopping center,
in districts where permitted as a special use, and where authorized as a special use: a) permanent pavilions and kiosks for the preparation, sale and
consumption of food and beverages, including adjacent outdoor seating; b) seasonal, portable carts (also referred to as "mobile units" or "RMUs") for the
sale of prepackaged food and beverages, including adjacent outdoor seating; c) seasonal merchandising zones containing a defined number of portable
carts selling primarily nonfood merchandise and packaged food gift items not intended for immediate consumption; d) defined zones for product
introduction or promotional activities, such as demonstrations and fashion shows; and e) entertainment and performance zones, including tables and
chairs. "Seasonal" shall mean that weather permits the operation of the portable carts.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A private stable is any building which is located on a lot on which a dwelling is located, and which is designed, arranged, used or
intended to be used for housing horses for the private use of occupants of the dwelling.
STABLE, PUBLIC: A building where horses are kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the top surface of the next floor or roof above, except that a space used
exclusively for the housing of mechanical services of the building shall not be construed to be a story if access to such space may be had only for
maintenance of such services. The floor of a story may have split levels provided that there are not more than four feet (4') difference in elevation between
the different levels of the floor. A basement shall be counted as a story and a mezzanine floor shall be counted as a story when it covers over one-third
(1/3) of the area of the floor next below it, or if the vertical distance from the floor next below it to the floor next above it is twenty four feet (24') or more.
STORY, HALF: A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than
three feet (3') above the floor of such story.
STREET: A permanent public or private right of way which affords a primary means of access to abutting property.
STREET FRONTAGE: All of the property fronting on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets, or in the case of a dead end street, all of the
property along one side of the street between an intersecting street and the end of such dead end street.
STREET, INTERNAL: A street not located along the exterior boundaries of a planned development.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 324/438
STREET LINE: The street right of way line.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders; or any substantial
change in the roof or in the exterior walls, excepting such repair or replacement as may be required for the safety of the building.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or attached to something having
a permanent location on the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, signs and pavements.
STRUCTURE HEIGHT: The height of a structure as measured from a base elevation determined by averaging the elevations of the principal corners in
the perimeter wall of the structure at natural ground level to the highest point of the structure. See section 13-3-8 of this title.
THREE COMPONENT MEASURING SYSTEM: Instruments which measure simultaneously earthborne vibrations in horizontal and vertical planes.
TOWNHOME: A one-family dwelling unit, with a private entrance, which is part of a structure which contains three (3) or more dwelling units which are
attached horizontally.
TOWNHOUSE, GROUP, ROW OR GARDEN APARTMENT: A. A dwelling joined to two (2) other dwellings by party walls, vertical cavity walls, or
aboveground physically unifying horizontal structural elements;
B. A dwelling joined to one other dwelling by a party wall, and aboveground physically unifying horizontal structural elements.
TOXIC MATTER: Those materials which are capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical means.
TRAILER: A vehicle or portable structure which may be used as a conveyance on streets and highways by attachment to a motor vehicle.
USE: The purpose of activity for which the land and structures thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and
shall include any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the performance standards of this title.
USE, LAWFUL: The use of any structure or land that conforms with all of the regulations of this title or any amendment hereto and which conforms with all
of the codes, ordinances, and other legal requirements, as existing at the time of the enactment of this title or any amendment thereto, for the structure or
land that is being examined.
USE, PERMITTED: A use which is or may be lawfully established in a particular district provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and when
applicable, performance standards of this title for the district in which such use is located.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The dominant use of land or structures as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.
USE, SPECIAL: A use that has unusual operational, physical or other characteristics that may be different from those of the predominant permitted uses
in a district, but which is a use that complements and is otherwise, or can be made, compatible with the intended overall development within a district.
Compliance with special standards not necessarily applicable to other permitted uses or special uses in the district shall be required for a special use, as
regulated in this title.
VEHICLE: Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway except for devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
VIBRATION: The periodic displacement, measured in inches, of earth at designated frequency cycles per second.
VILLAGE: The village of Oak Brook, Illinois.
VILLAGE CLERK: The village clerk of the village of Oak Brook, Illinois.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: The official of the village, duly appointed and designated as the village engineer.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT: The village president of the village of Oak Brook, Illinois.
WET DRAINAGEWAY: Any stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, slough, gulch, reservoir, lake, pond or natural or manmade
drainageway in, or into which, stormwater runoff or floodwaters flow regularly.
YARD: A required open area on a lot which is unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise provided in this title.
YARD ADJOINING A STREET, SIDE: A yard which is bounded by the front yard line, side yard adjoining a street line, rear yard line and side lot line
adjoining a street.
YARD, FRONT: A yard which is bounded by the side lot lines, front lot line and the front yard line.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: A side yard which adjoins another lot or an alley separating such side yard from another lot.
YARD LINE, FRONT: A line in a lot that is parallel to the front lot line and which is not nearer to the front lot line at any point than the required front yard
depth.
YARD LINE, REAR: A line in a lot that is parallel to the rear lot line and which is not nearer to the rear lot line at any point than the required rear yard
depth.
YARD LINE, SIDE: A line in a lot that is parallel to the side lot line and which is not nearer to the side lot line at any point than the required side yard
depth.
YARD, REAR: A yard which is bounded by side lot lines, rear lot line and the rear yard line.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 325/438
YARD, SIDE: A yard which is bounded by the rear yard line, front yard line, side yard line and side lot line.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS: The zoning board of appeals of the village of Oak Brook, Illinois, as created in this code3.
ZONING COMMISSION: The zoning commission of the village of Oak Brook, Illinois.
ZONING DISTRICT MAP: The zoning district map of the village of Oak Brook, Illinois.
ZONING DISTRICTS: The districts into which the village of Oak Brook, Illinois, has been divided as set forth on the zoning district map, for the purpose of
zoning regulations and requirements. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-135, 6-22-1971; Ord. G-142, 1-25-1972; Ord. G-178, 12-9-1975; Ord. G-180, 4-13-
1976; Ord. G-203, 12-14-1976; Ord. G-215, 4-26-1977; Ord. G-233, 5-31-1978; Ord. G-305, 9-8-1981; Ord. G-328, 8-24-1982; Ord. G-420, 12-13-1988;
Ord. G-448, 7-10-1990; Ord. G-449, 8-14-1990; Ord. G-510, 6-8-1993; Ord. G-518, 8-10-1993; Ord. G-695, 3-26-2002; Ord. G-721, 6-10-2003; Ord. G-
733, 11-11-2003; Ord. G-903, 11-10-2009; Ord. G-916, 1-12-2010; Ord. G-934, 9-28-2010; Ord. G-989, 1-22-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1154 - CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 3
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
13-3-1: CONTROL OVER USE:
A. The use of land and the erection, alteration and use of structures shall be limited to:
1. Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this title, subject to the regulations set forth in chapter 14 of this title.
2. Permitted uses or special uses permitted in the zoning district in which the land or structure is located.
Subject to the above limitations, no building or land shall be used, and no building shall be erected or altered for any purposes other than permitted
in the zoning district in which the land or structure is located.
B. Where a use which is classified as a special use by this title exists as of the date of the first zoning ordinance for the village, it shall be considered to be
a lawful special use.
C. Where a building permit for a structure has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of this title and where construction has begun
not more than six (6) months after such effective date and is being prosecuted to completion, said structure may be completed in accordance with
such building permit and may be occupied upon completion under a certificate of occupancy for the use originally designated, subject to the provisions
of chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. G-678, 6-26-2001)
13-3-2: CONTROL OVER BULK:
A. New and existing structures shall not be enlarged, constructed, reconstructed, structurally altered, converted or relocated in such a manner as to
conflict with the bulk regulations for the district in which such structures are located except as provided for in this section or provided by relief granted
pursuant to the provisions of chapter 14 of this title.
B. The provisions of this section shall apply to vacant lots and lots with existing dwellings in residential zoning districts.
C. Existing residential zoning district lots of record at the effective date of the first zoning ordinance of the village (ordinance G-60 adopted on March 22,
1966), or upon annexation shall have side yards of ten percent (10%) of the lot width or the side yard requirements of the underlying zoning district,
whichever is less.
Required side yards shall be not less than ten feet (10') in depth; except a side yard may be not less than eight feet (8'), provided the adjoining lot
contains a dwelling with an attached garage or carport adjacent to such side yard.
Where, due to existing building eaves, such lots have a legally established side yard(s) less than ten percent (10%) of lot width, second floor additions,
in-line additions to the front or rear, and repair of the structures, continuing such eave setbacks are permitted.
D. A lot in a residence district at the effective date of the first zoning ordinance of the village (ordinance G-60 adopted March 22, 1966), which is not a lot
of record but which is able to meet the requirements of this title as to lot area and width may be used for a single-family detached dwelling; provided, it
shall meet all the other requirements of this title with the following additional requirements:
1. A plat of subdivision or an assessment plat will be recorded prior to the issuance of a building permit. The subdivision regulations1 set forth the
requirements pertaining to such plats.
E. A lot in a residence district at the effective date of the first zoning ordinance of the village (ordinance G-60 adopted March 22, 1966), which is not a lot
of record and which is unable to meet the requirements of this title as to lot area or width may be used for a single-family detached dwelling; provided,
it shall meet all the other requirements of this title with the following additional requirements:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 326/438
1. The applicant shall furnish, with the application for a building permit, a survey by a duly licensed land surveyor, showing the lot upon which the
applicant proposes to erect a single-family detached dwelling and also showing all lots adjacent to said lot with all improvements thereon and widths
of the adjoining yards and any projections of structures therein duly plotted on said survey.
2. The applicant shall furnish an affidavit on the following form signed by the owner of record of the lot described in the application for a building
permit:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) ss:
COUNTY OF)
LOT OWNERSHIP AFFIDAVIT
Dated
At
TO: Director of Community Development
Village of Oak Brook
depose(s), and state(s) as follows:
1. That the title holder of record of the premises commonly known as Oak Brook, Illinois, and legally described as follows: (Insert Legal Description)
is
(Name of Title Holder)
having acquired title on
20 and have held title continuously since said date.
2. (To be answered only if title holder of record is a corporation or a trust.) (Strike out portions that are not applicable.)
Corporation:
That your affiant is the (president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer) of the title holder of record and has full knowledge of the facts set forth in this
affidavit and is authorized to make this affidavit.
Trust:
That your affiant holds a beneficial interest in and to the aforesaid trust, has full knowledge of the facts herein set forth and has full authority to make
this affidavit.
3. That an application has been or will be filed for a building permit to erect a building or structure upon the land above legally described.
4. That neither the applicant nor any of his/her predecessors in title have owned any right, title or interest, directly or indirectly, or by any person,
firm, corporation or trust, or by any officer, shareholder, director, partner, beneficiary, agent or immediate relative thereof who also holds any right,
title or interest directly or indirectly, in or to any of the contiguous lot(s) within a period of ten years prior to the date of the application for a building
permit or certificate for buildable site as to zoning, except:
5. That the following are the facts existing as to the lots adjoining and contiguous on all sides of the land as described in paragraph 1:
a. That none of the adjoining and contiguous lots are vacant and unimproved, except:
b. That none of the adjoining and contiguous lots have land in addition to its required side yards and required lot area under the Oak Brook Zoning
Ordinance that could be added to the aforedescribed lot, thereby adding to the amount of land available for the subject lot, except:
and said additional land could not be acquired because:
6. That this affidavit is given to induce the Village of Oak Brook to issue a (building permit or certificate of buildable site as to zoning) for the above
described premises.
7. Further your affiant sayeth not, except:
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN
to before me this
day of , 20 .
Notary Public
3. The director of community development shall issue a permit for erecting a single-family detached dwelling on the subject lot upon compliance with
all of the foregoing provisions and all other applicable provisions of this title, with each required interior side yard reduced to not less than ten
percent (10%) of the width of the lot, or the side yard requirement of the underlying zoning district, whichever is less, if all of the below enumerated
requirements are met:
a. The subject lot:
(1) Is not adjoining and contiguous to a vacant lot on any side held under common ownership at any time after the year 1966; or
(2) Is not contiguous to an improved lot of record which has one foot (1') or more of an adjoining side yard in excess of the minimum required side
yard for the district in which the building or structure is located, which additional side yard land could physically be added to the applicant's lot to
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 327/438
increase its width or area or that the owners of the adjoining lots refuse to sell any portion of land that could be added to the applicant's lot to
increase the width thereof without reducing the required side yards of the adjoining lots and which additional land the applicant would be willing
to purchase; and
(3) Is not owned and has not been owned directly or indirectly or by a nominee of any person, or by an officer, shareholder, director, partner,
beneficiary, agent or person related by blood or marriage or by any predecessors in title who also held or hold any right, title or interest in or to
either one or both of the contiguous lots after the year 1966 to the date of application for a building permit.
b. Interior side yards shall not be less than ten feet (10') in depth except a side yard may be not less than eight feet (8') provided, the adjoining lot
contains a dwelling with an attached garage or carport adjacent to such side yard.
c. The contiguous lots are not owned and have not been owned directly or indirectly or by a nominee of any person or by any officer, shareholder,
director, partner, beneficiary, agent or person related by blood or marriage or by person related by blood or marriage or by any predecessors in
title, who also held or hold any right, title or interest, directly or indirectly, in the applicant's lot after the year 1966 to the date of the application for
a building permit.
d. The subject lot was not used as part of a single or common homesite by or with the consent of the same interests which owned or controlled an
adjoining lot after the year 1966 to the date of application for a building permit.
e. In the event that a subdivision plat or an assessment plat has not been recorded, one will be required prior to the issuance of the building permit.
4. In the event that the owner is unable to meet all of the aforesaid additional requirements for a building permit, or for a lot which cannot meet the
minimum lot width and lot area of a lot of record, or in the event that the owner either desires to sell or to buy from the owners of a contiguous lot or
lots who also desire to either sell or buy, but the parties are unable to agree on a price, then the zoning board of appeals may recommend, and the
village president and board of trustees may grant such relief in accordance with the procedures as set forth in this title for variations as deemed
appropriate.
5. In no case, shall a contiguous lot from which property is being acquired be made nonconforming or more nonconforming without the necessary
approvals in accordance with the procedures as set forth in this title. Plats of resubdivision or revised assessment plats shall be required for such
properties.
F. Notwithstanding anything contained in this title to the contrary, in the event at any time subsequent to January 1, 1995, private property is dedicated or
conveyed to a governmental entity or condemned by a governmental entity (including, without limitation, the Illinois state toll highway authority) for the
purpose of widening the public right of way or providing public roadway infrastructure (including, without limitation, right of way for roadway entry or
exit ramps), the calculation of floor area ratio shall at all times include within the measurement of the area of the lot in question the area so dedicated,
conveyed or condemned, provided that not more than twenty percent (20%) of the lot has been so dedicated, conveyed or condemned, and provided
further that a site plan generally accommodating such a dedication, conveyance or condemnation has been reviewed and approved by the village.
(Ord. G-678, 6-26-2001)
13-3-3: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Buildings On A Lot:
1. On single-family detached residence district lots with permitted uses, there shall be not more than one principal building.
2. In the event that more than one lot of record is necessary to satisfy the requirements of this title, a notice of encumbrance shall be recorded with the
office of the county recorder of deeds against all affected lots of record prior to the issuance of any building permit.
B. Lot Divisions: No lot containing a use or structure shall hereafter be divided in order to secure one or more additional lots unless each lot resulting from
such division, and including also the lot containing the use or structure, shall have the minimum lot area and lot width as required in this title for the
district in which the lot is located and complies with the subdivision regulations of the village2. (Ord. G-678, 6-26-2001)
13-3-4: YARDS:
A. Yards and other open spaces as required by this title shall be located on the same lot as the principal use or structure, and shall have not less than the
minimum depth or area as required in this title for the district in which such use or structure is located, except as otherwise provided for setbacks.
B. On vacant through lots, the front lot line shall be along the street line designated by the director of community development, except that when a front lot
line has been established on one or more lots in the same block and all have front lot lines established along the same street line, the street line
designated as the front lot line for such lot or lots shall be the front lot line on all vacant through lots in such block. On through lots, only those uses
and structures permitted by this title in front yards shall be located in that part of a rear yard adjoining a street that is equivalent in depth to a required
front yard.
C. No legally required yards, open space, or lot area for any use or structure shall be used to satisfy yard, open space or lot area requirements for any
other structure or use.
D. No yards allocated to a use or structure existing on the effective date of this title shall be subsequently reduced or further reduced below the yard
requirements of this title, except a yard adjoining a street may be reduced in depth in the event and to the extent the right of way width of such street
adjoining such yard is subsequently increased.
E. Front yards of corner lots may be designated by the owner, provided such yard abuts a street. (Ord. G-678, 6-26-2001)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 328/438
13-3-5: SETBACKS ALONG STREETS:
Minimum setbacks on lots abutting a street shall be as required for yards in the district in which they are located and shall be measured from the street
line, or from the proposed street line if one has been designated on the official map. Notwithstanding anything contained in this title to the contrary, in the
event at any time subsequent to January 1, 1995, private property is dedicated or conveyed to a governmental entity or condemned by a governmental
entity (including, without limitation, the Illinois state toll highway authority) for the purpose of widening the public right of way or providing public roadway
infrastructure (including, without limitation, right of way for roadway entry or exit ramps), the calculation of minimum setbacks and minimum required yards
shall at all times be measured from the street line which existed prior to such dedication, conveyance or condemnation, provided that not more than
twenty percent (20%) of the lot has been so dedicated, conveyed or condemned, and provided that any newly constructed buildings establish minimum
setbacks and minimum required yards on the affected lot (as measured from the new lot line created as a result of said dedication, conveyance, or
condemnation) which, at a minimum, equal at least fifty percent (50%) of the minimum setback and minimum required yard which would be required in the
absence of this condemnation mitigation provision, and provided further that a site plan generally accommodating such a dedication, conveyance or
condemnation has been reviewed and approved by the village board of trustees. (Ord. G-977, 8-14-2012)
13-3-6: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
A. General Regulations:
1. Accessory uses and structures shall be compatible with the principal use and shall not be established prior to the establishment of the principal use.
2. Accessory uses shall not include the keeping, propagation or culture of pigeons, poultry, rabbits, bees, livestock or other nonhousehold animals for
profit, except on such lots where the pursuit of agriculture is a permitted principal or accessory use.
3. Except as otherwise regulated for specific principal uses, an accessory structure hereafter erected, altered, enlarged or moved in a lot shall conform
with the following:
a. A detached accessory structure shall not be nearer than ten feet (10') from the nearest wall of the principal structure, and for each foot over ten
feet (10') in length that the wall of an accessory structure parallels and is next to the principal structure, the required distance between the
structure shall be increased by an additional one-half foot (1/2').
b. An accessory structure shall not be located in any required front or side yard.
c. Accessory uses and structures shall not be located, erected, or altered in required yards, except as provided in subsections A3d, A3g, and B of
this section.
d. Detached accessory structures in a required rear yard in a residential district shall:
(1) Be not more than fifteen feet (15') in height except for detached garages that are not constructed with a continuous flat roof. (See subsection
A3h of this section for detached garage heights.)
(2) Cover not more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard.
(3) Be located not less than five feet (5') from the side or rear lot line.
e. Accessory structures which are only permitted in required rear yards shall not be constructed within the buildable area between the principal
structure and adjacent streets along the front or side lot lines unless a setback equal to double the required front or side yard setback is
maintained from the front or side yard lot line to such accessory structure.
f. Except as provided in subsection A3g of this section, for an accessory structure containing a dwelling unit or lodging rooms for domestic
employees or temporary nonpaying guests of the occupants of the principal dwelling, no detached structure accessory to a single-family detached
dwelling hereafter erected or altered at any location on a lot shall be more than one story nor more than fifteen feet (15') in height; a detached
accessory structure shall not be nearer than ten feet (10') from the nearest wall of the principal structure, and for each foot over ten feet (10') in
length that the wall of an accessory structure parallels and is next to the principal structure, the required distance between the structure shall be
increased by an additional one-half foot (1/2').
g. Accessory single-family detached dwellings or detached structures containing dwelling units or lodging rooms for domestic employees or
temporary nonpaying guests of the occupants of the principal single-family detached dwellings, or for students, faculty, and personnel authorized
to live on the premises of institutional or other nonresidential uses shall not be located in any required yard for the principal structure, and shall be
located not less than forty feet (40') from the principal structure except:
(1) When located on a lot ten (10) acres or more in area, such an accessory structure, when designed as a part of an architectural entrance
feature, may be located in a required front yard or side yard adjoining a street.
(2) When located in back of a principal structure, the rear yard of the principal structure shall be measured from the rear yard line to the nearest
building wall of such accessory structure.
h. Detached garages, that are not constructed with a continuous flat roof, constructed in the "buildable" area of a lot will be permitted to be built to
the same height as the principal structure. However, detached garages constructed in a required rear yard of a single-family home shall be limited
to the following heights:
R1 district: Twenty five feet (25').
R2 district (lots 1 acre or larger): Twenty two and one-half feet (22.5').
R2 district (lots less than 1 acre) and R3 district: Twenty feet (20').
R4 district: Seventeen and one-half feet (17.5').
Any detached garage located in a required rear yard, that is over fifteen feet (15') in height, shall be required to increase the setback one foot (1')
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 329/438
for every one foot (1') of increased height over fifteen feet (15'). Detached garages constructed with a continuous flat roof will be limited to a
maximum height of fifteen feet (15').
B. Permitted In Required Yards: Accessory uses and structures are permitted in required yards as follows with the following designations:
F = Yards adjoining streets
S = Interior side yards
R = Rear yards
F
S
R
Arbors or trellises, where trellises are attached to the principal structure X
X
X
Awnings or canopies, not more than 3 feet X
X
X
Fallout shelters, detached X
Fire escapes, open and enclosed or fire towers, not encroaching more than 5 feet, except 3.5 feet into a required interior side yard X
X
X
Flagpoles X
X
X
Garages or carports, detached X
Gates, driveway X
Growing of garden crops in the open X
X
HVAC equipment including air condition units, not less than 12 feet from designated lot lines X
X
Lawn furniture, such garden structures as benches, sundials and birdbaths X
X
X
Open off street loading spaces X
Open off street parking spaces, may be permitted in a required yard adjoining a street, as regulated in this title X
X
Ornamental light standards X
X
X
Playground and laundry drying equipment X
Playhouses and open sided summer houses X
Sheds and storage structures for garden equipment and household items X
Signs and nameplates X
X
X
Steps, open X
X
X
Swimming pools X
Tennis courts X
Terraces, patios and outdoor fireplaces X
Trees, shrubs and other plants, except on corner lots where no such material shall be permitted to obstruct a clear path of motorists'
vision of approaching vehicles within the area enclosed by any 2 intersecting curb lines or edges of pavement, as extended to their point
of intersection if necessary, whichever is applicable, and a straight line connecting those 2 lines at points 60 feet from their point of
intersection
X
X
X
(Ord. G-678, 6-26-2001; Ord. G-712, 1-14-2003; Ord. G-728, 8-12-2003; Ord. G-740, 2-10-2004; Ord. G-1021, 3-11-2014)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 330/438
13-3-7: TRAILERS, BOATS AND HABITABLE VEHICLES:
A. Trailers and vehicles shall not be permitted in any district as principal or accessory structures on a lot.
B. Habitable vehicles, utility trailers, horse trailers, boats on boat trailers or blocks, and other trailers shall not be parked or stored in any required yard or
in the open on any lot, except when permitted in this title, or in the operations of a lawfully established trailer or, habitable vehicle sales or
manufacturing establishment.
C. One habitable vehicle, and one utility trailer, horse trailer, or one boat on a boat trailer or blocks, or one other trailer, owned by the occupant of the
dwelling, may be stored or parked only to the rear of said dwelling and not within any required side yard or rear yard of a lot containing a single-family
detached dwelling; provided no major repair, disassembly, or rebuilding operations are conducted thereon; and provided that no habitable vehicle so
stored may be occupied.
D. A habitable vehicle may be parked or stored in the driveway on property within the zoning jurisdiction of the village for a period of three (3) consecutive
days without permit, and may be occupied during such period. Thereafter such a vehicle may be parked only after issuance of a permit by the director
of community development permitting such parking. Such a permit may be issued by the director for the following purposes if the proposed use is
consistent with the purposes of this title:
1. For parking of habitable vehicles for use as temporary office or storage space incidental to and only for the period of time of construction of a
building or series of buildings, provided such habitable vehicles are located on the same lot or contiguous lots to the building or series of buildings.
2. For parking and occupancy of a vehicle on a lot containing a dwelling for a period not to exceed ten (10) days in any consecutive thirty (30) day
period and only if the location of said habitable vehicle on such lot does not violate the provisions of this title in relation to the placement of
structures on such lot; except that such temporary parking shall be permitted on existing driveways notwithstanding that said driveway may be in a
side yard. (Ord. G-678, 6-26-2001)
13-3-8: STRUCTURE HEIGHT:
A. No structure shall be erected, converted, expanded, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height limit measured above the natural ground
level, as determined by the village engineer, for the district in which the structure is located. However, this height limit for skylights, steeples, flagpoles,
chimneys, radio and television aerials, wireless masts, or electric and telephone service poles anywhere in the village; and mechanical rooms,
penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment, towers, water tanks, or elevators or
other appurtenances anywhere in the village except residential districts, shall be thirty feet (30') above the height limits of the district in which they are
located and shall be for ornamental purposes only and shall in no event be occupied. Structure height may be measured from a base elevation other
than natural ground level only with the express approval of the village. However, an elevator housing enclosure for the purpose of providing a single
elevator access to the penthouse level not to exceed three hundred twenty five (325) square feet in area may be erected to heights which do not
exceed by more than twenty two feet (22') the height limits of the district in which it is located.
B. The height of single-family homes will be measured to the peak of the roof using one of the following methods:
1. In engineered subdivisions, as determined by the village engineer, the height will be measured using the recommended top of foundation elevation
that is part of the approved grading plan;
2. In all other situations, the village engineer shall determine an elevation, from which the height will be measured, based on the existing grades and
grades of adjacent properties;
3. For lots improved with an existing single-family home, the existing top of foundation elevation can be maintained and will be used as the base to
measure the height of the structure.
C. The height limit, as it pertains to all other structures, shall not exceed the height limit above natural ground level established for the district in which the
structure is located. (Ord. G-678, 6-26-2001; Ord. G-730, 9-23-2003; Ord. G-733, 11-11-2003; Ord. G-778, 4-26-2005)
13-3-9: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
The following public utility uses are permitted in any district: wires, cables, conduit, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains and valves, public warning devices,
microcells or other similar transmission and distributing equipment (not including cellular telephone towers and ancillary equipment), provided that the
installation and location thereof shall conform with the rules and regulations of applicable administrative authorities and ordinances of the village.
Microcells shall include a wireless communication facility consisting of an antenna that is either: a) four feet (4') in height and with an area of not more
than five hundred eighty (580) square inches, or b) if a tubular antenna, no more than four inches (4") in diameter and no more than six feet (6') in length
in the associated equipment cabinet that is six feet (6') or less in height and no more than forty eight (48) square feet in floor area. (Ord. G-678, 6-26-
2001)
13-3-10: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
Any use established in any zoning district shall be operated so as to comply with the performance standard regulations prescribed in subsection A of this
section.
A. Noise:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 331/438
1. Sound Levels: Sounds levels shall be measured with a sound level meter manufactured according to standards prescribed by the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI). Measurements shall be made using a digital decibel meter. Impulse type noises shall be subject to the
performance standards prescribed in this subsection A, provided that such noises shall be capable of being accurately measured. Noises incapable
of being so measured, such as those of an irregular and intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. At
any point on or beyond the boundary line of the district designated below, the sound pressure level of any operation or plant (other than background
noises produced by sources not under control of this subsection A, such as the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) shall not
exceed the decibel limits in the table below:
SOUND/NOISE LEVEL TABLE
Time Of Day
Maximum Permitted Decibel (dBA) Levels
Residential Commercial Industrial
Between 7:00 A.M. and 7:00 P.M. 65 dBA 70 dBA 70 dBA
Between 7:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. 55 dBA 60 dBA 65 dBA
2. General Requirements:
a. Sound Measurement Setback Requirement: All sound measurement readings must be set up not less than twenty five feet (25') (7.6 meters) from
the property line noise source. The twenty five foot (25') (7.6 meter) setback requirement is from the noise source and not the property line unless
the noise source is contiguous to the property line.
b. Exempt Activities: Activities exempt from these provisions include the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities; snow removal
equipment; church bells/chimes; residential air conditioning units (installed and operating in accordance to manufacturer's specifications).
c. Unnecessary Noise Standards: The following activities are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this subsection
A:
(1) Horns And Signaling Devices: The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile or other motor vehicle on any street or public
place of the village except as a danger warning.
(2) Animals Or Birds: The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any
persons in the vicinity.
(3) Exhausts: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any engine, stationary combustion machine, generator, motorboat or motor vehicle
except through a muffler or other device, which will effectively prevent loud noises therefrom. The use of emergency generators and other
backup power sources would not apply to reasonable use during an emergency situation or during testing.
(4) Loading: The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicles.
d. Additional Requirements; Lawn Mowing/Maintenance: It shall be unlawful to cause or make loud noise through the operation of lawn maintenance
equipment including, but not limited to, lawn mowers, lawn blowers and tractors before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and after dusk on any day during
the week. This restriction shall not apply to golf course, park district or forest preserve maintenance operations.
B. Other Performance Standards: Any use established in the various residence and business districts shall be operated so as to comply with the
performance standard regulations set forth in section 13-10-3 of this title. (Ord. G-678, 6-26-2001; Ord. G-863, 7-22-2008)
13-3-11: MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT TO BE SCREENED:
All heating, air conditioning, ventilating, or other mechanical equipment located on the roof of any nonresidential structure in any residential, business or
office-research-assembly district shall be screened on all sides or enclosed in such a manner consistent with the design and materials found on the
principal building as to mask such equipment. (Ord. G-678, 6-26-2001)
13-3-12: ACCESS:
All publicly dedicated rights of way for roadway or highway purposes or any land used, by easement or other means, for vehicular access which may be
developed in any zoning district in the village, shall meet all requirements of the subdivision regulations of the village3. Where such access may be
developed as part of a larger, continuous, regional street system, or where it may serve a subdivision located in part outside the corporate limits of the
village, the design of said system shall be reviewed in accordance with the applicable provisions of all governing ordinances and shall be subject to all
required public hearings and meetings before the plan commission, zoning board of appeals and village president and board of trustees prior to
development. (Ord. G-678, 6-26-2001)
13-3-13: PROPERTY ABUTTING OR ADJOINING CONSERVATION/RECREATION DISTRICT:
All provisions in this title, as amended, which pertain to property abutting or adjoining a residence district shall be equally applicable to property abutting
or adjoining any property zoned CR conservation/recreation district. (Ord. G-678, 6-26-2001)
13-3-14: DRIVEWAY GATES:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 332/438
Driveway gates are permitted as accessory structures in required front yards, or side yards adjoining a street; provided that they conform with the
following criteria:
A. Required Acreage: No driveway gate may be installed on a lot of less than two (2) acres, unless the front yard of said lot abuts a thoroughfare4. Any
driveway gate previously approved and constructed in accordance with applicable law at that time shall be treated as a permitted and legally
conforming use.
B. Direction Of Swing: Driveway gates shall not swing outward from the property.
C. Width: The minimum width for a gate structure shall be twelve feet (12') for opening the gate. All driveway gates shall be greater than fifty percent
(50%) open in design when viewed from a ninety degree (90°) angle, except that this required open space in louver type gates may be viewed from
any angle, and excluding metal gates with more than seventy five percent (75%) of its surface area open space.
D. Location Of Gates: Gates shall be located a minimum distance of twenty feet (20') from the nearest edge of pavement on local residential streets and
thirty feet (30') from the nearest edge of pavement on all other streets including all thoroughfares and collectors (reference the Oak Brook
transportation plan phase II report dated January 1971), to allow adequate room for vehicular access to the property. (Ord. G-678, 6-26-2001; Ord. G-
741, 2-10-2004)
13-3-15: PERMANENT ENTRYWAY CANOPIES:
Permanent entryway canopies to provide weather protection for persons being dropped off or picked up may be erected in required front and corner lot
side yards for churches and hotel, restaurant and office use buildings permitted by this title, subject to the following conditions:
A. The required yard must be one hundred feet (100') or more in depth;
B. The area of the encroachment is limited to a maximum of six hundred (600) square feet;
C. The maximum depth of the encroachment into the required yard is thirty feet (30');
D. The minimum clearance for a canopy above a driveway or parking area shall be not less than fourteen and one-half feet (14.5'); and
E. The maximum height of the canopy is eighteen feet (18'). (Ord. G-678, 6-26-2001)
13-3-16: PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS:
A. For purposes of this section, a "portable storage unit" is defined as an enclosed container that is delivered to a private property and is normally used for
the short term storage of items and materials associated with a move into or from the principal use of the property.
B. The following regulations shall apply to portable storage units:
1. No more than two (2) portable storage units shall be permitted on a property.
2. Stacking of portable storage units is prohibited.
3. Any property where a portable storage unit is located must be occupied by a principal use or dwelling.
4. No portable storage unit may remain on a property for more than fifteen (15) consecutive days. An additional fifteen (15) day period may be
approved by the department of community development for cause. Special circumstances allowing for longer periods of time may be determined by
the director of community development.
5. A portable storage unit on residential property shall not exceed sixteen feet (16') in length. A portable storage unit on nonresidential property shall
not exceed forty feet (40') in length.
6. Portable storage units shall be placed on the driveway or other paved surface on the property.
7. The portable storage unit shall not be located closer than ten feet (10') from the principal structure on the property.
8. The portable storage unit shall not be used to store hazardous materials or flammable liquids.
9. Portable storage units shall not be placed on public property or permitted to obstruct traffic visibility.
10. A permit and fee (an amount, if any, to be determined by the village board from time to time) shall be required prior to the placement of a portable
storage unit.
11. Portable storage units shall be maintained in good repair, free from rust, peeling paint, graffiti and other forms of deterioration.
12. Signage on portable storage units is limited to the name and address of the storage unit rental company.
13. Portable storage units shall be locked when not being loaded or unloaded. (Ord. G-861, 6-10-2008)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 333/438
13-3-17: FENCE REGULATIONS:
A. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
DOG RUNS/KENNELS: Enclosures constructed for the purpose of containing dog(s) outside of the principal structure on a property.
FENCE: A structure used to delineate a boundary, or as a barrier, or as a means of confinement or for confinement.
FENCE TYPE STRUCTURE: Any fence, or part thereof, located in the buildable area of a property and not located in any required yard. "Fence type
structures" include solid privacy screens and open patio enclosures. A "fence type structure" shall not include any part of a fence located outside of the
buildable area of a property.
B. The following regulations shall apply to all fences other than fence type structures:
1. Fences shall have a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the fence's surface area in open space as viewed from an angle of ninety degrees (90°) from
the fence line. A fence's surface area shall include the surface area of any gates attached to the fence, but shall not include the surface area
attributable to any supporting piers or pillars.
2. Solid fences shall be a maximum height of twenty four inches (24") and be constructed of wood, stone, brick or other masonry material. All nonsolid
fences shall be a maximum height of forty two inches (42") and shall be constructed of wood, stone, brick, wrought iron, aluminum or synthetic
materials that are molded and give the appearance of wood, stone, brick or wrought iron.
3. If a fence only has one finished side, the fence's finished side must face to the outside of the property.
4. Fences shall be constructed at a natural grade or at a grade approved of by the village engineer.
5. All fences shall be located completely within the property that the fence is serving. No fence shall be constructed in a manner that encroaches upon
another property or a village owned right of way without the prior approval of the village.
6. All fences shall be constructed and maintained in a manner that preserves the fence's structural integrity and appearance.
7. Electrified fences are not permitted in the village, with the exception of those approved by the community development department for horse stables
and other animal enclosures.
8. No fence shall be constructed or erected in a manner or in a location that interferes or obstructs the line of sight of vehicles using an intersection of
an alley and street, or an intersection of two (2) streets.
9. All fences shall comply with all applicable village code requirements.
C. The following regulations shall apply to all fence type structures:
1. Fence type structures may screen hot tubs, patios, decks, sitting areas, or other similar types of uses.
2. Fence type structures may not exceed six feet (6') in height.
3. Fence type structures may not privatize the buildable area.
4. Fence type structures are not permitted in any required yard.
5. All fence type structures shall comply with all applicable village code requirements.
6. All fence type structures are subject to the review and approval of the community development department prior to their construction or erection to
ensure that the requirements of this section are met.
D. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, the height of all fences surrounding any swimming pool or any other water feature
that requires fencing pursuant to this code or state law shall: 1) be a minimum of forty eight inches (48") in height; 2) not exceed seventy two inches
(72") in height; and 3) comply with all other applicable requirements of this code. In addition, no fence surrounding a swimming pool may be made of
chainlink or wire materials.
E. The following requirements shall apply to chainlink or wire fencing:
1. Chainlink or wire fencing shall be:
a. Made of at least 9-gauge wire and not of a thinner gauge wire;
b. Constructed with a top member or brace with a knuckle design;
c. Installed with the wire material (finished side) facing the neighboring property;
d. Painted or coated in a dark color (e.g., black, brown or dark green); and
e. Landscaped with year round plantings, bushes/vegetation or trees on both sides of the fence, except for dog runs/kennels, which shall be so
landscaped on the outside of the fence; all required vegetation will be reasonably maintained or replaced as needed.
2. No chainlink or wire fencing shall include slats.
3. No chainlink or wire fencing shall be used for a dog run/kennel in any required yard. Chainlink or wire fencing may be used for dog runs/kennels that
are constructed or erected in the buildable area of a property.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 334/438
4. Chainlink or wire fencing shall not be permitted:
a. In buildable areas. This restriction shall not apply to dog runs/kennels.
b. In any front or side yard.
c. In any rear yard unless the rear yard abuts the village's boundary. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, any such
chainlink or wire fencing in a rear yard abutting the village's boundary shall not exceed a height of six feet (6').
d. Surrounding subdivisions unless: 1) landscape screening is installed and maintained in a manner that provides year round vegetation on both
sides of the fence; and 2) the fence is approved by the village.
e. Around swimming pools.
f. Around sports courts/fields. This restriction shall not apply to fencing around sports courts for tennis, basketball, hockey and fields for baseball
provided that: 1) the fence does not exceed ten feet (10') in height; 2) the court/field shall not be located in any required front or side yard; and 3)
the fence must be constructed to the applicable ASTM standard.
5. Chainlink and wire fencing is permitted around construction sites only as a temporary use. The required height of construction fencing shall be
established as part of the building permit approval process.
6. Chainlink and wire fencing shall be permitted along state and federal roadways.
7. In the event that a yard is enclosed with a chainlink fence that was installed prior to August 12, 2003, and one side of the fence enclosure is on a
neighbor's property and the neighbor removes the chainlink fence, the owner may continue to enclose his/her yard with a chainlink fence by
constructing a new fence on his/her property to replace the fence removed by the neighbor.
F. Fences and barriers along major arterials: If a formal barrier or sound wall system is not in place, a solid fence/wall structure may only be erected if:
1. The solid fence/wall structure is located along one of the following: Roosevelt Road, Illinois Route 83/Kingery Highway, Interstate Highway I-88, or
Interstate Highway I-294; and
2. The solid fence/wall structure is a single unified system that is approved by all affected property owners, the subdivision homeowners' association (if
applicable) and the village of Oak Brook. (Ord. G-1021, 3-11-2014)
Chapter 4
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
13-4-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this title, the village is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
CR Conservation/recreation
R1 Single-family detached residence
R2 Single-family detached residence
R3 Single-family detached residence
R4 Single-family detached residence
R5 Residence
B1 Local shopping center
B2 Regional shopping center
B3 General business
B4 Hotel-office
Institutional
ORA1 Office-research-assembly
ORA2 Office-research-assembly
ORA3 Office-research-assembly
O3 Office
O4 Office
(Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-203, 12-14-1976; Ord. G-233, 5-31-1978; Ord. G-575, 9-24-1996; Ord. G-619, 9-22-1998; Ord. G-903, 11-10-2009)
13-4-2: ZONING DISTRICT MAP:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 335/438
The zoning districts and their boundaries are as shown upon the zoning district map dated March 22, 1966, which map and all amendments thereto and
all notations, references and other information shown thereon are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this title, with the same force and effect as
if fully set forth in this title. The original zoning district map, properly attested, shall be filed with the village clerk. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-4-3: INTERPRETATION OF BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various zoning districts as shown on the zoning district map, the following rules apply:
A. A zoning district boundary line following a street, state highway or tollway or extension thereof shall be construed to be the centerline of such street,
state highway or tollway or extension.
B. A zoning district boundary line approximately following a lot line or extension thereof within a subdivision shall be construed as following such lot line or
extension.
C. Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership, the regulations of this title for either portion of such lot may, at the owner's
discretion, apply to the entire area of the lot or twenty five feet (25') beyond the zoning district boundary line, whichever is the lesser distance.
D. Questions concerning the exact locations of district boundary lines shall be resolved by the village board of trustees. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-99,
1-28-1969; Ord. G-391, 10-28-1986)
13-4-4: ZONING OF ANNEXED LANDS:
Any additions to the incorporated area of the village resulting from disconnection by the county or otherwise shall be automatically classified as in the R1
single-family residence district unless otherwise classified by amendment to this title. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
Chapter 5
CR CONSERVATION/RECREATION DISTRICT
13-5-1: PURPOSE:
The CR Conservation/Recreation District is designed to encourage the development of land for open space recreational activities and/or preserve natural
resources. This District is characterized by open uses of land, for example, golf courses and agricultural uses. The only structures and improvements
permitted are those which supplement and are incidental to the principal open use. This District is not intended to encourage commercial or residential
operations. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-5-2: PERMITTED USES:
Agricultural, including incidental agricultural structures.
Forest preserves, wildlife reservations, ecological sanctuaries and arboretums.
Golf courses, and similar open field recreational activities.
Parks and playgrounds.
Accessory uses and structures, incidental to and on the same zoning lot as a principal uses. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-483, 3-10-1992)
13-5-3: SPECIAL USES:
Cultural facilities, including libraries, museums, and similar cultural institutions.
Educational facilities.
Gardens, botanical and zoological.
Governmental service facilities, including municipal civic centers, police and fire stations and similar uses.
Historic facilities available to the public and used primarily for educational, cultural and/or historic purposes and activities in furtherance of the
maintenance and support of the historicfacilities as set forth in the applicable special use ordinance.
Public warning devices.
Tennis and swimming clubs.
Winter sports: ice skating rinks, ice hockey, curling, skiing or tobogganing, not less than twenty five (25) acres.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 336/438
Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the same lot as the principal use. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-483, 3-10-1992; Ord. G-566, 2-13-
1996; Ord. G-608, 3-10-1998)
13-5-4: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Area: Not less than five (5) acres.
B. Lot Width: Not less than two hundred twenty feet (220') within the buildable area.
C. Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 0.15.
D. Structure Height: Not more than thirty feet (30'). Special uses may not exceed forty feet (40').
E. Yards: Yards shall be provided as follows:
1. All yards shall be established according to the following requirements. No structure shall be erected or maintained:
a. Within one hundred feet (100') from the center thread of any waterway or watercourse;
b. Within one hundred feet (100') from the right-of-way line of any street; or
c. Within one hundred feet (100') from any adjacent residence district.
2. Notwithstanding the above, public utilities such as wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains and valves and other similar transmission
distributing equipment, bridges, fountains, sidewalks, gateways, flagpoles, roadways, and other similar structures intended to be accessory and
incidental to the primary use of a principal building on the lot shall be permitted without regard to the setbacks established herein. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-
1966; Ord. G-341, 1-24-1984)
13-5-5: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Off-Street Parking And Loading: Off-street parking and off-street loading shall be as set forth in Chapter 12 of this Title.
B. Performance Standards: Any use established in a conservation/recreation district shall be operated in compliance with the performance standards set
forth in Section 13-10-3 of this Title.
C. Signs And Awnings: Awnings, marquees and signs may be erected in conformance with the provisions of Section 13-10A-4 of this Title. (Ord. G-60, 3-
22-1966; Ord. G-341, 1-24-1984)
Chapter 6
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
13-6-1: PURPOSE:
The residence districts provide for the development of various types of dwelling units within a framework of standards designed to:
A. Preserve and further promote low density single-family detached dwelling neighborhoods consistent with the predominant character of the village.
B. Encourage the development of medium density single-family detached dwelling neighborhoods where it is possible to employ modern, efficient land
planning techniques with smaller networks of utilities and pavements.
C. Provide for the economically sound and aesthetically pleasing use of areas characterized by their proximity to heavy traffic, the regional shopping
center and light industry, including the use of town houses and garden type low density multiple-family dwellings. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-6-2: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
In all residence districts, unless otherwise provided in the regulations of this title, any customary home occupation shall be permitted provided:
A. It is conducted entirely within the dwelling and only by members of the family, and when such home occupation is incidental and secondary to the use
of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
B. It is not conducted from a detached or attached accessory structure, requires no internal or external alterations and involves no construction features or
use of equipment not customary in a dwelling, and the entrance to the space devoted to such occupation shall be from within the dwelling and not
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 337/438
more than one-fourth (1/4) of the floor area of a story, including also a cellar of the dwelling, is devoted to such home occupation.
C. There is no display or activity that will indicate from the exterior of the dwelling that it is being used for any use other than a dwelling.
D. Stock in trade, including that which is produced on the premises, shall not require receipt or delivery of merchandise, goods or equipment other than by
United States letter carrier mail, similar parcel delivery service or by private passenger automobile. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-6-3: NAMEPLATES AND SIGNS:
See chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-203, 12-14-1976; Ord. G-510, 6-9-1993; Ord. G-549, 1-24-1995; Ord. G-586, 4-8-1997; Ord. G-
695, 3-26-2002)
13-6-4: BUILDINGS OF HISTORICAL, ARCHITECTURAL OR CULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this special use category is to provide a method of preserving institutional buildings in existence prior to the incorporation of
the village which are of historical, architectural or cultural significance for use as residential dwellings.
B. Criteria: In addition to the standards set forth in subsection 13-14-9E of this title, no special use may be granted hereunder unless:
1. The existing building has historical, architectural or cultural significance according to one or more of the following criteria:
a. Its character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics;
b. Its identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the development of the community, county, state or country;
c. Its exemplification of the cultural, religious, economic, social, political or historic heritage of the community;
d. Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style valuable for the study of a period, type, method of construction or use of
indigenous materials;
e. Its identification as the work of a master builder, designer or architect whose individual work has influenced the development of the community,
County, State or country;
f. Its embodiment of elements of architectural design, detail, materials or draftsmanship which represent a significant architectural innovation;
g. Its unique location or singular physical characteristics representing an established or familiar visual feature of a neighborhood or the community;
and
2. The building is suitable for preservation and continued use of conversion as residential dwellings.
C. Findings: In addition to the findings required under subsection 13-14-9E of this Title, no special use may be granted hereunder unless findings are
made that:
1. The building in question has historical, architectural or cultural significance according to one or more of the criteria set forth in this Section;
2. The proposed preservation plan does in fact preserve the existing building as a historical, architectural or culturally significant structure;
3. The building is suitable for preservation and continued use or conversion as residential dwellings.
D. Procedure:
1. The applicant shall file concurrently:
a. An application for a special use as herein provided; and
b. An application for approval of a proposed preservation plan, which applications shall be processed in the manner prescribed in subsection 13-14-
9D of this Title.
2. The proposed preservation plan shall include:
a. Information addressing the criteria set forth in subsection B of this Section;
b. Floor plans showing, in detail, existing and proposed uses of all areas of the building;
c. A plat of survey of the property involved showing the location of all existing structures and a site plan showing the location of all proposed
structures and existing structures to be retained;
d. A statement detailing the nature of any alteration to existing interior or exterior architectural features specifically identifying those features to be
preserved and/or restored;
e. A topographical analysis of the site with contour intervals of not more than two feet (2');
f. Information on existing and proposed water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, storm water retention and runoff, stream channels, floodplains
and floodways, lakes, ponds or other public improvements;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 338/438
g. A study of traffic engineers providing information on the impact of the development on public streets and intersections;
h. A plat or map showing the land uses, physical features, and zoning of all adjacent lands within four hundred (400) yards of the property involved;
i. A proposed fire protection plan detailing the description and location of proposed fire protection equipment and automatic sprinkler systems;
j. A set of plans detailing existing and proposed exterior elevations, a list of any items being removed from the exterior of the building, and typical
details for existing and proposed windows, doors, bays and balconies.
3. No special use as provided herein may be issued until a preservation plan has been approved as provided herein, provided that such a special use
may be approved upon the condition that the final preservation plan, detailing the information required in subsection D2 of this Section and
accompanying documents required in subsection D4 of this Section be submitted to and approved by the corporate authorities within a reasonable
time as specified in the ordinance approving the special use.
4. The final preservation plan shall be accompanied by:
a. Final plans and specifications for all public improvements reasonably required for implementation of the preservation plan. Such plans and
specifications shall comply with all applicable standards of the Village for said public improvements;
b. A draft of all necessary or advisable covenants, easements, preservation restrictions and condominium declarations acceptable in form and
substance to the Village.
E. Bulk Standards: The bulk standards established in this Section shall apply except as follows:
1. Structure Height: Structure height of existing buildings shall be established as necessary to preserve and restore such buildings, provided that no
existing structure may exceed its existing structure height or elevation.
2. Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling: Not less than nine hundred (900) square feet.
3. Floor Area Per Dwelling: Not less than two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet.
4. Parking:
a. Two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit and reserved for each said dwelling unit; and
b. One parking space for each dwelling unit for visitor and guest parking.
5. Density: No more than three (3.0) dwelling units per acre.
6. Preservation Vista: Not less than one hundred fifty feet (150').
7. Lot Area: Not less than twelve (12) acres. (Ord. G-328, 8-24-1982)
13-6-5: CLUSTER-TYPE SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS:
Residential development of cluster-type single-family detached dwellings shall meet the following criteria:
A. Bulk Standards: The bulk standards of this Section shall apply except as follows:
1. Structure Height: Not more than thirty feet (30') above the highest point of the foundation.
2. Density: Not more than two and three-tenths (2.3) dwelling units per acre, provided the total lot area does not exceed twenty two percent (22%) of
gross land area.
3. Lot Area: Not less than three thousand seven hundred (3,700) square feet.
B. Lot Width: Not less than fifty three feet (53') as determined at the rear lot line.
C. Yards: Distances between buildings, public or private rights of way and subdivision boundaries, which shall apply in lieu of the zoning yard
requirements for the R3 District, shall be not less than:
1. Sixteen feet (16') from the side wall eaves to the side wall eaves;
2. Seventy feet (70') from the rear wall eaves to the rear wall eaves;
3. Twenty feet (20') from the front wall eaves to the right of way or access easement line;
4. Fifteen feet (15') from the side wall eaves to the right of way or access easement line;
5. Fifteen feet (15') from the rear wall eaves to the right of way or access easement line; and
6. Thirty five feet (35') from the rear wall eaves to the subdivision boundary.
Patios, decks, roof overhangs, chimneys and bay windows shall be permitted within an exclusive easement adjoining the front, rear and side lot
lines. This easement may also provide utility access, provided that any structures in the easement do not conflict with the needs of any utility.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 339/438
D. Subdivision Controls: All common areas shall be titled to and maintained by a homeowners' association as open space for joint use by the residents of
the subdivision. At least eighty percent (80%) of occupied dwellings within the subdivision shall be occupied by at least one person who is fifty five (55)
years of age or older, and all occupants must be eighteen (18) years of age and older, and this restriction shall be included within the covenants,
conditions and restrictions recorded with the plat of subdivision. (Ord. G-618, 9-22-1998)
ARTICLE A. R1 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT
13-6A-1: PERMITTED USES:
Home occupations.
Nameplates and signs.
Parks and playgrounds.
Public schools, parochial school, nonboarding elementary, junior high and high, on lots not less than eight (8) acres in area for an elementary school and
not less than twenty five (25) acres in area for a high school.
Single-family detached dwellings.
Accessory uses and structures, subject to the following:
A. Uses and structures customarily accessory to single-family dwellings.
B. Noncommercial pursuit of agriculture: 1) on lots not less than ten (10) acres in area, provided structures and land used for the shelter, feeding,
keeping, propagating, culture of poultry and livestock shall not be less than one hundred feet (100') from the nearest lot line, and any other structure
or land used in the pursuit of agriculture shall not be less than one hundred feet (100') from the nearest street line, and not less than fifty feet (50')
from the nearest interior and rear lot line; and 2) on lots less than ten (10) acres in area, provided such uses involve only the growing of farm and
garden crops and nursery stock and no accessory structures are used exclusively for such uses, except conservatories or greenhouses of the types
customarily attached to dwellings.
C. Dwelling units for housing domestic servants or other persons employed on the premises and guest houses.
D. Horse stables, private, on lots not less than two (2) acres in area; provided that no more than two (2) horses are kept, except that one additional
horse may be kept for each one acre of additional lot area over two (2), and no structure used for shelter shall be nearer than ninety feet (90') from
side and rear lot lines and one hundred fifty feet (150') from front lot lines, or any streets; such stables to be subject to the following standards:
1. The stable must not be detrimental to or endanger public health or safety;
2. The stable must not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of property in its immediate vicinity nor diminish or impair property values in the
neighborhood;
3. Adequate utility service and drainage facilities must be provided and approved by the Village Engineer;
4. The storage area for manure must meet the same setback requirements of stable building location;
5. Manure removal must meet the requirements of the Department of Health of DuPage County and must be so scheduled in frequency so as not to
be offensive or injurious to public health;
6. A pest control program must be instituted to meet the requirements of the Department of Health of DuPage County.
E. Storage of building materials and equipment and temporary structures for construction purposes, when on the same or adjoining lot as the principal
uses and for a period of not to exceed the duration of such construction.
F. Temporary construction and sales offices in subdivisions containing forty (40) acres or more in area, for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days
following completion of such construction. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-6A-2: SPECIAL USES:
Agricultural: Growing of farm and garden crops and nursery stock as a principal use on a lot, provided:
A. The lot area for commercial growing of farm crops, truck garden produce, and nursery stock shall be not less than ten (10) acres in area.
B. The sale of such materials is not conducted from a store, stand or other structure erected or maintained for such purpose.
Cemeteries (subject to compliance with the regulations in chapter 16 of this title): Any existing cemetery and structure shall be deemed to have a special
use permit as required by this section, notwithstanding whether these existing cemeteries and structures comply, as of January 22, 2013, with the
provisions of chapter 16 of this title. Any expansion, change, or new construction relating to an existing cemetery and structure shall comply with chapter
16 of this title, but any such activity shall not require a new or amended special use permit, or other zoning relief, provided that the activities comply with
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 340/438
chapter 16 of this title. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no special use permit granted pursuant to this section, whether for an existing cemetery and
structure or for a new cemetery or structure, shall permit a community burial structure to be built in a residence district.
Churches, chapels, temples and synagogues: On lots not less than three hundred feet (300') in width and not less than two (2) acres in area and one
additional acre for each two hundred forty (240) seats in the sanctuary over two hundred forty (240) seats. Where churches and parochial schools are on
the same land, not less than eight (8) acres in area.
Cultural and recreational facilities: Outdoor and indoor cultural and recreational facilities including, but not limited to, swimming pools, tennis courts,
meeting facilities and other similar facilities accessory to and owned in common by the owners of properties within a residential subdivision.
Public utility, transportation, and government facilities: Public utility, transportation, and governmental service facilities, including municipal offices and
civic centers, public libraries, police and fire stations, public works facilities, village owned communication towers, conference of municipal governments
and ancillary uses (including organizations which provide consultation solely to units of local government), and similar uses.
Recreational and cultural uses: The following recreational and cultural uses, public or private, provided the site meets the minimum area requirements
hereinafter stipulated:
A. Golf courses and clubs, standard or par 3, when operated only during daylight hours, but not including commercially operated miniature courses or
golf driving ranges, not less than twenty five (25) acres.
Accessory uses: Accessory uses, customarily incidental to the above special uses, including, but not limited to, agricultural, recreational and cultural uses,
as follows:
A. Clubhouses and lodges, containing customary facilities incidental to the operation of the principal recreational use including, but not limited to,
restaurants, cocktail lounges and shops primarily for the sale and service of equipment and other commodities related to participation in the
recreational facilities on the premises on lots not less than two (2) acres in area, and provided further that the restriction relating to operation only
during daylight hours does not apply to the accessory uses.
B. Horse stables, kennels and other similar structures, for keeping and shelter of livestock, other animals, poultry and game, and accessory structures,
provided that such structures shall be located: 1) not less than one hundred fifty feet (150') from a street; 2) not less than one hundred feet (100')
from a structure on the same lot intended for occupancy as a dwelling; 3) not less than one hundred feet (100') from a residence district line; 4) not
less than seventy feet (70') from a nonresidence district line; and 5) on lots not less than ten (10) acres in area. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-328,
8-24-1982; Ord. G-483, 3-10-1992; Ord. G-571, 6-11-1996; Ord. G-608, 3-10-1998; Ord. G-675, 3-27-2001; Ord. G-938, 11-9-2010; Ord. G-989, 1-
22-2013)
13-6A-3: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Area: Except as otherwise required in this title for a specific use, not less than two (2) acres.
B. Lot Width: Not less than two hundred twenty feet (220') within the buildable area.
C. Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 0.4 for nonresidential uses.
D. Structure Height:
1. Residential uses: Not more than fifty feet (50'), except for continuous flat roofs, which shall be not more than thirty five feet (35') to the top of any
parapet wall. However, where residential building heights exceed thirty feet (30'), the highest space that can be occupied must have an emergency
escape and rescue opening at a maximum elevation of thirty two feet (32') above grade.
2. Nonresidential uses: Not more than forty five feet (45') excluding village owned communication towers, which may not exceed a height of one
hundred twenty feet (120').
E. Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling:
1. One story: Not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet.
2. Bilevel: Not less than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet.
3. Dwellings having more than one story: Not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet.
F. Yards: Except as required in subsections 13-6A-1B and D of this article, under "accessory uses and structures", yards shall be provided as follows:
1. Front: Not less than fifty feet (50') in depth, except front yards abutting York and Cermak Roads shall have a depth of not less than one hundred feet
(100').
2. Side: Not less than thirty feet (30') in depth, except: a) a side yard abutting a street shall be not less than fifty feet (50') in depth, and for
nonresidential uses each interior side yard shall be increased by not less than two feet (2') for each one foot (1') of structure height over thirty feet
(30').
3. Rear: Not less than one hundred feet (100') in depth. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-616, 8-11-1998; Ord. G-730, 9-23-2003; Ord. G-938, 11-9-
2010; Ord. G-977, 8-14-2012)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 341/438
13-6A-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading shall be as provided in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
ARTICLE B. R2 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT
13-6B-1: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses shall be those as in the R1 single-family detached residence district. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-6B-2: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses shall be those as in the R1 single-family detached residence district. (Ord. G-608, 3-10-1998)
13-6B-3: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Area: No less than one acre, except as otherwise required in this title for a specific use.
B. Lot Width: Not less than one hundred fifty feet (150') within the buildable area.
C. Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 0.4 for nonresidential use.
D. Structure Height:
1. Residential Uses: Not more than forty five feet (45') for lots one acre or larger and forty feet (40') for lots less than one acre, except for continuous
flat roofs, which shall be not more than thirty five feet (35') to the top of any parapet wall. However, where residential building heights exceed thirty
feet (30'), the highest space that can be occupied must have an emergency escape and rescue opening at a maximum elevation of thirty two feet
(32') above grade.
2. Institutional And Other Nonresidential Uses: Not more than forty five feet (45').
E. Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling:
1. One Story Without Basement: Not less than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet.
2. One Story With Basement: Not less than one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet.
3. Dwellings Having More Than One Story: Not less than one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet.
F. Yards: Except as required in subsections B and D under "accessory uses and structures" in section 13-6A-1 of this chapter, yards shall be provided as
follows:
1. Front: Not less than forty feet (40') in depth.
2. Side: Not less than eighteen feet (18') in depth except:
a. A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than forty feet (40') in depth;
b. To accommodate a side load garage, the minimum side yard setback (on 1 side yard) must be at least twenty three feet (23'); the width of the
pavement opposite of the garage door must be a minimum of twenty three feet (23');
c. For nonresidential uses each side yard abutting a street shall be not less than fifty feet (50') in depth and each interior side yard shall be not less
than thirty feet (30') in depth and increased by not less than two feet (2') for each one foot (1') of structure height over thirty feet (30').
3. Rear: Not less than sixty feet (60') in depth. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-328, 8-24-1982; Ord. G-616, 8-11-1998; Ord. G-730, 9-23-2003)
13-6B-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading shall be as provided in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
ARTICLE C. R3 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT
13-6C-1: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses shall be those as in the R1 single-family detached residence district. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 342/438
13-6C-2: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses shall be those as in the R1 single-family detached residence district; and
Residential development of cluster type single-family detached dwellings intended for occupancy by persons fifty five (55) years of age or older, and all
occupants at least eighteen (18) years of age or older, on parcels not less than thirty (30) acres in area1.
Residential development of existing buildings of historical, architectural or cultural significance2. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-83, 4-9-1968; Ord. G-203,
12-14-1976; Ord. G-608, 3-10-1998)
13-6C-3: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Reduction Of Lot Area: Not less than twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet, except that in subdivisions of eighty (80) acres or more in area, the lot
area may be reduced to one-half (1/2) acre provided that lands equal to ten percent (10%) of the total area be dedicated to the village, or agency
approved by the village board, for park or recreational uses and no portion of which shall be less than four (4) acres. The dedicated land shall be
appropriate for park or recreational uses, and shall not include wet drainageways in excess of twenty five percent (25%) of the total dedicated area.
B. Lot Width: Not less than one hundred feet (100') within the buildable area.
C. Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 0.4 for nonresidential uses.
D. Structure Height:
1. Residential Uses: Not more than forty feet (40') except for continuous flat roofs, which shall be not more than thirty feet (30') to the top of any
parapet wall. However, where residential building heights exceed thirty feet (30'), the highest space that can be occupied must have an emergency
escape and rescue opening at a maximum elevation of thirty two feet (32') above grade.
2. Institutional And Other Nonresidential Uses: Not more than forty five feet (45').
E. Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling:
1. One story: Not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet.
2. Bilevel: Not less than one thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet (floors at grade and above basement).
3. Dwellings having more than one story: Not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet.
F. Yards: Except as required in subsections 13-6A-1B and D of this chapter under "accessory uses and structures", yards shall be provided as follows:
1. Front: Not less than forty feet (40') in depth.
2. Side: Not less than twelve feet (12') in depth except:
a. A side yard abutting a street shall be not less than forty feet (40') in depth;
b. To accommodate a side load garage, the minimum side yard setback (on 1 side yard) must be at least twenty three feet (23'); the width of the
pavement opposite of the garage door must be a minimum of twenty three feet (23');
c. For nonresidential uses each side yard abutting a street shall be not less than fifty feet (50') in depth and each interior side yard shall be not less
than thirty feet (30') in depth and increased by not less than two feet (2') for each one foot (1') of structure height over thirty feet (30').
3. Rear: Not less than forty feet (40') in depth. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-83, 4-9-1968; Ord. G-203, 12-14-1976; Ord. G-730, 9-23-2003; Ord. G-
977, 8-14-2012)
13-6C-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading shall be as provided in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
ARTICLE D. R4 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT
13-6D-1: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses are those as in the R1 single-family detached residence district. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-6D-2: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses are those as in the R1 single-family detached residence district; and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 343/438
Single-family detached, attached and semidetached dwellings, on parcels not less than fifty (50) acres in area, provided that the gross density of each
such development shall not exceed three (3) dwelling units per acre; the structure heights shall not exceed thirty feet (30'); no structure shall contain more
than two and one-half (21/2) stories; the ground floor living area per dwelling shall not be less than one thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet for a
one story dwelling and nine hundred (900) square feet for a dwelling of more than one story; the minimum distance between principal buildings, as
measured between bearing walls, shall be not less than twenty feet (20'), except that this distance may be reduced by two feet (2') if one of such walls
encloses an attached garage or carport and by four feet (4') if each of such walls encloses an attached garage or carport; provided further, that each
principal building shall be set back at least thirty feet (30') from dedicated public streets, off street loading and off street parking requirements shall be as
provided in chapter 12 of this title; and provided that a preliminary development plan indicates sufficiently clearly the proposed streets, rights of way, lot
sizes and setbacks, so that the village board in granting approval of such preliminary plan may clearly define the areas of any special restrictions it may
wish to impose and that approval of the final subdivision plan shall be subject to same. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-6D-3: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Area:
1. Not less than eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet, except that in subdivisions forty (40) acres or more in area, the lot area may be reduced to
fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet provided that lands equal to ten percent (10%) of the total area be dedicated to the village, or agency
approved by the village board, for park or recreational uses and no portion of which shall be less than four (4) acres.
2. For single-family detached dwellings, the dedicated land shall be appropriate for park or recreational uses, and shall not include wet drainageways
in excess of twenty five percent (25%) of the total dedicated area.
B. Lot Width: Not less than seventy five feet (75') within the buildable area.
C. Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 0.4 for nonresidential uses.
D. Structure Height:
1. Residential Uses: Not more than thirty five feet (35') except for continuous flat roofs, which shall be not more than thirty feet (30') to the top of any
parapet wall. However, where residential building heights exceed thirty feet (30'), the highest space that can be occupied must have an emergency
escape and rescue opening at a maximum elevation of thirty two feet (32') above grade.
2. Institutional And Other Nonresidential Uses: Not more than forty five feet (45').
E. Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling:
1. One story: Not less than one thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet.
2. Bilevel: Not less than one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet (floors at grade and above basement).
3. Dwellings having more than one story: Not less than nine hundred (900) square feet.
F. Yards: Except as required in subsections 13-6A-1B and D of this chapter under "accessory uses and structures", yards shall be provided as follows:
1. Front: Not less than thirty feet (30') in depth.
2. Side: Not less than ten feet (10') in depth except:
a. A side yard may be reduced to not less than eight feet (8') provided the adjoining lot contains a dwelling with an attached garage or carport
adjacent to such side yard unless a side load garage is present;
b. A side yard abutting a street shall be not less than thirty feet (30') in depth;
c. To accommodate a side load garage, the minimum side yard setback (on 1 side yard) must be at least twenty three feet (23'); the width of the
pavement opposite of the garage door must be a minimum of twenty three feet (23');
d. For nonresidential uses each side yard abutting a street shall be not less than thirty feet (30') in depth and each interior side yard shall be not less
than thirty feet (30') in depth and increased by not less than two feet (2') for each one foot (1') of structure height over thirty feet (30').
3. Rear: Not less than thirty feet (30') in depth. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-66, 12-19-1966; Ord. G-83, 4-9-1968; Ord. G-203, 12-14-1976; Ord. G-
608, 3-10-1998; Ord. G-730, 9-23-2003; Ord. G-977, 8-14-2012)
13-6D-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading shall be as provided in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
ARTICLE E. R5 RESIDENCE DISTRICT
13-6E-1: PERMITTED USES:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 344/438
Accessory uses and structures including those uses and structures customarily accessory to residential dwellings.
Duplexes.
Home occupations.
Nameplates and signs.
Parks and playgrounds.
Public schools, parochial school, nonboarding elementary, junior high and high, on lots not less than eight (8) acres in area for an elementary school and
not less than twenty five (25) acres in area for a high school. (Ord. G-903, 11-10-2009)
13-6E-2: SPECIAL USES:
Cemeteries (subject to compliance with the regulations in chapter 16 of this title): Any existing cemetery and structure shall be deemed to have a special
use permit as required by this section, notwithstanding whether these existing cemeteries and structures comply, as of January 22, 2013, with the
provisions of chapter 16 of this title. Any expansion, change, or new construction relating to an existing cemetery and structure shall comply with chapter
16 of this title, but any such activity shall not require a new or amended special use permit, or other zoning relief, provided that the activities comply with
chapter 16 of this title. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no special use permit granted pursuant to this section, whether for an existing cemetery and
structure or for a new cemetery or structure, shall permit a community burial structure to be built in a residence district.
Churches, chapels, temples and synagogues: On lots not less than three hundred feet (300') in width and not less than two (2) acres in area and one
additional acre for each two hundred forty (240) seats in the sanctuary over two hundred forty (240) seats. Where churches and parochial schools are on
the same land, not less than eight (8) acres in area.
Cultural and recreational facilities: Outdoor and indoor cultural and recreational facilities including, but not limited to, swimming pools, tennis courts,
meeting facilities and other similar facilities accessory to and owned in common by the owners of properties within a residential development.
Public utility, transportation, and government facilities: Public utility, transportation, and governmental service facilities, including municipal offices and
civic centers, public libraries, police and fire stations, public works facilities, conference of municipal governments and ancillary uses (including
organizations which provide consultation solely to units of local government), and similar uses.
Recreational and cultural uses.
Residential townhomes and condominiums.
Senior housing including nursing homes, independent living, assisted living and congregate care facilities. (Ord. G-903, 11-10-2009; Ord. G-989, 1-22-
2013)
13-6E-3: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. District Area: Not less than four (4) acres.
B. Density:
1. Duplexes: Gross density shall not exceed six (6) dwelling units per acre.
2. Residential townhomes and condominiums: Gross density shall not exceed eight (8) dwelling units per acre. Additional density bonuses shall be
permitted for the inclusion of the following site amenities:
a. Underground parking (for all required parking spaces): Four (4) units per acre.
b. Open space in excess of thirty percent (30%) of the project area: Two (2) units per acre.
3. Senior housing including nursing homes, independent living, assisted living and congregate care facilities: Fifteen (15) units per acre.
a. Underground parking (for all required parking spaces): Four (4) units per acre.
b. Open space in excess of thirty percent (30%) of the project area: Two (2) units per acre.
C. Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 0.5 for nonresidential uses.
D. Structure Height:
1. Duplexes: Not more than thirty five feet (35') except for continuous flat roofs, which shall be not more than thirty feet (30') to the top of any parapet
wall. However, where residential building heights exceed thirty feet (30'), the highest space that can be occupied must have an emergency escape
and rescue opening at a maximum elevation of thirty two feet (32') above grade.
2. All other uses: Fifty feet (50').
E. Yards:
1. Front: Not less than forty feet (40') in depth.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 345/438
2. Side: Not less than twenty feet (20') in depth except:
a. A side yard abutting a street shall be not less than forty feet (40') in depth;
b. To accommodate a side load garage, the minimum side yard setback (on 1 side yard) must be at least twenty three feet (23'); the width of the
pavement opposite of the garage door must be a minimum of twenty three feet (23');
c. For nonresidential uses each side yard abutting a street shall be not less than thirty feet (30') in depth and each interior side yard shall be not less
than thirty feet (30') in depth and increased by not less than two feet (2') for each one foot (1') of structure height over thirty feet (30').
3. Rear: Not less than forty feet (40') in depth. (Ord. G-903, 11-10-2009; Ord. G-977, 8-14-2012)
13-6E-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading shall be as provided in chapter 12 of this title with the following exceptions:
1. Off street parking for senior housing including nursing homes, independent living, assisted living and congregate care facilities shall be at a ratio not
less than one parking space per dwelling unit. This parking ratio may be decreased upon the submittal of detailed parking study and review/approval
by the village engineer. (Ord. G-903, 11-10-2009)
Chapter 7
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
13-7-1: PURPOSE:
The business districts provide for groupings of business and other nonresidential establishments in accordance with their compatibility, functions and
scope of service. The regulations of the various business districts are designed to govern developments ranging from the local shopping areas serving
primarily residents of the village to those which serve the region. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-514, 7-13-1993)
13-7-2: TWO OR MORE USES ON A LOT:
Wherever two (2) or more permitted uses or special uses, each requiring a minimum lot area, are located in the same building or on the same lot, the
required minimum lot area shall be the sum of the areas required for each use individually. When one or more uses has a required minimum lot area, the
total lot area shall equal the sum of the required lot areas plus an additional area equivalent to that devoted to the use which does not have a required
minimum lot area. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-514, 7-13-1993)
13-7-3: SCOPE:
A. All business establishments shall be retail trade or service establishments dealing directly with consumers and all goods produced on the premises
shall be sold on the premises where produced, except for approved specialty retail programs in outdoor areas of a shopping center in districts where
permitted as a special use.
B. All business, service, storage, merchandise, display and where permitted, repair and processing shall be conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building except for:
1. Off street automobile parking, off street loading, and open sales lots and drive-in facilities in districts where they are permitted;
2. Outdoor dining areas adjacent to restaurants in districts where outdoor dining areas are permitted as a special use;
3. Approved specialty retail programs in outdoor areas of a shopping center in districts where permitted as a special use;
4. Outdoor sales events on a property in any business district provided that all of the following conditions are met:
a. Such event shall be of a limited duration (14 days or less per event) occurring no more than two (2) times in any calendar year; and
b. Such event is held in a temporary enclosure that received all required permits from the village; and
c. Such event offers for sale only items that are normally sold inside the building in conformity with the principal use of the subject property; and
d. Such event conforms to all signage and setback requirements of the underlying zoning district; and
e. The property complies with all parking requirements of the underlying district, or, in the alternative, the petitioner reasonably demonstrates that
notwithstanding any temporary noncompliance, the conduct of the event will not impose any undue traffic or parking burden on surrounding
properties and streets; and
f. Such event is approved by the village board of trustees upon petition or request from the property owner detailing prospective compliance with the
conditions herein; and
5. Farmers' markets and/or French markets involving the sale of flowers, culinary accessories and edible items for consumption off the premises
where the sale is made in districts where permitted as a special use.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 346/438
C. Goods sold shall consist primarily of new merchandise, except for antique shops. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-572, 6-11-1996; Ord. G-721, 6-10-
2003; Ord. G-870, 9-9-2008; Ord. G-915, 1-12-2010)
13-7-4: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All activities involving the production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, or repair of materials, goods or products, shall conform with the
performance standards established for the ORA office-research-assembly districts1. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-7-5: TRUCK PARKING:
Trucks in excess of one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity used in conjunction with the operations of any use permitted in business districts shall not be
parked in the open within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residence district boundary line, except during normal business hours. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
ARTICLE A. B1 LOCAL SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT
13-7A-1: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses and structures, including, but not limited to, off street loading, off street parking and business signs.
Antique shops.
Audio and video equipment, retail sales thereof, including components and related accessories, installation and servicing of such products in motor
vehicles and conducted entirely within an enclosed structure with service entry at the rear of the building with no overnight parking.
Bakeries, where not more than thirty percent (30%) of the floor area is devoted to processing.
Banks and financial institutions.
Barbershops and beauty parlors.
Book and stationery stores.
Camera and photographic supply stores and photographic studios.
Candy and ice cream stores.
Clinics, medical and dental, including accessory laboratories.
Drugstores.
Dry cleaning and laundry retail establishments; provided that processing, if done on the premises, shall utilize nonexplosive and noninflammable
materials, and that such processing shall be limited to service of the principal use.
Fire stations.
Florist shops.
Food stores including grocery stores, meat markets and delicatessens.
Gift shops.
Haberdasheries.
Hardware stores.
Health clubs.
Hobby, toy and game shops provided amusement arcades are not permitted.
Home decorating stores.
Home furniture and furnishings stores.
Housewares stores.
Jewelry stores, including watch, clock and jewelry repair.
Launderettes, including automatic self-service dry cleaning equipment.
Libraries, branch.
Liquor stores with a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of retail space.
Luggage and leather goods stores.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 347/438
Men's and women's accessory and specialty stores.
Music stores.
Offices: business, professional and public.
Optical goods stores.
Police stations.
Post offices.
Restaurants, including cocktail lounges.
Schools: Commercial, business, trade, music and dance subject to the conditions that the permitted use is limited to second floor space of any building
where a school is located and that the use is limited to a maximum of ten percent (10%) of the total square footage of the shopping center in which it is
located provided that adequate parking is provided to accommodate such use.
Shoe stores.
Sporting goods stores.
Temporary buildings, for construction purposes for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days following completion of the development.
Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices.
Variety stores.
Wearing apparel shops. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-444, 2-13-1990; Ord. G-778, 4-26-2005; Ord. G-835, 9-25-2007; Ord. G-901, 10-13-2009; Ord. G-
1023, 5-13-2014)
13-7A-2: SPECIAL USES:
Accessory uses and structures, including, but not limited to, off street parking and off street loading spaces and business signs.
Automobile service stations, on lots not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
Clubs, lodges, fraternities and community centers on lots not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
Daycare center, provided such facility complies with all licensing requirements of the state and maintains a direct alarm hookup to the police department.
Drive-in banking facilities.
Farmers' markets and/or French markets involving the sale of flowers, culinary accessories and edible items for consumption off the premises where the
sale is made provided that the following conditions are met:
A. Sale of used or preowned items is not permitted.
B. Farmers' market and/or French market may be conducted no more than one day per week on any property zoned for business purposes.
C. All signage and setback requirements of the underlying zoning district must be met.
D. The property on which the farmers' market and/or French market is conducted complies with all the parking requirements of the underlying zoning
district or, in the alternative, the petitioner demonstrates that notwithstanding any temporary noncompliance, the conduct of the event will not impose
any undue traffic or parking burden on surrounding properties and streets; and
E. The farmers' market and/or French market is approved by the department of community development upon application and submittal of all required
information from the property owner detailing prospective compliance with the conditions herein.
Office supply stores.
Outdoor dining areas adjacent to restaurants.
Public utility, governmental service and transportation uses:
Bus turnarounds and passenger shelters.
Electric distribution centers and substations.
Gas regulator stations.
Sewage and stormwater lift stations.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 348/438
Telephone exchanges and transmission buildings and equipment, and outdoor telephone booths and pedestals.
Water filtration plants, wells, pumping stations and reservoirs.
Restaurants and accessory cocktail lounges, without facilities for dancing and live entertainment, on lots not less than two hundred feet (200') in width and
not less than one and one-half (11/2) acres in area.
Senior housing and nursing homes on lots not less than three hundred feet (300') in width and not less than two (2) acres in area. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966;
Ord. G-454, 10-9-1990; Ord. G-513, 6-22-1993; Ord. G-556, 7-11-1995; Ord. G-835, 9-25-2007; Ord. G-903, 11-10-2009; Ord. G-915, 1-12-2010)
13-7A-3: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 0.5.
B. Structure Height: Not more than fifty feet (50') and not more than two (2) stories.
C. Yards:
1. No structure, other than access drives and paved parking areas, and signs as provided in subsection 13-7A-4A of this article, shall be erected or
maintained within the following distances:
a. Sixty feet (60') from the right of way of any public street;
b. Thirty feet (30') from a district boundary which abuts a public right of way which does not afford a primary means of access to the district; and
c. Sixty feet (60') from any other district boundary; except when adjacent to a B2 district boundary line; provided, however, that the area between a
building and the right of way of any street or other district boundary may be occupied by drives, drive-in banking facilities, vehicular parking,
sidewalks, landscaping and similar facilities, except paved parking, areas shall not be located closer than ten feet (10') to any lot in a residence
district or ten feet (10') to any public street;
except that building shall be set back not less than one hundred feet (100') from the rights of way of York Road, 22nd Street and 31st Street.
2. For the purpose of interpreting and enforcing the yard regulations of this section, the entire area included within a B1 district, except that portion
separated by a dedicated public street, shall be considered as a single zoning lot; more than one building or structure may, however, be erected
thereon; and the only front, side and rear yards that need to be observed are those provided for in subsection C1 of this section. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-
1966; Ord. G-513, 6-22-1993; Ord. G-778, 4-26-2005)
13-7A-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Awnings, Marquees And Signs: See chapter 11 of this title.
B. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading shall be as provided in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-85, 5-14-
1968; Ord. G-513, 6-22-1993; Ord. G-695, 3-26-2002)
ARTICLE B. B2 REGIONAL SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT
13-7B-1: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses and structures, including but not limited to storage and service areas within the structures, garages for delivery trucks, central heating and
air conditioning plants, and storage areas, yards, shops and similar facilities that are used solely for operating, servicing or maintaining the activities and
improvements within the district.
Art galleries.
Automobile service stations and automobile sales, including show rooms, electric powering stations, fulfillment centers.
Banks and other financial institutions.
Barbershops, beauty parlors, and other aesthetic and personal wellness services, including but not limited to salons and spas.
Bus depots, cab stands, and pick-up/drop-off areas for ride-sharing services.
Candy, ice cream and bakery shops, and other shops selling food products, including but not limited to grocery stores, specialty food stores, butchers,
delicatessens, health food stores, with or without accessory catering services, where the commodities may be produced on the premises; but all such
production shall be either sold at retail on the premises or sold in stores owned and operated by the producing company.
Drugstores, pharmacies, and stores selling medical devices and homeopathic or herbal remedies (but not including medical cannabis dispensaries).
Electronic data storage.
Furniture stores, including upholstery when conducted as part of the retail operation and secondary to the principal use.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 349/438
Gas regulator stations.
Hospitals, having not more than ten (10) beds and first-aid stations for the treatment of emergency cases, and outpatient medical and aesthetic service
facilities and uses, including but not limited to medical and dental offices and clinics, rehabilitative exercise and training centers, cosmetic surgery
services, physical therapy, massage, and chiropractic services.
Hotels.
Hybrid uses. While commercial occupants in the B2 District may operate a single principal use with one or more accessory uses, other commercial
occupants may have business operations that are or become a hybrid of multiple principal uses of significant and possibly equal importance. The
following are provided by way of example and not limitation:
A. Restaurants, cocktail lounges and tearooms, coffee houses, banquet facilities, micro-wineries, micro-breweries, micro-distilleries and other
businesses offering the sale of food and beverage may be combined with retail, catering, event planning, musical performances and karaoke, dance
floors, bowling, bocce, pool and billiards, ping pong and similar table games, arcade games, and other forms of service, entertainment and
recreation.
B. Retail stores and shops, including department stores, may operate and offer related and complementary on-site uses and services (including but
not limited to repair services, internet purchase fulfillment services, restaurant and food service, classes, indoor special events and entertainment)
and off-site services (including but not limited to event planning, catering and interior design).
C. Gyms, health clubs and other physical wellness facilities may be paired with restaurant and retail uses and offer nutritional and health classes,
personal training and counseling, aesthetic services, and chiropractic, physical therapy, massage, medical services, including blood draws.
Interior decorating shops.
Job printing shops.
Laundries, dyeing and cleaning establishments, operated as an accessory use to some other use or uses permitted by this section, provided permits for
the use of combustible and flammable materials, if to be used, are obtained from the Board of Trustees.
Laundries, self-service, and shops for the collection and distribution of laundry and dry cleaning articles.
Messenger and telephone service stations.
Offices.
Pet shops, grooming services, and veterinary clinics.
Photographer, artist or similar studios.
Post offices.
Printing plants, newspaper, magazine and similar publications.
Public and private garages.
Radio and television broadcasting stations.
Restaurants, cocktail lounges and tearooms, coffee houses, banquet facilities, micro-wineries, micro-breweries, and other businesses offering the sale of
food and beverage (but not including micro-distilleries). Only the following two (2) accessory uses to restaurants shall be permitted outdoors without
special use approval: a) outdoor dining areas that are within a regional shopping center of at least fifty (50) acres and are completely separated from
public rights-of-way by enclosed buildings; and b) vertical and rooftop gardens that produce fruits, flowers and vegetables for on premises consumption
and use.
Retail stores and shops, including department stores.
Sales and display rooms.
Schools, studios, classrooms, facilities and activities for personal or interactive learning, physical wellness and cultural enrichment, including but not
limited to colleges, universities and test preparation services, art and craft classes, yoga and Pilates studios, gyms and physical fitness facilities, afterschool
programs for children, day camps, venues providing interactive entertainment and educational programming for children, and activity centers for
seniors and adult learning. Structures for physical wellness uses are permitted to include, by way of example and not limitation, indoor and outdoor
exercise and participant sports facilities, swimming pools, playgrounds, and climbing walls.
Service, cleaning and repair shops, for personal, household or garden equipment.
Tailor or dressmaking shops, and similar repair services.
Theaters, except open air drive-in establishments. (Ord. G-1112, 9-26-2017)
13-7B-2: SPECIAL USES:
Amusement establishments that are not expressly listed as a permitted use under section 13-7B-1 of this article, such as spectator sports facilities, and
are not otherwise prohibited by Village ordinance.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 350/438
Automobile test drive areas that are designated exclusively as such and involve construction of specific physical improvements (as opposed to automobile
testing within multi-functional vehicular areas).
Community centers that do not qualify as a permitted use under section 13-7B-1 of this article.
Daycare center, provided such facility complies with all licensing requirements of the State and maintains a direct alarm hookup to the Police Department.
Drive-in banking facility.
Electric distribution centers and substations.
Farmers' markets and/or French markets involving the sale of flowers, culinary accessories and edible items provided that the following conditions are
met:
A. Sale of used or pre-owned items is not permitted unless allowed in the special use approval ordinance.
B. Farmers' market and/or French market may be conducted no more than one day per week unless otherwise allowed in the special use approval
ordinance.
C. All signage and setback requirements of the underlying zoning district must be met.
D. The property on which the farmers' market and/or French market is conducted complies with all the parking requirements of the underlying zoning
district or, in the alternative, the petitioner demonstrates that notwithstanding any temporary noncompliance, the conduct of the event will not impose
any undue traffic or parking burden on surrounding properties and streets; and
E. The farmers' market and/or French market is approved by the Department of Community Development upon application and submittal of all
required information from the property owner detailing prospective compliance with the conditions herein.
Micro-distilleries.
Outdoor dining areas adjacent to restaurants and specialty retail programs that do not qualify as a permitted use under section 13-7B-1 of this article.
Pre-schools, including nursery schools and kindergartens.
Public utility, governmental service, and transportation uses:
Bus turnarounds and passenger shelters.
Fire and police stations.
Sewage and stormwater lift stations.
Telephone exchanges and transmission buildings and equipment, and outdoor telephone booths and pedestals.
Water filtration plants, wells, pumping stations and reservoirs.
Specialty retail programs in outdoor areas of a shopping center as a convenience to pedestrian shoppers, provided: a) all aspects of the operation and
sales meet the applicable requirements of the DuPage County Health Department; and b) specialty retail program facilities have appropriate utilities
provided, are not convenient to drive-up businesses, and do not materially interfere with access to or visibility of other establishments within the shopping
center.
Wireless communication towers. (Ord. G-1112, 9-26-2017)
13-7B-3: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 0.5; provided, however, that with regard to any increase of floor area over 0.3, not more than twelve and one-half
percent (121/2%) of permissible floor area in excess of 0.3 shall be devoted to office use as permitted under section 13-7B-1 of this article.
B. Yards:
1. No structure, other than signs as provided for in subsection 13-7B-4A of this article shall be erected or maintained within the following distances:
a. Three hundred feet (300') from the right-of-way of 22nd Street or Route 83 (Kingery Expressway);
b. Eighty feet (80') from the right-of-way of any other street;
c. Eighty feet (80') from any other district boundary, except when adjacent to a B1 District, and except that when adjacent to a residence district
boundary line, then not within one hundred fifty feet (150') of such boundary line; provided, however, that the area between a building and the
right-of-way of any street or other district boundary may be occupied by drives, drive-in banking facilities, vehicular parking, sidewalks,
landscaping and similar facilities, except that paved areas shall not be located closer than forty feet (40') to any lot in a residence district.
2. For the purpose of interpreting and enforcing the yard regulations of this subsection, the entire area included within a B2 District, except that portion
separated by a dedicated public street, shall be considered as a single zoning lot; more than one building or structure may, however, be erected
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 351/438
thereon; and the only front, side and rear yards that need to be observed are those provided for in subsection B1 of this section. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-
1966; Ord. G-229, 4-25-1978; Ord. G-414, 7-12-1988; Ord. G-513, 6-22-1993)
13-7B-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Signs: See chapter 11 of this title.
B. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading shall be as provided in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-85, 5-14-
1968; Ord. G-695, 3-26-2002)
ARTICLE C. B3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
13-7C-1: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses and structures.
Animal hospitals and veterinarian offices.
Art galleries.
Auction rooms.
Automobile accessory stores.
Automobile sales establishments.
Automobile service stations.
Banks and other financial institutions.
Bicycle stores, sales, rental and repair.
Blueprinting and photocopying establishments.
Building material sales, not including outside storage.
Camera and photographic supply stores.
Carpet and rug stores.
Cartage and express facilities; provided storage of goods, motor trucks or other equipment is in a completely enclosed building.
Catering establishments.
China and glassware stores.
Clinics, medical and dental, including accessory laboratories.
Clothes pressing establishments.
Clothing stores.
Clothing and costume rental shops.
Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations.
Cocktail lounges.
Coin and philatelic stores.
Department stores.
Drug stores.
Dry cleaning and laundry retail establishments; provided, that processing, if done on the premises, shall utilize nonexplosive, nonflammable materials,
that such processing shall be limited to service of the principal use.
Electrical, gas and other household appliance stores, including radio and television sales and accessory repair and service thereof.
Electric distribution centers and substations.
Employment agencies.
Exhibition halls.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 352/438
Fire stations.
Food stores, including grocery stores, meat markets and delicatessens.
Furniture stores, including upholstery when conducted as part of the retail operation and secondary to the principal use.
Furrier shops, including the incidental storage and conditioning of furs.
Garages, public, where body repair and painting are incidental accessory uses, but not including automobile wrecking yards.
Garages, storage.
Garden supply and seed stores.
Gas regulator stations.
Greenhouses and conservatories.
Hobby shops, for retailing of items to be assembled or used away from the premises.
Interior decorating shops, including upholstery and making of draperies, slipcovers and other similar articles when conducted as part of the retail
operation and secondary to the principal use.
Jewelry stores, including watch repair.
Job printing shops, using presses having beds of not more than fourteen inches by twenty inches (14" x 20").
Kennels, with no outdoor dog runs.
Laboratories, medical, dental or optical.
Leather goods and luggage stores.
Libraries.
Liquor stores, retail sales of package goods only.
Loan offices.
Locksmith shops.
Mail order service stores.
Millinery shops.
Music stores, sheet music and phonograph record sales.
Musical instrument sales and repair.
Offices.
Office supply stores.
Opticians and optometrists.
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores, not including the assembly or manufacture of such articles.
Paint and wallpaper stores.
Parking lots, for passenger motor vehicles only.
Pet service, domestic.
Pet shops.
Photography studios, including developing and printing of photographs, when conducted on the premises as a part of the retail business.
Physical culture and health service, gymnasiums, reducing salons, massage salons and public baths.
Picture framing, when conducted on the premises for retail trade.
Plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical fixtures and equipment, showroom and shops, for domestic use only.
Police stations.
Radio and television service and repair shops.
Recording studios.
Recreational buildings, community centers and meeting halls.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 353/438
Religious institutions, churches, chapels, temples or synagogues.
Restaurants, including musical entertainment and dancing.
Schools, commercial or trade, provided that operations do not involve danger of fire, explosion, nor objectionable standards of noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, odor, glare, heat or other nuisances.
Sewing machine sales and services, household machines only.
Shoe and hat repair stores.
Shoe stores.
Sporting goods stores.
Tailor shops.
Taxidermists.
Telegraph offices.
Theaters, indoor.
Tobacco shops.
Toy shops.
Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices.
Typewriter and adding machine sales and service establishments.
Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-520, 8-24-1993)
13-7C-2: SPECIAL USES:
Accessory uses and structures, including, but not limited to, off street parking and off street loading spaces and business signs.
Amusement establishments, including bowling alleys, gymnasiums, swimming pools and skating rinks.
Automobile minimarket.
Daycare center, provided such facility complies with all licensing requirements of the state of Illinois and maintains a direct alarm hookup to the Oak Brook
police department.
Drive-in establishments for permitted uses.
Farmers' markets and/or French markets involving the sale of flowers, culinary accessories and edible items for consumption off the premises where the
sale is made provided that the following conditions are met:
A. Sale of used or preowned items is not permitted.
B. Farmers' market and/or French market may be conducted no more than one day per week on any property zoned for business purposes.
C. All signage and setback requirements of the underlying zoning district must be met.
D. The property on which the farmers' market and/or French market is conducted complies with all the parking requirements of the underlying zoning
district or, in the alternative, the petitioner demonstrates that notwithstanding any temporary noncompliance, the conduct of the event will not impose
any undue traffic or parking burden on surrounding properties and streets; and
E. The farmers' market and/or French market is approved by the department of community development upon application and submittal of all required
information from the property owner detailing prospective compliance with the conditions herein.
Horse stables and riding academies, public, on a lot not less than ten (10) acres in area, provided buildings containing stables and accessory outdoor
facilities are not less than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the nearest lot line.
Nursing homes, on lots not less than three hundred feet (300') in width and not less than two (2) acres in area.
Open sales lots, when accessory to new automobile, trailer or boat sales establishments.
Outdoor dining areas adjacent to restaurants.
Public utility, governmental service and transportation uses.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 354/438
Bus turnarounds and passenger shelters.
Sewage and stormwater lift stations.
Telephone exchanges and transmission buildings and equipment, and outdoor telephone booths and pedestals.
Water filtration plants, wells, pumping stations and reservoirs.
Recreation, outdoor, par 3 and miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges, swimming and tennis clubs, and other outdoor recreation uses as approved by
the village board of trustees.
Senior housing.
Trailer or boat sales establishments, for new trailer or boat sales. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-305, 9-8-1981; Ord. G-449, 8-14-1990; Ord. G-454, 10-9-
1990; Ord. G-819, 12-12-2006; Ord. G-903, 11-10-2009; Ord. G-915, 1-12-2010)
13-7C-3: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 1.2.
B. Structure Height: Not more than thirty five feet (35') and not more than three (3) stories.
C. Yards: As in B1 local shopping center district, except: 1) for automobile service stations where islands containing fuel pumps and air and water outlets,
with or without connecting shelters, shall have a front yard, or a side yard adjoining a street not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth; and 2) front
and side yards abutting 22nd Street and York Road shall have a depth not less than one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-7C-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Awnings, Marquees And Signs: See chapter 11 of this title.
B. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading shall be as provided in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-695, 3-26-
2002)
ARTICLE D. B4 HOTEL-OFFICE DISTRICT
13-7D-1: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses and structures including:
Restaurants and accessory cocktail lounges, in a structure which is used principally for a permitted use, and when located on floors below those used for
the principal use or on the top floor or roof of such a structure.
Retail sales and personal service uses, having no exterior advertising and accessible only from the lobby and interior of a building and used for a
permitted principal use and when no single establishment occupies more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area.
Electric distribution centers and substations.
Gas regulator stations.
Hotels and motels (minimum of 50 rooms).
Offices, institutional and fraternal.
Sewage and stormwater lift stations.
Telephone exchanges and transmission buildings and equipment, and outdoor telephone booths and pedestals.
Water filtration plants, wells, pumping stations and reservoirs. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-7D-2: SPECIAL USES:
Accessory uses and structures.
Bus turnarounds and passenger shelters.
Daycare center, provided such facility complies with all licensing requirements of the state and maintains a direct alarm hookup to the Oak Brook police
department.
Farmers' markets and/or French markets involving the sale of flowers, culinary accessories and edible items for consumption off the premises where the
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 355/438
sale is made provided that the following conditions are met:
A. Sale of used or preowned items is not permitted.
B. Farmers' market and/or French market may be conducted no more than one day per week on any property zoned for business purposes.
C. All signage and setback requirements of the underlying zoning district must be met.
D. The property on which the farmers' market and/or French market is conducted complies with all the parking requirements of the underlying zoning
district or, in the alternative, the petitioner demonstrates that notwithstanding any temporary noncompliance, the conduct of the event will not impose
any undue traffic or parking burden on surrounding properties and streets; and
E. The farmers' market and/or French market is approved by the department of community development upon application and submittal of all required
information from the property owner detailing prospective compliance with the conditions herein.
Offices, business and professional, occupying less than fifty percent (50%) of the total floor area of a structure over five (5) stories in height, and when
located on floors below those used for dwelling purposes.
Sewage and stormwater lift stations.
Water filtration plants, wells, pumping stations and reservoirs. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-454, 10-9-1990; Ord. G-915, 1-12-2010)
13-7D-3: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 0.6.
B. Yards:
1. Front: Not less than one hundred feet (100').
2. Side Yards And Courts:
a. Two (2) side yards each not less than ten feet (10'), plus one foot (1') for each one foot (1') in height that a structure exceeds twenty seven feet
(27'), in height except a side yard adjoining a street shall be not less than fifty feet (50').
b. Where a building wall more than thirty feet (30') in length faces an interior side lot line, the interior yard as required in this article shall be
increased in depth by one foot (1') for each one foot (1') such wall exceeds thirty feet (30') in length, or not more than twenty seven feet (27'),
whichever is less.
c. Where the walls of one or more structures face upon a court, the depth and length of the court shall be as approved by the board of trustees after
receiving recommendations of the plan commission.
3. Rear: Not less than forty feet (40') in depth.
4. Yards Adjoining Residence District: Any yard adjoining a residence district and a structure within the B4 hotel-office district shall be not less than
one hundred feet (100') in depth.
5. Yards Adjoining 22nd Street And York Road: Not less than one hundred feet (100') in depth.
C. Height: Not more than five (5) stories.
D. Lot Width: Not less than two hundred feet (200'). (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-7D-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Awnings, Marquees And Signs: See chapter 11 of this title.
B. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading shall be as provided in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-695, 3-26-
2002)
Chapter 8
HISTORIC GRAUE MILL GATEWAY AREA
13-8-1: FINDINGS:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 356/438
A. The area around the Graue Mill is a unique area with special cultural significance and character different from similarity zoned properties in the Village
and includes historic structures: the Graue Mill, the old St. John Church and the Fred Graue residence, which structures are hereby designated to be
historically significant.
B. The preservation and development of this area require additional rules and regulations supplementing existing ordinances in order to specifically
address the unique character of that area.
C. The Historic Graue Mill Gateway Area includes all that property within the boundaries as shown on the map and legal description labelled Exhibit "A",
attached to Ordinance G-272 on file in the office of the Village Clerk. Such map and legal description are hereby incorporated herein and made a part
hereof by reference.
D. A public hearing has been held pursuant to notice to property owners in the area of the Historic Graue Mill Gateway Area on February 2, 1980, before
the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village, pursuant to due and appropriate notice published in the Oak Brook Doings on January 17, 1980.
E. The creation of the Historic Graue Mill Gateway Area and rules and regulations regarding the development therein is consistent with the
comprehensive plan of the Village of Oak Brook.
F. The Village of Hinsdale has passed on October 7, 1980, a similar ordinance so that the character of this area can be preserved in both Villages. This
joint effort of the two (2) Villages is consistent with and in accordance with theprovisions of section 10 of article VII of the Illinois Constitution relating to
intergovernmental cooperation. (Ord. G-272, 11-11-1980)
13-8-2: GRAUE MILL GATEWAY AREA ESTABLISHED:
The Historic Graue Mill Gateway Area is hereby established with the boundaries as set forth in Exhibit "A", attached to Ordinance G-272, made a part of
this Chapter by reference, and on file in the office of the Village Clerk. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the erection, construction, alteration or
repair of any building or structure in the said area and no building permits shall be issued for any such work except as provided herein. (Ord. G-272, 11-
11-1980)
13-8-3: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The provisions of this Chapter are intended to order and control growth within the area described as the Historic Graue Mill Gateway Area, hereinafter
sometimes referred to as "area", and for the additional purposes:
A. To promote the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the citizens of said area.
B. To enhance the values of property throughout the said area.
C. To encourage and foster development in the area consistent with the Graue Mill, its site and the historic period it represents.
D. To encourage and promote the attractiveness, cohesiveness and compatibility of new buildings, development, remodeling, and additions so as to
maintain and improve established standards of property values within the area consistent with its historical character.
E. To encourage and promote the preservation of historical structures, buildings and natural resources including the Graue Mill, the old St. John Church
and the Fred Graue residence. (Ord. G-272, 11-11-1980)
13-8-4: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter the following words and terms shall have the respective meanings:
ARCHITECTURAL CHARACTER: The composite or aggregate of the characteristics of structure, form, materials, and function of a building, group of
buildings, or other architectural composition.
ARCHITECTURAL CONCEPT: The basic aesthetic idea of a building,or group of buildings or structures, including the site and landscape development,
which produces the architectural character.
AREA: The Historic Graue Mill Gateway Area.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: A statement issued by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village that a gateway development plan
meets the intent and purpose of the Historic Graue Mill Gateway Area which permits the applicant to build in accordance with the statement.
EXTERIOR BUILDING COMPONENT: An essential and visible part of the exterior of a building.
GATEWAY DEVELOPMENT PLAN: Those documents, drawings, and plans, including the site plan and landscape plan, as referred to in Sections 13-8-7
and 13-8-8 of this Chapter.
SCREENING: Structure or plantings which conceals from view from public ways the areas behind such structure or plantings.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 357/438
STREET HARDWARE: Objects other than buildings, structures and plantings located in streets and public ways and outside of buildings. Examples are:
lamp posts, utility poles, traffic lights, traffic signs, benches, litter containers, planting containers, letter boxes, fire hydrants.
STREETSCAPE: The scene as may be observed along a public street or way composed of natural and manmade components including buildings,
paving, plantings, street hardware, and miscellaneous structures.
VILLAGE: The Village of Oak Brook, Illinois. (Ord. G-272, 11-11-1980)
13-8-5: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this Chapter shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any provisions of the zoning ordinance of the Village; provided, however, that
where any provision of the said zoning ordinance may conflict with a provision of this Chapter, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. (Ord. G-272, 11-
11-1980)
13-8-6: CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS:
A. Required: No building permit or other permit otherwise required under the ordinances of the Village for the erection, construction, exterior alteration or
repair of any building or structure in the Historic Graue Mill Gateway Area shall be issued by the Director of Community Development except upon the
issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by the President and Board of Trustees. Such certificate ofappropriateness may only be issued after a
public hearing has been held before the Plan Commission of the Village in accordance with the public hearing procedures set forth herein and after the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village approve the gateway development plan for the property involved.
B. Application And Hearing: Upon the filing of an application for a building permit for which a certificate of appropriateness is or may be required, the
applicant shall concurrently file with the Village Clerk an application for a certificate of appropriateness, which application shall include all the
information and material required pursuant to Sections 13-8-7 and 13-8-8 of this Chapter. Such application shall be referred to the plan commission by
the president and board of trustees upon verification of the completeness of said application. The fact that an application for a certificate of
appropriateness has been filed shall not be cause for the director of community development to delay the review of plans relating to the building and
zoning aspects of the project while said application is pending. The plan commission shall thereupon fix a reasonable time, within forty five (45) days,
for a hearing and give a written five (5) day notice thereof to the applicant. Upon such hearing the commission shall consider the application for a
certificate of appropriateness and, if necessary, receive additional evidence (such as exterior elevation renderings) from the applicant or his agent or
attorney and from the village personnel or other persons as to whether the external architectural features of the proposed building or structure comply
with the provisions of this chapter. All testimony given at such hearing shall be under oath. (Ord. G-272, § 1, 11-11-1980)
13-8-7: GATEWAY DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
The gateway development plan must be appropriate to the development of the area consistent with its historic character and shall provide detailed
information in regards to the following:
A. Relationship Of Proposed Buildings Or Structures To Site And Adjoining Area: The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with the
streetscape, and to provide for adequate planting, pedestrian movement, and parking areas, and shall be evaluated pursuant to the following criteria:
1. The provision, where practical, of setbacks in excess of zoning restrictions to provide an interesting relationship between buildings;
2. The treatment of parking areas with decorative elements, building wall extensions, plantings, berms or other innovative means so as to screen
parking from view;
3. The underground installation of newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by exterior alterations.
B. Building Design: Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall be based on the following criteria:
1. The quality of the design and its relationship to the Graue Mill, its site, and the historic period it represents;
2. The compatibility of the design, arrangement, texture, and materials of the proposed buildings or structures with the intent and purpose of the area;
3. The screening and location of mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground, or buildings from public view with materials
harmonious to the building, so as not to be visible from any public ways;
4. The unobtrusiveness and harmoniousness of exterior lighting and the compatibility of fixtures, standards, and all exposed accessories with the
building design.
C. Street Hardware And Signs: See chapter 11 of this title.
D. Landscaping Design Considerations: Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural features and provide shade and screening, and
shall be evaluated pursuant to the following criteria:
1. The compatibility of the design and size of all landscaping effects with the building or structure and adjacent areas;
2. The preservation, protection and development of existing topographic patterns and plant materials which contribute to the beauty and utility of a
development;
3. Where building sites limit plantings, the placement of trees in the parkway or paved areas. Parkway trees shall be of a minimum three inch (3")
caliper. Buildings of three (3) stories or more shall have parkway and front and/or side yard trees of a minimum of five inch (5") caliper;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 358/438
4. The method of screening of service yards, and other places which tend to be unsightly, by fencing, plantings, or a combination of these. Screening
shall be equally effective in all seasons and may be accomplished by use of any combination of walls, fencing or plantings;
5. The enhancement of parking areas and traffic ways with landscaped spaces containing trees and tree groupings and low shrubs or ground cover;
6. The use of unobstrusive exterior lighting to enhance the landscaping;
7. The use of landscaping materials and lighting which have low demand for annual maintenance.
E. Landscape Plan: A detailed landscape plan shall show:
1. Location of existing plant materials to remain and those to be removed;
2. Designation of parkway "street trees". Existing parkway trees shall be preserved and protected during construction;
3. Scientific (genus-species) and common names of proposed landscape material and proposed quantities and sizes of same;
4. Landscape materials other than plant materials shall be designated in detail.
The landscape plan shall be prepared by a landscape architect or qualified nurseryman in accordance with the criteria set forth in subsection D of
this section. The plan shall be signed and dated by the designer.
F. Site Plan: A detailed site plan shall show:
1. Exact location of the building(s) or structure(s) on the site;
2. Exact location of drives, walks, parking areas, parking layout, freestanding or retaining walls, fences, and drainage accommodations;
3. Elevations showing all sides of the proposed structure. Elevations should indicate the type of materials to be used on the structure as well as their
proportions;
4. Existing grades or topographic details to be retained and proposed grading;
5. Location of utilities. (Ord. G-272, 11-11-1980; Ord. G-695, 3-26-2002)
13-8-8: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS OF GATEWAY DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
In addition to the information required pursuant to subsection 13-8-7F of this chapter, the following requirements must be met prior to the issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness:
A. Visual Environment: In order to ensure an adequate and pleasant natural environment, a sum of money equal to not less than five percent (5%) of the
total project construction cost, as set forth on the approved building permits, shall be budgeted and used by the owners and developers to purchase
and install mature sized trees, shrubbery, grass and other suitable landscaping upon the grounds, which budgeted amount shall be expended to
comply with the provisions of subsections 13-8-7D and E of this chapter. The president and board of trustees may vary from or waive the requirement
for such expenditure where such expenditure would cause a hardship on the applicant. Hardship, for purposes of this chapter shall include, but not be
limited to, the following situations:
1. Irregular shaped lots where landscaping is not practical;
2. Lots with minimal frontage;
3. Development does not cause any visual impact; e.g., development to the rear of a lot or building; and
4. Those instances where there is an abundance of existingnatural vegetation precluding the necessity for further landscaping treatment.
B. Public Utilities: All utility lines, including, but not limited to, telephone and electric, in the right of way adjacent to and in the development property shall
be placed underground. Underground utility lines shall be placed within easements or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not conflict with
other underground services. All transformer boxes and service posts shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous. (Ord. G-272, 11-11-1980)
13-8-9: ACTION BY GOVERNMENTAL BODIES:
A. Plan Commission: Prior to making its decision the commission may make recommendations to the applicant as to changes in the exterior drawings,
sketches, landscaping, site plans and materials which in the judgment of the commission would tend to effect the general purposes of this chapter.
The commission shall make its decision within fifteen (15) days after the hearing is closed and shall issue to the president and board of trustees its
findings and recommendation concerning the proposed gateway development plan. If the plan commission recommends denial of a gateway
development plan it shall specifically point out such deficiency in its findings.
B. Corporate Authorities: The village president and board of trustees may approve or disapprove the proposed gateway development plan or refer the
matter back to the plan commission for further consideration. Upon approval of any proposed gateway development plan the president and board of
trustees shall issue a certificate of appropriateness as to the approved gateway development plan. (Ord. G-272, 11-11-1980)
13-8-10: IMPLEMENTATION OF GATEWAY DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 359/438
Upon granting of a certificate of appropriateness, the gateway development plan, including the exterior drawings, sketches, landscape and site plans,
renderings and materials upon which said certificate was granted, shall be referred to the director of community development, whose responsibility it shall
be to determine, from time to time as the project is in progress and upon its completion, that there have been no unauthorized deviations from the
gateway development plan upon which the granting of the certificate of appropriateness was based. (Ord. G-272, 11-11-1980)
13-8-11: EXCEPTIONS TO PLAN PROCEDURES:
The requirements of this chapter for submission and approval of a gateway development plan and the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall
not be applicable to:
A. Renovation, restoration and preservation of structures designated by the president and board of trustees as historically or culturally significant;
B. Ordinary repairs or interior renovations;
C. Renovations or additions to existing single-family detached residential buildings or structures accessory thereto. (Ord. G-272, 11-11-1980)
13-8-12: PROCEDURE FOR SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCES:
Where a certificate of appropriateness is required, pursuant to subsection 13-8-6A of this chapter, for the construction of any single-family detached
residence, the requirements of subsections 13-8-7D, E and 13-8-8A of this chapter shall not be applicable. (Ord. G-272, 11-11-1980)
Chapter 9
INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
13-9-1: PURPOSE:
The institutional district provides for the preservation of those areas of the village which are characterized by natural features and for the development of a
broad range of selective educational, religious and other institutional uses. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-9-2: RESERVED:
(Ord. G-989, 1-22-2013)
13-9-3: SPECIAL USES:
Agricultural use, only on a lot twenty (20) acres or more in area; except when the pursuit of agriculture is accessory to an institutional or residential use on
a lot not less than ten (10) acres in area.
Cemeteries (subject to compliance with the regulations in chapter 16 of this title). Any existing cemetery and structure shall be deemed to have a special
use permit as required by this section, notwithstanding whether these existing cemeteries and structures comply, as of January 22, 2013, with the
provisions of chapter 16 of this title. Any expansion, change, or new construction relating to an existing cemetery and structure shall comply with chapter
16 of this title, but any such activity shall not require a new or amended special use permit, or other zoning relief, provided that the activities comply with
chapter 16 of this title.
Electric distribution centers and substations.
Gas regulator stations.
Public utility, governmental service and transportation uses.
Residential use, but only for detached dwellings, on lots not less than one acre, when the said dwelling is in the same ownership as one or more of the
institutional uses above set forth.
Sewage and stormwater lift stations.
Telephone exchanges, transmission buildings and equipment, outdoor telephone booths and pedestals.
Water filtration plants, wells, pumping stations and reservoirs. (Ord. G-989, 1-22-2013)
13-9-4: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Floor area ratio: Not to exceed 0.4 for nonresidential uses.
B. Structure height: Not more than forty five feet (45'); steeples, spires and towers not more than ninety feet (90').
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 360/438
C. Yards:
1. Institutional:
a. No structure shall be built abutting any existing street closer than one hundred feet (100').
b. Nonresidential uses shall not be less than one hundred feet (100') from any residential district line.
2. Residential: As provided in the R2 single-family residence district in chapter 6, article B of this title. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-9-5: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Signs: See chapter 11 of this title.
B. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading shall be as provided in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-207, 1-11-
1977; Ord. G-695, 3-26-2002)
Chapter 10
OFFICE-RESEARCH-ASSEMBLY DISTRICTS
13-10-1: PROHIBITED USES:
A. Industrial: No lot shall be used, and no structure shall be erected, altered or remodeled for any of the following uses: abattoirs; arsenals; crematories;
creosote treatment or manufacture; fat rendering; fertilizer manufacture; fireworks manufacture or storage; dumping or reduction of garbage, dead
animals, offal, or refuse; ore reduction; petroleum processing or refining; pyroxylin manufacture; gutta percha manufacture or treatment; saltworks;
sauerkraut manufacture; smelters; stockyard or slaughter of or experimentation with animals or fowl; tallow, grease, or lard manufacture or treatment;
tanning, curing, or storage of rawhides or skins; tar distillation or manufacture; cement, concrete, or asphaltic concrete, mortar or plaster batch mixing
plants; or junkyard or other uses having operations that are deemed by the board of trustees to be incompatible with the intended environmental
character of the ORA office-research-assembly district, except clinical testing of animals of the rodent family or domesticated fowl is permitted if
conducted within a separate room or rooms not to exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area which is part of a building used for
research.
B. Explosives: No activities involving the storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted,
except such as are specifically licensed by the village. Such materials shall include, but shall not be confined to, all primary explosives such as lead
azide, lead styphnate, fulminates and tetracene; all high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN and pectic acid, propellants and components
thereof such as nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium powder,
potassium chlorate and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerin; unstable organic compounds such as acetylides,
tetrazoles, perchloric acids; perchlorates, chlorates, hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than thirty five percent (35%); and nuclear fuels,
fissionable materials and products, and reactor elements such as uranium 235 and plutonium 239. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-119, 5-12-1970)
13-10-2: USES ENCLOSED:
All business, service, research, merchandise display and manufacturing activities and operations shall be conducted wholly within completely enclosed
buildings except off street parking, off street loading, outdoor dining areas adjacent to restaurants and open sales lots and drive-in facilities in districts
where they are permitted. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-758, 8-24-2004)
13-10-3: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
Any use established in the ORA1, ORA2 or ORA3 office-research-assembly districts shall be operated so as to comply with the performance standard
regulations prescribed in this section, and no use lawfully established on the effective date hereof shall be hereafter altered or modified so as to conflict
with, or further conflict with, such performance standards.
A. Noise: See section 13-3-10 of this title for performance standards pertaining to sound levels.
B. Vibration: Any operation or activity which shall cause at any time and at any point beyond the boundaries of the lot, earthborne vibrations other than
background vibrations produced by some source not under control of this chapter, such as the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation
facilities in excess of the limits set forth in the following column I is prohibited. In addition, any operation or activity which shall cause at any time and at
any point in a residence district earthborne vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in the following column II is prohibited. Vibration shall be
expressed as displacement in inches and shall be measured with a three (3) component measuring system approved by the director of community
development.
Frequency In
Cycles
Per Second
I
Displacement
In Inches
II
Displacement
In Inches
0 to 10 0.0008 0.0004
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 361/438
10 to 20 0.0005 0.0002
20 to 30 0.0002 0.0001
30 to 40 0.0002 0.0001
40 and over 0.0001 0.0001
Impact vibrations which are discrete pulses that do not exceed one hundred (100) impulses per minute shall be permitted twice the displacements shown
above in columns I and II.
C. Smoke And Particulate Matter:
1. The emission of smoke or particulate matter in such manner or quantity as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or
welfare is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall henceforth be unlawful.
2. For the purpose of grading the density or equivalent capacity of smoke, the Ringelmann chart described in the bureau of mines information circular
6888 shall be employed. The emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density or equivalent greater than no. 1 on the Ringelmann chart is
prohibited at all times except as otherwise provided hereinafter.
3. The emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density greater than Ringelmann no. 3 is permitted once in any twenty four (24) hour day for no
more than three (3) minutes.
4. Wind generated dust from such sources as storage areas, yards, roads, and so forth, within lot boundaries shall be minimized by appropriate
landscaping or all weather paving.
5. The emission of particulate matter from any chimney, stack, or vent shall not exceed one-fourth (1/4) pound per hour per acre of lot area.
D. Toxic Matter: No use shall discharge beyond the boundaries of the lot toxic matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to, or endanger the
public health, safety, comfort or welfare, or cause injury or damage to property or business.
E. Odors: The emission of odorous matter in excess of the odor threshold measured beyond the boundaries of the lot at ground level or at habitable
elevation is prohibited.
F. Fire And Explosion Hazard:
1. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted.
2. The storage or utilization of solid materials ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted provided the following conditions are
met:
a. The materials shall be stored or utilized within completely enclosed buildings or structures having incombustible exterior walls and handled in
accordance with the standards and regulations of the village and the National Fire Protection Association.
b. All such buildings shall be set back at least forty feet (40') from all lot lines or, in lieu thereof, shall be protected throughout by an automatic fire
extinguishing system installed in accordance with the standards and regulations of the village and the National Fire Protection Association.
c. Said materials, if stored outdoors, shall be no closer than one hundred fifty feet (150') to the nearest lot line in conformance with the standards
and regulations of the village and the National Fire Protection Association.
3. The storage or utilization of flammable liquids or materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors shall be permitted in accordance with the
following limitations, exclusive of storage in underground tanks, and storage of finished products in original sealed containers:
a. Said materials or products shall be stored or utilized within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior walls, and handled in
accordance with the standards and regulations of the village and the National Fire Protection Association and, in addition, all such buildings shall
be set back at least forty feet (40') from all lot lines and shall be protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system installed in
accordance with the standards and regulations of the village and the National Fire Protection Association.
b. The aboveground storage of flammable liquids in excess of the following quantities shall not be permitted:
Closed Cup Flash Point
Quantity
(Gallons)
Less than 24°F 1,000
24°F to less than 105°F 2,000
105°F to less than 187°F 5,000
187°F and higher 10,000
c. The total of all flammable liquids permitted on any lot shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000) gallons.
G. Glare And Heat: Any operation producing glare or heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such manner as not to create a
public nuisance or hazard beyond the boundaries of the lot.
H. Radiation Hazards:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 362/438
1. The release of radioactive gases and particulate matter shall not exceed the maximum allowable concentration permitted the general population of
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations when measured at or beyond the lot line at ground level or habitable elevation.
2. No activity involving radiation hazards shall be permitted which causes exposure to persons at or beyond the lot lines in excess of the maximum
allowable permitted the general population in applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-233, 5-31-
1978; Ord. G-863, 7-22-2008)
ARTICLE A. ORA1 OFFICE-RESEARCH-ASSEMBLY DISTRICT
13-10A-1: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses and structures, including storage and service areas within the structures, garages for delivery trucks, central heating and air conditioning
plants, and storage areas, yards, shops and similar facilities that are used solely for operating, servicing or maintaining the activities and improvements
within the lot on which the accessory use is located. Accessory uses and structures shall also include dwellings occupied by watchmen, janitors,
maintenance and similar employees engaged upon the premises; but no dwellings shall be erected for any other purposes.
Any establishment, the principal use of which is manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing or testing of
materials, goods or products, provided that operations conform with performance standards and other requirements of this title.
Churches, on lots not less than four (4) acres in area.
Electric distribution centers and substations.
Gas regulator stations.
Offices and financial institutions. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-10A-2: SPECIAL USES:
Clinics, medical and dental, including accessory laboratories.
Daycare centers, provided such facility complies with all licensing requirements of the state and maintains a direct alarm hookup to the police department
or other emergency dispatch center.
Drive-in banking facilities.
Health clubs, private, membership only, in multibuilding office complexes under single ownership or control on sites not less than ten (10) acres, when
such facility is designed primarily for use by tenants of the office complex. Such structure shall not front on any perimeter road, and access thereto shall
be provided only from interior roadways.
Heliports (not for freight) shall meet all of the standards as contained in subsection 13-10A-4C of this article.
Hotels.
Parks and open field recreational activities.
Personal service and retail sales uses intended primarily for the use of tenants and having no exterior advertising and accessible only from the lobby or
interior of the building, limited to:
Barbershops and beauty parlors.
Drugstores.
Newsstands; newspapers, magazines and other periodicals.
Tobacco shops.
Public utility, governmental service and transportation uses:
Bus turnarounds and passenger shelters.
Emergency warning system structures.
Fire and police stations.
Post office operated by the United States government.
Sewage and stormwater lift stations.
Telephone exchanges, transmission buildings and equipment, and outdoor telephone booths and pedestals.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 363/438
Water filtration plants, wells, pumping stations and reservoirs.
Radio and television stations and production studios.
Restaurants with accessory cocktail lounges, without facilities for dancing and live entertainment, in multibuilding office complexes under single ownership
or control on sites not less than ten (10) acres, when such facility is designed primarily for use by tenants of the office complex. Such structure shall not
front on any perimeter road, and access thereto shall be provided only from the interior roadways.
Schools, nonresidential, post baccalaureate school; provided, that not more than twenty percent (20%) of the course offerings may be prerequisite to
admission to the post baccalaureate programs. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-131, 5-25-1971; Ord. G-210, 2-8-1977; Ord. G-275, 1-20-1981; Ord. G-
305, 9-8-1981; Ord. G-424, 1-24-1989; Ord. G-448, 7-10-1990; Ord. G-471, 8-13-1991; Ord. G-483, 3-10-1992; Ord. G-487, 5-12-1992; Ord. G-536, 7-12-
1994; Ord. G-553, 3-14-1995; Ord. G-669, 1-23-2001; Ord. G-724, 7-22-2003; Ord. G-785, 6-28-2005)
13-10A-3: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 0.48.
B. Structure Height: Not more than five (5) stories or seventy six feet (76'), whichever is less.
C. Yards:
1. Front: Not less than one hundred feet (100') in depth, except when adjacent to a residence district boundary line not less than one hundred fifty feet
(150') in depth;
2. Side: Not less than thirty feet (30') in depth, except: a) that portion of a side yard when abutting a residence district shall not be less than one
hundred fifty feet (150') in depth; b) a side yard abutting a street shall conform in depth to the front yard depth of a contiguous lot abutting on such
street; and c) side yards abutting 22nd Street and York Road shall have a depth of not less than one hundred feet (100');
3. Rear: Not less than forty feet (40') in depth, except that portion of a rear yard abutting a residence district shall be not less than one hundred fifty
feet (150') in depth, and except that a rear yard abutting an alley or service drive may be reduced by twenty feet (20') in depth;
4. Conservation/Recreation Districts: Notwithstanding anything contained in this title to the contrary, including, without limitation, section 13-3-13 of this
title, any yard which is one hundred feet (100') in depth and which is adjacent in its entirety to a conservation/recreation district boundary shall
satisfy the applicable yard requirement;
provided, however, that when a developed zoning lot which contains two (2) or more principal buildings is subdivided the yards required along the
new lot lines created by the subdivision shall be not less than thirty feet (30') in depth and the depth of all required yards for each lot shall be shown
on the subdivision plat; provided, that existing parking stalls and aisles and access and service drives shall be permitted to continue within said
yards and within the yards along the boundaries of the original zoning lot required by subsections C1, C2 and C3 of this section, as modified by
subsection 13-12-3H of this title; and provided further that upon redevelopment of any part of a lot, other than for resurfacing or for utility
replacement, which development requires removal of existing parking stalls or aisles located in whole or in part within areas where such accessory
uses are not permitted by said subsections as so modified, no new stalls or aisles shall be constructed in such areas except as permitted by said
subsections as so modified, and any landscaping therein required by this title shall be promptly installed and properly maintained. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-
1966; Ord. G-135, 5-22-1971; Ord. G-213, 3-22-1977; Ord. G-554, 5-9-1995; Ord. G-557, 7-25-1995; Ord. G-676, 4-10-2001)
13-10A-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Awnings, Marquees And Signs: See chapter 11 of this title.
B. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading shall be as provided in chapter 12 of this title.
C. Heliports1:
1. If the federal aviation administration has conducted an aeronautical study to determine the effect of the proposed heliport on the safe and efficient
use of the navigable air space by aircraft and find no objection to the proposed heliport.
2. The layout and design of the heliport, including approach and departure paths, shall conform to the most current rules and regulations of the division
of aeronautics, state of Illinois, department of transportation. Any approval for a heliport granted by the village shall be subject to evidence that said
division of aeronautics has issued an order authorizing the applicant to proceed with construction of the heliport in accordance with plans approved
by it; provided, however, that any waiver of such rules and regulations granted by said division shall be subject to approval by the village. No permit
for the construction of a heliport will be given until such an order has been issued by said division.
3. Hours of operation shall be from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday. The heliport may also be used on
Sunday, provided the village is advised seventy two (72) hours in advance, and said use does not exceed one such use per month.
4. Approach and departure patterns from said heliport shall be limited to avoid operation over residential areas.
5. Refueling, routine maintenance and storage of helicopter, except for emergency purposes only, shall not be permitted at the heliport.
6. There will be no receiving or shipping of freight from said heliport, and there will be no on site storage of fuel.
7. Use of the heliport shall at all times comply with any specific requirements of the federal aviation administration or Illinois department of
transportation in the certificate of approval or operation issued to the user of the heliport by such agencies.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 364/438
8. Special use shall only be applicable to the applicant therefor and only so long as the applicant is occupying the subject property, provided, however,
that pursuant to a special use permit application identifying a specific user occupying property adjacent to the subject property, the special use also
may be made applicable to such user for so long as such user occupies adjacent property.
9. The applicant shall maintain at all times appropriate and sufficient insurance coverage relative to the installation and use of the heliport insuring
against any property damage or personal injury arising therefrom with policy limits of not less than twenty million dollars ($20,000,000.00).
10. All such special uses shall be reviewed by the village every five (5) years for conformance with the conditions set forth herein, character of safety
and extent of operations and any further relevant factors.
11. Helicopters utilizing a heliport shall fly at the maximum safe level prior to entering the approach pattern to the heliport.
12. Use of the heliport shall be made available to the village or its designees for emergencies.
13. A log of usage shall be submitted to the village on an annual basis, or as otherwise required by the village. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-82, 4-9-
1968; Ord. G-178, 12-9-1975; Ord. G-305, 9-8-1981; Ord. G-471, 8-13-1991; Ord. G-553, 3-14-1995; Ord. G-695, 3-26-2002)
ARTICLE B. ORA2 OFFICE-RESEARCH-ASSEMBLY DISTRICT
13-10B-1: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses and structures, including storage and service areas within the structures, garages for delivery trucks, off street parking, central heating
and air conditioning plants, and storage areas, yards, shops, and similar facilities that are used solely for operating, servicing, or maintaining the activities
and improvements within the district. Accessory structures and uses shall also include dwellings occupied by watchmen, janitors, maintenance and similar
employees engaged upon the premises; but no dwelling shall be erected for any other purpose.
Permitted uses as allowed in the B2 regional shopping center district.
Permitted uses as allowed in the ORA1 office-research-assembly district. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-758, 8-24-2004)
13-10B-2: SPECIAL USES:
Daycare centers, provided such facility complies with all licensing requirements of the state and maintains a direct alarm hookup to the police department
or other emergency dispatch center.
Drive-in establishments for retail banks and freestanding restaurants.
Heliports (not for freight) shall meet all of the standards as contained in subsection 13-10A-4C of this chapter.
Nonresidential, postbaccalaureate schools.
Outdoor dining areas adjacent to restaurants.
Public utility, governmental service and transportation uses:
Bus turnarounds and passenger shelters.
Fire and police stations.
Sewage and stormwater lift stations.
Telephone exchanges, transmission buildings and equipment, and outdoor telephone booths and pedestals.
Water filtration plants, wells, pumping stations and reservoirs. (Ord. G-980, 9-25-2012)
13-10B-3: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 1.2 for office uses, financial uses and accessory uses thereto; 0.8 for other uses permitted in the ORA1 district; and
0.3 for uses as permitted in the B2 regional shopping district.
B. Structure Height: Not more than twelve (12) stories or one hundred seventy four feet (174'), whichever is less.
C. Yards:
1. Front: Not less than one hundred feet (100') in depth, except when adjacent to a residence district boundary line not less than one hundred fifty feet
(150') in depth, provided that required front yards may be occupied by drives, sidewalks, landscaping and similar facilities.
2. Side: Not less than thirty feet (30') in depth, except: a) that portion of a side yard abutting a residence district shall be not less than one hundred fifty
feet (150') in depth; b) a side yard abutting a street shall be not less than fifty feet (50') in depth; c) each interior side yard shall be increased by not
less than one foot (1') for each one foot (1') of structure height over thirty two feet (32'); and d) side yards abutting 22nd Street and York Road shall
have a depth of not less than one hundred feet (100'), provided that required side yards may be occupied by drives, vehicular parking, sidewalks,
landscaping, and similar facilities provided that paved parking areas shall not be located closer than forty feet (40') to any lot in a residence district.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 365/438
3. Rear: Not less than twenty feet (20') in depth, except that portion of a rear yard abutting a residence district shall be not less than one hundred feet
(100') in depth, provided that required rear yards may be occupied by drives, vehicular parking, sidewalks, landscaping and similar facilities provided
that paved parking areas shall not be located closer than forty feet (40') to any lot in a residence district. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-213, 3-22-
1977; Ord. G-557, 7-25-1995; Ord. G-758, 8-24-2004)
13-10B-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Awnings, Marquees And Signs: See chapter 11 of this title.
B. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading shall be as provided in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-695, 3-26-
2002)
ARTICLE C. ORA3 OFFICE-RESEARCH-ASSEMBLY DISTRICT
13-10C-1: PURPOSE:
The ORA3 district is designed to permit and encourage orderly and attractive site planning in accordance with an overall design which provides for the
preservation of natural site qualities, a high proportion of open space, and an arrangement of land uses and physical features into a harmonious design
compatible with the surrounding area. It is intended that an area may be classified as an ORA3 district only when the following conditions are met:
A. Not less than fifty percent (50%) of the property shall be permanently devoted to open space which shall consist of planted areas (including planted
surfaces of parking decks), forests, lagoons, watercourses, storm water swales and retention areas, pedestrian, bicycle, and bridle paths and
walkways, with the maximum practicable retention of forests and other natural vegetation.
B. All buildings and parking, and other structures to the extent practical, will be substantially screened from public view from public streets and streets
privately owned and maintained in residential developments in accordance with a landscaping plan to be submitted for approval by the village.
C. All roads and bridges will be retained in private ownership and constructed to meet village standards and maintained by the owner without cost to the
village.
D. All access to and from the property can be constructed and maintained so that substantially all traffic generated will use commercial thoroughfares.
(Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-10C-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following are permitted uses within the ORA3 district, but only to the extent that each such use is in accordance with an approved development plan:
Accessory uses and structures including the following:
Central heating and air conditioning plants.
Daycare centers, provided such facility complies with all licensing requirements of the state and maintains a direct alarm hookup to the police
department or other emergency dispatch center.
Limited retail and service facilities.
Living quarters (not in separate residential buildings) solely for occupancy of watchmen, janitors, maintenance, and similar employees (and their
families) employed in connection with the maintenance and security of the property and improvements thereon.
Lodging facilities (together with restaurant and accessory cocktail lounge) for the transient use of employees of the owner, its subsidiaries, affiliates,
franchisees, and other business invitees.
Nonpublic meeting and conference facilities.
Private recreational use, such as tennis courts, putting greens, swimming pools, bowling alleys, racquetball courts, baseball diamonds, stables,
bridle paths, and health facilities.
Public utility and transportation uses, such as:
Bus turnarounds and passenger shelters;
Electric distribution stations solely for serving the development;
Outdoor telephone booths;
Sewerage and storm water lift stations;
Wells and reservoirs.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 366/438
Radio and television production studios.
Research and development facilities.
Storage, service, and maintenance buildings and areas.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes and construction equipment storage areas, for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days following
completion of construction.
Hotels.
Office, business and professional; provided, however, that following completion of any phase and for five (5) years thereafter not more than thirty three
percent (33%) of the office space shall be occupied by persons other than employees or business invitees of either: a) the owner, its successors or
subsidiaries or affiliated corporations thereof, or joint venturers or partners of the owner; or b) tenants who are suppliers for or consultants to the owner.
Restaurants (which may include musical entertainment and dancing, cocktail lounges and tearooms). (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-447, 4-24-1990; Ord.
G-558, 7-25-1995; Ord. G-696, 6-11-2002)
13-10C-3: SPECIAL USES:
Heliport (not for freight), shall meet all of the standards as contained in subsection 13-10A-4C of this chapter and may be located on a roof of a building of
four (4) stories or less.
Not for profit, noncommercial performing and fine arts center.
Schools of music, fine arts, dance, theater, and other arts. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-305, 9-8-1981)
13-10C-4: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Area: Not less than twenty four (24) acres.
B. Floor Area Ratio:
1. Not to exceed 0.44 for permitted and accessory uses;
2. Not to exceed 0.01 for special uses.
C. Open Space:
1. Not more than twenty four percent (24%) of the property shall be covered by buildings, including parking structures.
2. Not less than fifty percent (50%) of the property shall be "open space" as defined in subsection 13-10C-1A of this article.
D. Structure Height: Not to exceed thirty five feet (35') or three (3) stories, whichever is less; provided, however, that parking structures may be above that
height but shall not exceed the lesser of four (4) stories or forty feet (40') unless located within an office building structure; and that up to forty five
percent (45%) of the total permitted office floor area may be above that height but shall not exceed the lesser of six (6) stories or seventy five feet
(75'); and up to ten percent (10%) of the total permitted lodging facilities floor area may be above that height, but shall not exceed the lesser of five (5)
stories or sixty feet (60').
E. Yards: No structure other than signs as provided for in subsection 13-10C-5A of this article, shall be erected or maintained within one hundred feet
(100') from any boundary of said property, except that said area may be occupied by drives, vehicular parking, sidewalk, landscaping, gatehouse
entrance treatment and similar facilities, except that paved parking areas shall not be located on required yards adjacent to public streets or within
forty feet (40') of all other boundary lines. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-558, 7-25-1995)
13-10C-5: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Signs: See chapter 11 of this title.
B. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading shall be as provided in chapter 12 of this title, except that if the approved development
plan shall reserve enough land area to satisfy the full requirements of chapter 12 of this title, then only sixty percent (60%) of the required parking for
any phase of the development need be developed until and unless the village determines that the existing parking is inadequate. At such time, the
owner shall construct additional parking spaces as required by chapter 12 of this title up to one hundred percent (100%). An amount equal to twenty
percent (20%) of the parking provided for the development shall be located in an office building and/or in underground parking facilities decked over
with architectural landscaping. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-447, 4-24-1990; Ord. G-558, 7-25-1995; Ord. G-695, 3-26-2002)
13-10C-6: PROCEDURES:
A. The applicant shall concurrently file with the village clerk:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 367/438
1. An application for rezoning of the property to an ORA3 office-research-assembly district classification; and
2. An application for approval of a proposed development plan.
B. Such applications shall be processed in the manner provided in section 13-14-8 of this title.
C. The proposed development plan shall include the following:
1. A statement as to the following:
a. The period of time expected to be required to implement the development plan, and each development phase necessary or desirable for full
implementation thereof.
b. The total acreage allocated for each principal and accessory use, including, but not limited to, open space, office and other buildings and
structures, parking and other accessory uses.
c. The conditions and limitations relating to the development of the property.
2. A plat setting forth graphically on a scaled drawing drawn to a scale not smaller than one hundred feet to one inch (1" = 100'), which shall include
the following information:
a. The boundaries of the site and location of adjacent public streets;
b. The general location of proposed vehicular access points and internal private drives;
c. The proposed boundaries of areas within the site of: 1) open space areas where no building or parking lots will be permitted; 2) building areas
where buildings and other structures and parking lots will be permitted;
d. The location of water channels, storm water detention areas, lakes and ponds;
provided, that prior to final approval of improvement plans as provided for in subsection E of this section, all of such areas shall be precisely
defined.
D. The applicant shall also provide the following:
1. A statement of the planning objectives to be achieved by the development.
2. A plat of survey of the site.
3. A topographical analysis of the site with contour intervals of not more than two feet (2').
4. An aerial photograph of the site at a scale of not less than two hundred feet to the inch (1" = 200').
5. Information on existing water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, storm water retention and runoff, stream channels, floodplains and floodways,
lakes and ponds.
6. A study by traffic engineers providing information on the impact of the development on public streets and intersections.
7. A plat or map showing the land uses, physical features and zoning of all adjacent lands within four hundred (400) yards of the site.
E. Following final approval of the development plan for the site, no building permit shall be issued and no improvements shall be commenced until an
improvement plan shall have been approved in the manner provided in the applicable provisions of the subdivision regulations1.
F. The owner of property zoned ORA3 may file from time to time applications for approval of proposed amendments to an approved development plan,
which applications shall be processed in the manner provided in subsections B through E of this section. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-233, 5-31-
1978)
ARTICLE D. O3 OFFICE DISTRICT
13-10D-1: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses and structures including:
Restaurants and accessory cocktail lounges, in a structure over five (5) stories in height which is used principally for a permitted use, and when
located on floors below those used for the principal use or on the top floor or roof of such structure.
Retail sales and personal service uses, having no exterior advertising and accessible only from the lobby and interior of a building (which is over 12
stories in height) and used for a permitted principal use and when no single establishment occupies more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of
floor area.
Banks and financial institutions.
Electric distribution centers and substations.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 368/438
Gas regulator station.
Offices. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-842, 10-9-2007)
13-10D-2: SPECIAL USES:
Daycare center, provided such facility complies with all licensing requirements of the state and maintains a direct alarm hookup to the Oak Brook police
department.
Heliports, not for freight, shall meet all of the standards as contained in subsection 13-10A-4C of this chapter. Additionally, the operation of said heliport
shall meet the performance standards as contained in section 13-10-3 of this chapter.
Hotel or combination office and hotel.
Outdoor dining areas adjacent to restaurants.
Public utility, governmental service and transportation uses.
Bus turnarounds and passenger shelters.
Emergency warning system structures.
Fire and police stations.
Sewage and storm water lift stations.
Telephone exchanges, transmission buildings and equipment, and outdoor telephone booths and pedestals.
Water filtration plants, wells, pumping stations and reservoirs. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-454, 10-9-1990; Ord. G-483, 3-10-1992; Ord. G-747,
4-27-2004)
13-10D-3: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 0.8.
B. Yards:
1. Front: Not less than one hundred feet (100') in depth, except when adjacent to a residence district boundary line not less than one hundred fifty feet
(150') in depth.
2. Side: Not less than thirty feet (30') in depth, except: a) that portion of a side yard abutting a residence district shall be not less than one hundred fifty
feet (150') in depth; b) a side yard abutting a street shall be not less than forty feet (40') in depth; and c) a side yard abutting 22nd Street shall be not
less than one hundred feet (100') in depth.
3. Rear: Not less than forty feet (40') in depth, except that portion of a rear yard abutting a residence district shall be not less than one hundred feet
(100') in depth and except that a rear yard abutting an alley or service drive may be reduced by twenty feet (20') in depth. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966;
Ord. G-213, 3-22-1977)
13-10D-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Awnings, Marquees And Signs: See chapter 11 of this title.
B. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading shall be as provided in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-233, 5-31-
1978; Ord. G-305, 9-8-1981; Ord. G-695, 3-26-2002)
ARTICLE E. O4 OFFICE DISTRICT
13-10E-1: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses and structures including:
Restaurants and accessory cocktail lounges in a structure five (5) stories or more in height which is used principally for a permitted use, and when located
on the ground or on floors below those used for the principal use or on the top floor or roof of such structure.
Retail sales and personal service uses when no single establishment occupies more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area.
Buildings existing at the time of rezoning to O4 office district may be used for any of the uses permitted in the zoning district applicable to the property at
the time of its rezoning; provided that in the event that: a) the structure is substantially damaged and the owner is not required by the lease or otherwise to
restore the structure to its prior condition; or b) the structure is not occupied, used or leased for such purpose or purposes for a period of twelve (12)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 369/438
consecutive months, then its future use shall be limited to one or more of the uses permitted in this article, or, with the prior approval of the village board
of trustees, to one or more of the special uses set forth in section 13-10E-2 of this article.
Electric distribution centers and substations.
Gas regulator station.
Office supply retail establishments.
Offices. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-10E-2: SPECIAL USES:
Daycare center, provided such facility complies with all licensing requirements of the state and maintains direct alarm hookup to the Oak Brook police
department.
Health clubs, private, membership only, in multi-building office complexes under single ownership or control on sites not less than ten (10) acres. Such
structure shall not front on any perimeter road, and access thereto shall be provided only from interior roadways.
Heliports, not for freight, shall meet all of the standards as contained in subsection 13-10A-4C of this chapter. Additionally, the operation of said heliport
shall meet the performance standards as contained in section 13-10-3 of this chapter.
Hotel or combination office and hotel.
Medical offices.
Mixed use development on properties not less than ten (10) acres in area subject to the following:
A. Authorized Uses:
1. Permitted; B1 District; Exceptions: All permitted uses authorized in the B1 local shopping center district, except that the following uses are not
permitted:
Fire stations.
Launderettes, including automatic self-service dry cleaning equipment.
Libraries, branch.
Police stations.
2. Permitted; B-2 District; Exceptions: All permitted uses in the B-2 regional shopping center district, except that the following uses are not permitted:
Automobile service stations.
Electric distribution centers and substations.
Gas regulator stations.
Hospitals, having not more than ten (10) beds and first aid stations for the treatment of emergency cases.
Laundries, dyeing and cleaning establishments.
Laundries, self-service, and shops for the collection and distribution of laundry and dry cleaning articles.
Messenger and telephone service stations.
Printing plants, newspaper, magazine and similar publications.
Radio and television broadcasting stations.
Service, cleaning and repair shops, for personal, household or garden equipment.
3. Permitted; B-3 District; Exceptions: All permitted uses in the B-3 general business district, except that the following uses are not permitted:
Animal hospitals and veterinarian offices.
Automobile accessory stores.
Automobile service stations.
Building material sales, not including outside storage.
Cartage and express facilities.
Clothing pressing establishments.
Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 370/438
Coin and philatelic stores.
Electric distribution centers and substations.
Employment agencies.
Exhibition halls.
Fire stations.
Garages, public, where body repair and painting are incidental accessory uses, but not including automobile wrecking yards.
Garages, storage.
Gas regulator stations.
Greenhouses and conservatories.
Kennels, with no outdoor dog runs.
Laboratories, medical, dental or optical.
Libraries.
Locksmith shops.
Mail order service stores.
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores.
Pet service, domestic.
Physical culture and health service, gymnasiums, reducing salons, massage salons and public baths.
Plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical fixtures and equipment, showroom and shops, for domestic use only.
Police stations.
Radio and television stations.
Recording studios.
Recreational buildings, community centers and meetings halls.
Religious institutions, churches, chapels, temples or synagogues.
Sewing machine sales and services.
Taxidermists.
Telegraph offices.
Typewriter and adding machine sales and service establishments.
Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors.
4. Special; B-1 District; Exceptions: All special uses authorized in the B-1 local shopping center district, except as specified in subsection A7 of this
use.
5. Special; B-2 District; Exceptions: All special uses in the B-2 regional shopping center district, except as specified in subsection A7 of this use.
6. Special; B-3 District; Exceptions: All special uses in the B-3 general business district, except as specified in subsection A7 of this use.
7. Nonpermitted Uses: The following uses are not permitted, notwithstanding the provisions of the zoning regulations:
Amusement establishments, including gymnasiums, swimming pools and skating rinks.
Automobile minimarket.
Automobile service stations.
Clubs, lodges, fraternities and community centers.
Drive-in establishments for permitted uses.
Fire and police stations.
Gas regulator stations.
Horse stables and riding academies, public.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 371/438
Nursing homes.
Open sales lots, when accessory to new automobile, trailer or boat sales establishments.
Recreation, outdoor, par 3 and miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges, swimming and tennis clubs, and other outdoor recreation uses as
approved by the village board of trustees.
Water filtration plants, wells, pumping stations and reservoirs.
8. Additional Authorized Uses:
Bakeries, where not more than forty percent (40%) of the floor area is devoted to processing.
Barber shops and beauty parlors, day spas, tanning salons.
Clinics, medical, dental and optometric including accessory laboratories.
Drive-in and drive-through banking facilities.
Garden supply, retail.
Health clubs, including accessory uses such as daycare, spa services including tanning and salon, selling of goods including clothing, food, other
items related to health and well being.
Indoor entertainment facilities, except for game rooms and pool rooms.
Offices: business, professional and public. Any such office use may also include a daycare center.
Outdoor dining areas adjacent to restaurants or other retail food products sales facilities.
Seasonal, portable carts serving only limited menu foods and/or beverage items in outdoor areas of a shopping center as a convenience to
pedestrian shoppers, provided that: a) all aspects of the operation and sales meet the applicable requirements of the DuPage County health
department; and b) cart locations have appropriate utilities provided, are not convenient to drive-up business, and do not materially interfere with
access to or visibility of other establishments within the shopping center.
Single-family attached dwellings.
B. Lot Requirements:
1. Yards:
a. Front: Not less than one hundred feet (100') in depth; provided that parking may be installed and utilized in this setback along York Road not less
than thirty feet (30') of the property line; and further provided that canopies may encroach no more than eight feet (8') into any required front yard;
b. Rear: Not less than thirty feet (30'); provided that canopies may encroach no more than eight feet (8') into any required rear yard; and further
provided that hotel and condominium canopies may encroach no more than fifteen feet (15') into any required rear yard;
c. Side: Not less than thirty feet (30'); provided that canopies may encroach no more than eight feet (8') into any required side yard; and further
provided that hotel and condominium entryway coverings may encroach no more than fifteen feet (15') into a required side yard;
provided, however, that when a developed zoning lot which contains two (2) or more principal buildings is subdivided the yards required along the
new lot lines created by the subdivision shall be not less than thirty feet (30') in depth and the depth of all required yards for each lot shall be
shown on the subdivision plat; provided, that existing parking stalls and aisles and access and service drives shall be permitted to continue within
said yards and within the yards along the boundaries of the original zoning lot required by this subsection B1, as modified by subsection 13-12-3H
of this title; and provided further that upon redevelopment of any part of a lot, other than for resurfacing or for utility replacement, which
development requires removal of existing parking stalls or aisles located in whole or in part within areas where such accessory uses are not
permitted by said subsections as so modified, no new stalls or aisles shall be constructed in such areas except as permitted by said subsections
as so modified, and any landscaping therein required by this title shall be promptly installed and properly maintained.
2. Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 1.0.
3. Structure Height: Not more than sixteen (16) stories or one hundred eighty feet (180'), whichever is greater.
C. Parking And Loading: In a mixed use development containing hotel and/or office uses:
1. Up to thirty five percent (35%) of required parking spaces for all uses may have a minimum width of eight and one-half feet (8.5').
2. No more than fifteen percent (15%) of required parking spaces may be located within one hundred feet (100') of York Road.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 13-12-3C of this title, the minimum aisle width shall be twenty four feet (24').
4. The following provisions shall govern driveways notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 13-12-3E of this title: Spacing between driveways shall
be consistent with good engineering practice as reasonably determined by the village engineer and not less than thirty five feet (35').
5. The following provisions shall govern loading requirements, notwithstanding the provisions of section 13-12-7 of this title: Loading docks and loading
berths are not required provided that off street loading areas are installed.
D. Signs:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 372/438
1. Monument Signs:
a. One at fifteen feet by sixteen feet (15' x 16') (2 sided) with slots for tenant signage (240 square feet, each side, 480 square feet total).
b. One at ten feet by sixteen feet (10' x 16') (2 sided) (160 square feet each side, 320 square feet total).
2. Directional And Miscellaneous/Wayfinding Signs:
a. Up to twenty (20) signs, each no more than twenty (20) square feet.
3. Restaurant And Retail Signs:
a. On building signage/entrance signage.
b. Gross surface area of all signs shall be no more than two (2) times the number of linear feet in the length of the building wall facing a public
street.
c. On a corner or through lot, a sign may be erected along each street frontage.
d. Height of letters are limited to thirty six inches (36").
e. The sign shall not project more than thirty inches (30") from any facade or canopy and shall not be higher than the top of the building.
4. Blade Signage: The following sign provisions are available for each occupant of any nonresidential use:
a. Signage shall be no larger than eight (8) square feet.
b. Height of letters are limited to twelve inches (12").
c. Signage shall be at least eight feet (8') above the elevation of the sidewalk.
d. Signage shall project no more than sixty inches (60") from the facade.
5. Health Club Signs:
a. Building signage/entrance signage.
b. Gross surface area shall be no more than six hundred thirty (630) square feet.
c. Height of letters are limited to forty eight inches (48").
d. The sign shall not project more than thirty inches (30") from any facade or canopy and shall not be higher than the top of the building.
e. Health club may have three (3) building/entrance signs: two (2) on the building and one at the main entrance.
6. Hotel Signage:
a. Top of the building (north side): Up to one hundred forty (140) square feet.
b. Top of the building (south side): Up to sixty five (65) square feet.
c. Porte-cochere signage: Up to one hundred forty five (145) square feet.
d. Ground sign: Up to three (3) square feet.
7. Condominium Signage:
a. Entrance Signage: The primary and secondary entrances may each have the following signage:
(1) Gross surface area shall be no more than two (2) times the number of linear feet in the length of the building wall facing a public street.
(2) Height of letters are limited to thirty six inches (36").
(3) The signs shall not project more than thirty inches (30") from any facade or canopy and shall not be higher than structure height.
b. Parking Signage For Condominiums:
(1) Limited to thirty (30) square feet.
8. Location Of Signs: Except for signs authorized in subsection D2 of this use, no ground sign may be closer than ten feet (10') from any lot line and no
sign may be closer than three feet (3') from a driveway or parking area.
E. Landscaping: The following provisions shall govern requirements for landscaping notwithstanding the provisions of subsections 13-12-4B and C of this
title:
1. Screening And Landscaping: The following landscaped and planted areas shall be provided and maintained for all parking areas:
a. Front Yards: Permanent screening at least two feet (2') in height shall be installed in front yard areas adjacent to parking areas. This screening
may consist of a planted earth berm, shrubs or trees, or a combination of both.
b. Side And Rear Yards: Permanent peripheral screening at least two feet (2') in height shall be installed in side and rear yards adjacent to parking
areas. This screening may consist of a planted earth berm, shrubs or trees, or a combination of both.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 373/438
2. Lot Area: Landscaped areas shall occupy not less than ten percent (10%) of the total lot area.
Public utility, governmental service and transportation uses:
Bus turnarounds and passenger shelters.
Emergency warning system structures.
Fire and police stations.
Schools - nonresidential, postbaccalaureate school, provided that not more than twenty percent (20%) of the course offerings may be prerequisite to
admission to the postbaccalaureate programs.
Sewage and stormwater lift stations.
Telephone exchanges, transmission buildings and equipment, and outdoor telephone booths and pedestals.
Water filtration plants, wells, pumping stations and reservoirs. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-710, 12-10-2002; Ord. G-827, 1-23-2007; Ord. G-914,
1-12-2010; Ord. G-1074, 4-12-2016)
13-10E-3: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 0.8.
B. Structure Height: Not to exceed one hundred eighteen feet (118') or eight (8) stories in height, whichever is less.
C. Yards:
1. Front: Not less than sixty feet (60') in depth, except: a) when adjacent to a residence district boundary line not less than one hundred fifty feet (150')
in depth; and b) when abutting 22nd Street or York Road not less than one hundred feet (100') in depth.
2. Side: Not less than thirty feet (30') in depth, except: a) that portion of a side yard abutting a residence district shall be not less than one hundred fifty
feet (150') in depth; b) a side yard abutting a street shall be not less than forty feet (40') in depth; and c) a side yard abutting 22nd Street or York
Road shall be not less than one hundred feet (100') in depth.
3. Rear: Not less than forty feet (40') in depth, except that portion of a rear yard abutting a residence district shall be not less than one hundred feet
(100') in depth and except that a rear yard abutting an alley or service drive may be reduced by twenty feet (20') in depth. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-10E-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Awnings, Marquees And Signs: See chapter 11 of this title.
B. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading shall be as provided in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-619, 9-22-
1998; Ord. G-695, 3-26-2002)
Chapter 11
SIGN REGULATIONS
13-11-1: PURPOSE:
The regulations in this chapter are intended to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare by reducing the depreciation of property values
caused by signs that are incompatible with surrounding land uses; by creating a more attractive economic and business climate within the commercial
and office areas of the village; by enhancing and protecting the physical appearance of all areas of the village; and by reducing the distractions,
obstructions and hazards to pedestrian and auto traffic caused by the indiscriminate placement and use of signs. (Ord. G-916, 1-12-2010)
13-11-2: SCOPE:
The regulations in this chapter shall govern and control the erection, enlargement, expansion, alteration, operation, maintenance, relocation and removal
of all signs within the village visible from any street, sidewalk or public or private common open space. Any sign not expressly permitted by these
regulations shall be prohibited. The regulations in this chapter relate to the location of signs, by function and type, within zoning districts and shall be in
addition to provisions of this code applicable to the construction and maintenance of signs. (Ord. G-916, 1-12-2010)
13-11-3: SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Sign Permit: Except as expressly provided in section 13-11-6 of this chapter, no sign shall be erected, enlarged, expanded, altered, relocated or
maintained unless a sign permit evidencing the compliance of such work with the provisions of this section and other applicable provisions of this
chapter shall have first been issued by the village; provided, however, that routine sign maintenance, changing of parts designed to be changed or
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 374/438
changing the content of a sign in any manner does not change the functional classification of the sign and shall not, standing alone, be considered an
alteration of the sign requiring the issuance of a sign permit hereunder.
B. Additional Application Requirements: In addition to the information and documents otherwise required by this chapter, every application for a sign
permit for a sign shall be accompanied by:
1. Plans and specifications showing the location on the lot or building face and the method of construction, illumination and support of such sign;
2. A scale drawing showing sign faces, exposed surfaces and the proposed message and design, accurately represented as to size, area, proportion
and color;
3. A landscape plan showing plantings proposed for area at the base of a monument sign;
4. Photographs of the street sides of the property in question, showing all existing signs on the property;
5. A calculation of the total amount of sign area presently existing on the property;
6. The applicant's attestation that the sum of the areas of the requested sign or signs and the existing signs does not exceed the maximum allowed by
the provisions of this chapter; and
7. Evidence of a valid village business license, when applicable, issued for any business to which the sign is accessory. (Ord. G-916, 1-12-2010)
13-11-4: GENERAL STANDARDS:
The following general standards shall apply to all signs:
A. Illumination:
1. Location And Design Of Light Source: Whenever an external artificial light source is used for a sign, such source shall be located, shielded and
directed so as not to be directly visible from any public street or private residence. No receptacle or device housing a permitted light source for a
sign shall protrude more than twelve inches (12") from the face of the sign or building to which it is attached; provided, however, that a receptacle or
device housing a permitted light source for a sign may be located more than twelve inches (12") from the face of the sign if such light source is
ground mounted, locked in place, and cannot be redirected.
2. Level Of Illumination: In no event shall the illumination of any sign, resulting from any internal or external artificial light source, exceed one hundred
seventy five (175) foot-candles when measured with a standard light meter held perpendicular to the sign face at a distance equal to the narrowest
dimension of such sign face. All artificial illumination shall be so designed, located, shielded, and directed as to prevent the casting of glare or direct
light upon adjacent property or streets. Illumination resulting from any internal or external artificial light source shall not exceed 0.5 foot-candle as
measured at the property line of the subject property.
3. Flashing Lights Prohibited: Except for public service signs when expressly permitted by this section, no flashing, blinking or intermittent lights shall
be permitted.
4. Light Fixtures: Light fixtures placed along the base of the sign shall be screened from view by site grading or evergreen shrubs. No unscreened light
sources are permitted. Temporary holiday displays, which contain lights, are exempt from these provisions.
5. External Illumination: External illumination shall be provided by a white, steady, stationary light of reasonable intensity, directed solely at the sign
and shielded or otherwise prevented from shining directly onto adjacent properties or rights of way.
6. Internal Illumination: Internal illumination shall be provided by interior white lighting of reasonable intensity with primary and secondary images lit or
silhouetted (i.e., backlit) on an opaque background. The background of all signs must be opaque. No additional background lighting or illuminated
borders or outlines shall be permitted.
7. Additional Lighting Standards: The following are additional lighting standards for specific sign types:
a. Signs Without Permits: Signs permitted pursuant to section 13-11-6 of this chapter shall be illuminated only as permitted in that section.
b. Awning And Canopy Signs: Awning and canopy signs shall be illuminated using a direct light source. Direct illumination shall be aimed at the
exterior of the awning/canopy, not the underside.
c. Monument Signs: Monument signs shall be backlit, directly lit, or internally illuminated. All letters must be individually affixed. Any direct light
source shall be concealed from view from the right of way.
d. Wall Signs: Letters shall be individually affixed to walls of a building and may be either internally illuminated or backlit.
B. Landscaping: The base of all permanent ground signs shall be effectively landscaped to conceal the base from public view and maintained in good
condition at all times. The minimum landscaped area shall extend at least three feet (3') beyond all sign faces or supporting structures in all directions.
Exposed foundations must be constructed with a finished material such as brick, stone, or wood. Landscaping must be maintained in a manner that
prevents the screening or blocking of addresses and other information provided on the monument sign.
C. Electrical Elements: All wiring, fittings and materials used in the construction, connection and operation of electrically illuminated signs shall be in
accordance with the provisions of this code. No metal sign illuminated by any means requiring internal wiring and no electrical fixtures attached to any
sign shall be lower than nine feet (9') from grade unless it is grounded by the use of a grounding conductor run with the circuit conductors and is also
grounded by being bonded to a grounding electrode at the sign site.
D. Structural Elements: The construction and structural components of all signs shall be in accordance with the standards and regulations of this code. All
permanent signs shall be constructed of fire resistant materials and shall be capable of withstanding wind pressures of at least thirty (30) pounds per
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 375/438
square foot of surface area and of receiving dead loads based on the actual weight of the structure.
E. Minimum Elevation Of Certain Signs: The bottom of every awning, canopy, marquee, wall and pylon sign shall be elevated at least eight feet (8') above
grade. Whenever possible wall signs on the same facade shall maintain the same top and bottom elevations above grade.
F. Obstruction Of Accessways: No sign or sign structure shall obstruct free ingress to or egress from a fire escape, door, window or other required
accessway.
G. Obstruction Of Window Surface: No sign shall project over, occupy or obstruct any window surface required for light or ventilation by any applicable
provision of this code.
H. Traffic Safety:
1. Confusion With Traffic Signals: No sign shall be maintained at any location where by reason of its position, size, shape, content, color, or
illumination it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with, any traffic control sign, sign or device, or where it may
interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
2. Obstruction Of Sight Triangles Prohibited: No sign, nor any part of a sign other than a supporting pole or brace no greater than eighteen inches
(18") in width or diameter shall be located lower than eight feet (8') from grade within the area of any sight triangle as defined in this chapter.
I. Signs In Rights Of Way: Except as provided in this section, no sign except governmental signs authorized in this chapter shall be placed in or extend
into or over any public property or right of way. Temporary signs advertising civic functions may extend into or over a public right of way upon the
specific prior approval of the village manager on the basis of need and impact on pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and impact on surrounding
properties.
J. Sign Identification: All signs shall be plainly marked with the name of the person, firm or corporation hanging or erecting the sign and the sign permit
number.
K. Sign Maintenance: The owner of a sign and the owner of the premises on which such sign is located shall be jointly and severally liable to maintain
such sign, including its illumination sources, in compliance with this chapter and all applicable laws, in a safe and secure condition, and in a neat and
orderly condition and good working order at all times, and to prevent the development of any rust, corrosion, rotting or other deterioration in the
physical appearance or safety of such sign. The premises around ground and pylon signs shall be kept clean and free of all rubbish and weeds.
L. Sign Measurement:
1. Area To Be Included: The supporting structure or bracing of a sign shall be omitted in measuring the area of the sign unless such structure or
bracing is made part of the message or face of the sign. Where a sign has more than one display face, all faces shall be included in determining the
area of the sign.
2. Area Of Signs With Backing: The area of all signs with backing shall be measured by computing the area of the sign backing.
3. Area Of Signs Without Backing: The area of all signs without backing shall be measured by computing the area of the smallest regular geometric
figure that can encompass all words, letters, figures, emblems and other elements of the sign message.
4. Area Of Signs With And Without Backing: The area of all signs formed by a combination of elements with and without backing shall be measured by
counting the area of such elements measured in accordance with the foregoing subsections.
Figure 1. Sign Measurement Illustrations
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 376/438
M. Signs On Lots With Multiple Users: Where more than one user occupies a zoning lot, the owner of the lot where the sign is located shall be
responsible for allocating permitted signage among such users.
N. General Safety: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no sign shall be located in any area or in any manner so as to create a nuisance or
a threat to the public safety and welfare. (Ord. G-916, 1-12-2010)
13-11-5: CLASSIFICATION OF SIGNS:
A. Functional Types: For purposes of this chapter, signs shall be classified as follows according to function:
1. Advertising Sign: A sign, other than an off premises identification sign, that directs attention to or identifies a business, commodity, service or
entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located. This term shall include signs, other than
customary identification lettering and advertising posters on buses and taxicabs, attached to parked or moving vehicles.
2. Attention Getting Device: A sign designed to attract attention by means of flashing or moving parts, bright color or light, or movement of any kind.
Examples of such signs include pennants hung in series, whirligigs, spinners, streamers, flashing lights, searchlights and balloons.
3. Business Sign: A sign that directs attention to or identifies a business or profession conducted, or to a commodity or service sold, offered or
manufactured, or to an entertainment offered on the premises where the sign is located.
4. Construction Sign: A temporary sign erected on premises on which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction, indicating
the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors, and similar artisans, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors and
similar persons or firms having a role or interest in the construction activity.
5. Drive-Through Sign: A sign that facilitates the operation of a drive-through facility by aiding with the pick up, drop off, ordering or service of such a
facility. It includes, but is not limited to, such signs as changeable copy menu boards.
6. Governmental Signs: A sign erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental function or required by any law, ordinance or
governmental regulation including wayfinding/directional signage.
7. Holiday Decorations: Signs in the nature of decorations, clearly incidental to and customarily and commonly associated with any national, local or
religious holiday.
8. Home Occupation Sign: A sign advertising or identifying a home occupation on the site of the home occupation.
9. Identification Sign: A sign giving only the name, trademark or other readily recognized symbol or address, or any combination thereof, of a building,
business, development or establishment on the premises where it is located.
10. Institutional Bulletin Board Sign: A sign that identifies a religious organization, school, library, community center, or similar institutional or
community service use on whose premises it is located and that contains only the name of the institution or organization, the name or names of
persons connected with it, and greetings, announcements or events or activities occurring at the institution or similar message.
11. Joint Identification Sign: An identification sign limited in content to the identification of a planned development, office plaza, shopping center,
business park or the like and not containing any reference to the individual uses sharing the development, plaza, center, park or the like.
12. Memorial Sign: A sign or tablet memorializing a person, place, event or structure.
13. Nameplate Sign: A sign limited in content to the name or address, or both, of the owner or occupant of a building or premises on which it is
located. If any premises is occupied by more than one occupant, the nameplate sign may identify all such occupants, as well as the premises, and
may include necessary directional information.
14. Off Premises Identification Sign: A sign giving the name, trademark or other readily recognized symbol or address, or any combination thereof, of a
building, business, development or establishment, which sign is located off the lot on which such building, business, development or establishment
is located.
15. Official Flag Or Emblem: A flag or emblem of a government or of a membership organization.
16. On Site Directory Sign: A sign, not readable from any public right of way, on which the names and locations of the occupants and/or uses of a
building or group of buildings is given.
17. On Site Informational Sign: A sign commonly associated with, and limited to, information and directions necessary or convenient for persons
coming on the property, including signs marking entrances and exits, parking areas, one-way drives, restrooms, pick up and delivery areas and the
like.
18. Private Sale Sign: A temporary sign advertising private sales of personal property at "house sales", "garage sales", "rummage sales" and the like.
19. Private Warning Sign: A sign limited in content to messages warning, caution or danger.
20. Public Service Signs: A sign displaying only the time, temperature, stock market quotations or civic messages by means of a landbank.
21. Real Estate Signs; Standard Size: A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises, or a portion of the premises, on which the sign is located
and limited to one single or double faced, nonilluminated sign per zoning lot, not to exceed six (6) square feet in area per sign face.
22. Real Estate Signs; Large Size: A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises, or a portion of the premises, on which the sign is located and
limited to one single or double faced, nonilluminated sign per zoning lot, not to exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area per sign face.
B. Structural Types: For purposes of this chapter, signs shall be classified as follows according to structure:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 377/438
1. Awning, Canopy Or Marquee Sign: A sign that is mounted or painted on or attached to an awning, canopy or marquee that is otherwise permitted by
this chapter. No such sign shall project above, below, or beyond the physical dimensions of such awning, canopy or marquee.
2. Banner Sign: A sign made of fabric or other similar nonrigid material with no enclosing framework or electrical components that is supported or
anchored on two (2) or more edges or at all four (4) corners.
3. Billboard Sign: A board, panel, or tablet used for the display of posters, printed or painted advertising matter, either illuminated or nonilluminated,
that directs attention to goods, merchandise, entertainment, or services offered elsewhere than the premises where the sign is located.
4. Box Sign: A sign that is self-enclosed in a typically square or rectangular structure with or without internal lighting. A box sign can be single or
double sided. Internally illuminated channelized lettering, logo, or groupings of letters and/or logos, not providing any additional sign face, shall not
be considered a box sign.
5. Freestanding Sign: A sign on a frame, pole or other support structure not attached to any building.
6. Gas Station Price Sign: A changeable copy sign advertising gasoline prices.
7. Monument Sign: A freestanding sign supported primarily by an internal structural framework or integrated into landscaping or other solid structural
features other than support poles.
8. Moving Or Animated Sign: Any sign or part of a sign that changes physical position by any movement or rotation or that gives the visual impression
of such movement or rotation.
9. Paint On Wall Sign: A sign painted on the wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a place parallel to the face of the wall.
10. Portable Sign: A sign that is not permanently affixed to a building, a structure or the ground, but not including customary identification lettering on
vehicles and advertising posters on buses and taxicabs.
11. Projecting Sign: (Except for the B2 zoning district or as approved for planned unit developments.) A sign that is wholly or partially dependent upon
a building for support and that projects more than twelve inches (12") from such building.
12. Pylon Sign: A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other supports.
13. Reader Board/Changeable Copy/Video Sign: (Does not apply to gas/service stations or to that portion of a sign dedicated to time and/or
temperature.) A sign or portion thereof designed to accommodate frequent message changes composed of characters, or letters, or illustrations and
that can be changed or rearranged, either manually or electronically, without altering the face or surface of such sign.
14. Roof Sign: A sign that is mounted or painted on the roof of a building, or that is wholly dependent upon a building for support and that projects
above the highest point of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deck line of a building with a
mansard roof.
15. Sandwich Board Sign: A movable sign not secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located.
16. Temporary Sign: A sign or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, paper, plywood or other light material and intended to be
displayed for a short period of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days within one calendar year. Temporary signage intended for a temporary tenant and
intended to be displayed for longer than thirty (30) days is permitted in the B2 district, but only if approved by the property owner and after receiving
a sign permit from the village.
17. Vehicle/Trailer Sign: A sign that is attached to or painted on a vehicle that is parked on or adjacent to any property, the principal purpose of which
is to attract attention to a product sold or business located on the property.
18. Wall Sign: A sign fastened to the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the
background surface of, the sign and that does not project more than twelve inches (12") from such building or structure.
19. Window Sign: A sign that is applied or attached to the exterior or interior of a window or located within the interior of a structure so that its message
can be read from the exterior of the structure. (Ord. G-916, 1-12-2010)
13-11-6: SIGNS PERMITTED IN ANY DISTRICT WITHOUT A PERMIT:
Except as regulated by section 13-11-4 of this chapter and except as expressly prohibited by section 13-11-7 of this chapter, and notwithstanding any
other contrary provisions of this chapter, the following signs may, subject to the following limitations, be erected and maintained in any district without
obtaining a village sign permit:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 378/438
A. Governmental Signs: The content and size of any such sign shall not exceed the requirements of the law, ordinance or regulation pursuant to which
such sign is erected.
B. Holiday Decorations: Such signs shall be displayed for a period of not more than sixty (60) consecutive days nor more than twenty (20) days following
the holiday in connection with which they are displayed; any other provision of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, such signs may be of any
type, number, area, height, location, illumination or animation so long as they create no safety hazard, nuisance or adverse impact on the adjacent
properties.
C. Nameplate Signs: Such signs shall be limited to no more than one wall sign per occupancy; shall be no more than one square foot in area per
occupancy and in no event more than three (3) square feet in area; and shall be nonilluminated.
D. Official Flags And Emblems: Such signs may be displayed on flagpoles and when so displayed shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area.
Such signs may also be displayed in the form of a wall sign and when so displayed shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area.
E. On Site Informational Signs: Such signs shall be limited to wall or freestanding signs of not more than six (6) square feet in area; shall be, if a
freestanding sign, not more than four feet (4') in height; and shall be illuminated only as necessary to accomplish their intended purpose.
F. Private Sale Signs (Residential Only): Such signs shall be no more than six (6) square feet in area; shall be located entirely on the premises where
such sale is to be conducted; shall be clearly marked with name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for the removal of such
sign; shall be erected not more than twenty four (24) hours in advance of such sale; and shall be removed within twenty four (24) hours following the
conclusion of such sale. No freestanding sign shall be higher than four feet (4') nor closer to any lot line than six feet (6').
G. Private Warning Signs: Such signs shall be no more than two (2) square feet in area each; shall be limited to the number necessary to accomplish the
intended purpose and shall be illuminated only as required to accomplish such purpose.
H. Real Estate Signs; Standard Size: Real estate signs if limited to one single or double faced, nonilluminated sign per zoning lot, not to exceed six (6)
square feet in area per sign face, and set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from the property line. The name, address and telephone number of the
person responsible for such removal shall be marked on the sign. Real estate signs indicating that the property has sold or is under any contractual
obligation shall not be permitted pursuant to this subsection. Real estate signs for multi-unit developments or structures and exceeding six (6) square
feet in area shall require a permit.
I. Window Signs, Temporary: The aggregate area of all such signs shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the area of the window in which they are
exhibited nor block any window area required for light, ventilation or emergency exit by any applicable code. No such sign shall be illuminated. (Ord.
G-916, 1-12-2010)
13-11-7: SIGNS SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED IN ALL DISTRICTS:
The following signs, as well as all other signs not expressly permitted by this chapter, are prohibited in all zoning districts and shall not be erected,
maintained or, except as provided for elsewhere in this chapter, permitted to continue in any zoning district:
A. Advertising signs, including billboards.
B. Attention getting devices.
C. Banner signs (as approved by village sign permit).
D. Box signs.
E. Electronic reader board/changeable copy/video sign.
F. Home occupation identification signs.
G. Moving or animated signs.
H. Off premises identification signs.
I. Portable signs.
J. Roof signs.
K. Temporary signs, except as expressly authorized in this chapter and when approved in connection with temporary uses.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 379/438
L. Vehicle/trailer signs.
M. Any sign that advertises, identifies or pertains to a business no longer conducted, or a product no longer sold, on the premises where such sign is
located. Such signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days following cessation of the relevant activity.
N. Any sign on a tree or utility pole, whether on public or private property.
O. Any sign on public property, except governmental signs authorized in this chapter.
P. Any sign painted directly on a wall, roof or fence.
Q. In a residential district, any sign located in a homeowners' association common area, except for a homeowners' association sign. (Ord. G-916, 1-12-
2010)
13-11-8: DISTRICT B1 AND B3 REGULATIONS:
Signs shall be permitted in the B1 and B3 districts as follows:
A. Functional Types Permitted:
1. All signs permitted in any district without a village permit as provided in section 13-11-6 of this chapter.
2. Business signs.
3. Construction signs, but for no longer than fourteen (14) days following completion of the construction in question.
4. Gas station price sign, but only when authorized as a special permit.
5. Identification signs.
6. Joint identification signs.
7. On site directory signs.
8. Real estate signs, large size. Real estate signs if limited to one single or double faced, nonilluminated sign per zoning lot, not to exceed twenty four
(24) square feet in area per sign face, and set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from the property line. The name, address and telephone
number of the person responsible for such removal shall be marked on the sign. Real estate signs indicating that the property has sold or is under
any contractual obligation shall not be permitted pursuant to this subsection. Real estate signs, large size may indicate that the property is for sale
or lease. Real estate signs, large size require a village sign permit. Real estate signs, large size shall not be in place for more than twelve (12)
months, at which time the sign must be removed or another permit must be issued for another twelve (12) month period. Real estate signs, large
size must be constructed of quality materials and maintained in good condition. Signs not maintained in good condition may be removed by the
village. Real estate signs, large size are not permitted in residential districts.
B. Structural Types Permitted:
1. Awning and canopy signs.
2. Drive-through sign, but only when authorized by a special permit.
3. Monument signs.
4. Temporary signs, but only as authorized in section 13-11-6 of this chapter or for construction signs.
5. Wall signs.
C. Number Of Signs Permitted Per Lot:
1. All signs permitted pursuant to section 13-11-6 of this chapter; plus
2. One construction sign of any permitted structural type; plus
3. One joint identification sign per zoning lot frontage; plus
4. One monument sign per street frontage on development less than ten (10) acres in area. For developments greater than ten (10) acres, seven
hundred (700) linear feet of street frontage (per street) or less gets one monument sign and lots with more than seven hundred feet (700') of street
frontage (per street) get two (2) monument signs (per street frontage). Monument signs must be spaced at least five hundred feet (500') apart on a
zoning lot when a zoning lot contains two (2) monument signs per street frontage, and the sign must be a joint identification sign.
5. One wall sign per zoning lot frontage for buildings with a single ground floor tenant, or one wall sign per ground floor business tenant; plus
6. One on site directory sign per zoning lot frontage; plus
7. One real estate sign, large size.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 380/438
D. Maximum Gross Surface Area Of Signs Permitted:
1. Total Sign Area: The total area of all signs on a zoning lot shall not exceed one square foot per foot of zoning lot frontage; provided, however, that
construction signs, real estate signs, joint identification signs, and signs allowed without permits, shall not be counted toward the total allowance
gross sign surface area permitted on a zoning lot. The maximum amount of sign area shall be allocated proportionally based on the linear zoning lot
frontage.
2. Individual Sign Area Limitations: The following individual sign area limitations shall apply to all signs:
a. Awning And Canopy Signs: Not to exceed fifty (50) square feet per sign face. No sign identifying an individual tenant of a multi-tenant building
shall cover more than five percent (5%) of the wall to which it is affixed.
b. Construction Signs: Not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet per sign face nor more than two (2) sign faces.
c. Monument Signs: Not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet per sign face, nor more than two hundred (200) square feet total for
developments less than ten (10) acres in area. Not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet per sign face, nor more than two hundred
forty (240) square feet total for development greater than ten (10) acres in area. B3 lots north of 22nd Street with frontage on Midwest Road only
shall have monument signs not exceeding fifty (50) square feet per sign face or one hundred (100) square feet total.
d. Wall Signs: Not to exceed two hundred forty (240) square feet per sign, or not to exceed covering more than five percent (5%) of the wall to which
it is affixed, whichever is less. Wall signs in the B3 zoning district north of 22nd Street with Midwest Road frontage only shall not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet or five percent (5%) of the wall area to which it is affixed.
E. Maximum Height Of Signs Permitted:
1. Signs Without Permits: As provided in section 13-11-6 of this chapter for signs permitted pursuant to that section.
2. Awning And Canopy Signs: Twenty feet (20'); all awning and canopy signs shall be at least eight feet (8') above grade. Awning and canopy signs for
individual tenants of a multi-tenant building shall be at the same height on the building to which they are affixed.
3. Monument Signs: A maximum height of ten feet (10') for lots with developments less than ten (10) acres in area. A maximum height of twelve feet
(12') is permitted on lots with developments greater than ten (10) acres in area. A maximum height of eight feet (8') is permitted for B3 zoned lots
north of 22nd Street with frontage on Midwest Road only.
4. Wall Signs: Thirty feet (30') and only on the first floor of buildings.
F. Minimum Setback Required:
1. Permitted Signs: As provided in section 13-11-6 of this chapter for signs permitted pursuant to that section.
2. Monument Signs: Five feet (5') from "right of way" and six feet (6') from all other lot lines. B3 zoned lots north of 22nd Street and with frontage along
Midwest Road have a minimum setback of five feet (5') from "right of way". All monument signs shall be perpendicular to the street and "sight
triangles" shall be maintained. (Ord. G-916, 1-12-2010)
13-11-9: DISTRICT B2 REGULATIONS:
Business signs shall be permitted in the B2 district as follows:
A. Ground Signs:
1. There may be a total of not more than two (2) freestanding ground signs on each of the boundary streets surrounding any shopping center in the B2
district located not less than thirty feet (30') from any street line; provided that each sign shall not exceed a total area of one thousand (1,000)
square feet on either side, shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height, and each shall be limited to advertising the shopping center, its
merchandise or services.
2. In a retail/commercial development containing less than five (5) acres, a maximum of one ground sign, which identifies the name and address of the
development and may also identify the name and services or merchandise of each of the tenants located in the center, may be erected in addition to
signs affixed to the building walls; provided that the sign shall not exceed a total area of one hundred thirty (130) square feet; not to exceed sixty five
(65) square feet on either side and shall not exceed eleven feet (11') in height.
3. Real estate signs, large size. Real estate signs if limited to one single or double faced, nonilluminated sign per zoning lot, not to exceed twenty four
(24) square feet in area per sign face, and set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from the property line. The name, address and telephone
number of the person responsible for such removal shall be marked on the sign. Real estate signs indicating that the property has sold or is under
any contractual obligation shall not be permitted pursuant to this subsection. Real estate signs, large size may indicate that the property is for sale
or lease. Real estate signs, large size require a Village sign permit. Real estate signs, large size shall not be in place for more than twelve (12)
months, at which time the sign must be removed or another permit must be issued for another twelve (12) month period. Real estate signs, large
size must be constructed of quality materials and maintained in good condition. Signs not maintained in good condition may be removed by the
Village. Real estate signs, large size are not permitted in residential districts.
4. Internal informational/way-finding signs for vehicular traffic. In addition to the ground signs permitted by the other provisions of this subsection A, in
a retail, commercial or mixed use development containing no less than fifty (50) acres, no fewer than two thousand (2,000) parking spaces and no
fewer than three (3) separate multi-story parking garages, up to twenty (20) ground signs may be located throughout the development's interior
roads and parking aisles, provided no such ground sign is located within one hundred fifty feet (150') from exterior property lines. The content of
such ground signs may include: a) the names of tenants in the development; b) the name of the development itself; and c) digital sign elements
displaying only the location and availability of parking spaces in the development's surface parking lots and multi-story parking garages. The
foregoing types of ground signs shall not be subject to, nor deemed to be in violation of, any contrary provisions in this title, including without
limitation, subsections 13-11-4A, B and E of this chapter (excluding, however, the illumination standard in subsection 13-11-4A2 of this chapter) and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 381/438
subsections 13-11-7A, E, H and M of this chapter. The content of each digital element within the ground signs shall be limited to the location and
estimated number of parking spaces available in the referenced parking garage or surface lot, or, the word "Full" or "FULL" or "full".
B. Wall Signs:
1. Standards: Signs may be attached to one (1) or more facades of any building, provided that they conform to the following requirements:
a. They shall not project more than thirty inches (30") from any facade and shall not be higher than the building height.
b. The total area of any sign attached to a facade shall not exceed two percent (2%) of the gross floor area, including basements, of the building to
which such sign is attached.
c. No wall sign shall extend beyond the roofline or parapet of the building to which it is affixed. No wall sign shall cover any architectural features
(architectural features shall include, but not be limited to: pediment, cornice, belt course, pier, windows, pilaster, roof, decorative stone or tile inlay,
kick plate/bulkhead, raised or colored brick pattern, and corbel) of the building to which it is affixed. No wall sign shall be affixed to HVAC
screening, elevator overrun, or other features protruding from the roof of the structure, with the exception of building parapets which have been
designed and integrated into the building's architecture and which are in line with and not set back from the perimeter facade of the building.
d. Letters shall be individually affixed to walls of a building and be either internally illuminated or backlit. All wall signs mounted above forty feet (40')
shall consist of internally illuminated or backlit lettering that is one (1) consistent color for all letters of the sign. Wall signs mounted above forty
feet (40') shall consist of the business name only and not include slogans, tag lines, or other wording. Wall signs mounted above forty feet (40')
may also include the company's primary registered or trademarked logo, which must be no taller than the height of the lettering of the wall sign.
2. Informational Signs As To Locations Of Available Parking: In addition to the wall signs permitted by subsections B1 and E of this section, multi-story
parking garages in the B2 District may have wall signs with digital sign elements that display the availability of parking spaces subject to the
following conditions:
a. The multi-story parking garages on which such wall signs are permitted must be located within a retail, commercial or mixed use development of
no less than fifty (50) acres in area that has no fewer than two thousand (2,000) parking spaces and no fewer than three (3) separate multi-story
parking garages;
b. The wall signs must comply with the signage regulations in the following sections of this title: section 13-11-3 of this chapter (other than
subsections B3, B5 and B7); section 13-11-4 of this chapter (other than subsections A1, A3 through A7 and E); section 13-11-7 of this chapter
(other than subsection E); and subsections B and C of this section;
c. No such wall sign may be located within two hundred feet (200') from 16th Street;
d. The content of each digital element within the wall signs shall be limited to: 1) the estimated number of parking spaces available on the
referenced level of the parking garage, or 2) the word "Full" or "FULL" or "full".
Wall signs complying with the foregoing requirements shall not be subject to, nor deemed to be in violation of, any contrary provisions in this title,
including subsections 13-11-4A and E, and 13-11-7E of this chapter.
C. Size Limitation Exemptions:
1. Signs that are interior to a shopping center in the B2 District and are not visible from any exterior street and/or parking lot are exempt from the size
limitations contained in this chapter.
D. Awnings And Marquees:
1. Awnings and marquees affixed to any building or structure shall have headroom of not less than eight feet (8').
E. Wall Signs For Garage Facades: Notwithstanding anything contained in this title to the contrary, including, without limitation, subsections 13-11-7A, H
and M of this chapter, wall signs may be located on facades of multi-story parking garages in the B2 District provided that:
1. No parking garage facade may have more than one (1) such wall sign;
2. The wall sign otherwise complies with sections 13-11-3 and 13-11-4 and subsections 13-11-7B through G, I through L, and N through Q of this
chapter, and subsections B and C of this section;
3. The wall sign does not face 16th Street between Illinois State Route 83 and Spring Road;
4. The wall sign exclusively or primarily faces Illinois State Route 83 or 22nd Street;
5. The wall sign advertises or identifies a retail tenant occupying no less than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of a building in the B2 District;
6. The building in which the subject retail tenant is located does not have, or no longer has, any other wall sign that: a) is visible from the right-of-way
the proposed wall sign would primarily face, and b) advertises or identifies the subject retail tenant; and
7. At least one (1) of the following applies:
a. As of the effective date hereof: 1) the building occupied in whole or part by the subject retail tenant is located within seventy feet (70') of the
applicable parking garage at grade, and 2) the parking garage is at least partially located within one hundred seventy feet (170') of 16th Street; or
b. As of the effective date hereof: 1) the building occupied in whole or part by the subject retail tenant is located within two hundred feet (200') of the
applicable parking garage at grade, and 2) the parking garage is at least partially located within four hundred fifty feet (450') of 22nd Street.
F. Internal Way-Finding, Directory And Merchant Signage: In retail, commercial or mixed-use developments containing no less than fifty (50) acres, no
less than one million (1,000,000) square feet of retail and restaurant occupancies and no fewer than eighty (80) distinct commercial occupants, the
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 382/438
following types of signage shall be permitted subject only to receipt of an applicable sign permit pursuant to section 13-11-3 of this chapter and
compliance with the illumination standard set forth in subsection 13-11-4A2 of this chapter and each of the life-safety requirements set forth in
subsections 13-11-4A3, C, D, F, G, H, I, J, K and N of this chapter: 1) signage within the development's enclosed commercial establishments; 2)
signage in outdoor areas of the development that are surrounded by enclosed buildings and therefore are not visible to any public right-of-way; and 3)
signage inside multi-story garages that is not visible to rights-of-way. (Ord. G-916, 1-12-2010; Ord. G-1082, 8-9-2016; Ord. G-1099, 2-28-2017)
13-11-10: DISTRICT B4, O3, O4, ORA1 AND ORA2 REGULATIONS:
Signs shall be permitted in the B4, O3, O4, ORA1 and ORA2 districts as follows:
A. Functional Types Permitted:
1. All signs permitted in any district without a village permit, as provided in section 13-11-6 of this chapter.
2. Business signs.
3. Construction signs, but for no longer than fourteen (14) days following completion of the construction in question.
4. Drive-through sign, but only when authorized as a special permit.
5. Identification signs.
6. Joint identification signs.
7. On site directory signs.
8. Real estate signs, large size. Real estate signs if limited to one single or double faced, nonilluminated sign per zoning lot, not to exceed twenty four
(24) square feet in area per sign face, and set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from the property line. The name, address and telephone
number of the person responsible for such removal shall be marked on the sign. Real estate signs indicating that the property has sold or is under
any contractual obligation shall not be permitted pursuant to this subsection. Real estate signs, large size may indicate that the property is for sale
or lease. Real estate signs, large size require a village sign permit. Real estate signs, large size shall not be in place for more than twelve (12)
months, at which time the sign must be removed or another permit must be issued for another twelve (12) month period. Real estate signs, large
size must be constructed of quality materials and maintained in good condition. Signs not maintained in good condition may be removed by the
village. Real estate signs, large size are not permitted in residential districts.
B. Structural Types Permitted:
1. Awning and canopy signs.
2. Monument signs.
3. Wall signs.
C. Number Of Signs Permitted Per Zoning Lot:
1. All signs permitted by section 13-11-6 of this chapter; plus
2. One awning sign per entrance; plus
3. One construction sign of any structural type; plus
4. One joint identification sign per zoning lot frontage; plus
5. One monument sign per street frontage for zoning lot frontage that is less than seven hundred feet (700') in length, and up to two (2) monument
signs per street frontage for zoning lot frontage that is seven hundred feet (700') or more in length.
6. Two (2) on site directory signs per zoning lot frontage; plus
7. One real estate sign, large size; plus
8. One wall sign per street frontage per building, limit two (2) per building; signs must be "anchored" or oriented to a corner of the building (with the
exception of the office buildings located at 1211, 1301, 1415 and 1515 22nd Street may locate their wall signs in the center of the building face),
rather than placed on the center of the wall; signs must be located at the uppermost permitted signable area of the building, rather than on the lower
levels, except for permitted first floor restaurant signs; signs on adjacent walls must not be "anchored" or oriented on the same corner of the
building; signs may be placed on any side of the building; limit of one wall sign per building side. Signs must be of a single line of text, multiple lines
of text (one above the other) are not permitted, except as approved for first floor restaurant signs.
D. Maximum Gross Surface Area Of Signs Permitted:
1. Total Sign Area: The total area of all signs on a zoning lot shall not exceed one square foot per foot of zoning lot frontage or one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet, whichever is less; provided, however, that construction signs, real estate signs, joint identification signs, and signs
allowed without permits, shall not be counted toward the total allowance gross sign surface area permitted on a zoning lot. The maximum amount of
sign area shall be allocated proportionally based on the linear zoning lot frontage. For the zoning lots that contain the office buildings located at
1211, 1301, 1415 and 1515 22nd Street, the maximum permitted signage is two thousand (2,000) square feet.
2. Individual Sign Area Limitations: The following individual sign area limitations shall apply to all signs within the B4, O3, O4, ORA1 and ORA2
districts, whether counted toward the total allowable gross sign surface area established in this chapter or not:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 383/438
a. Awning And Canopy Signs: Not to exceed fifty (50) square feet per sign face. No sign identifying an individual tenant of a multi-tenant building
shall cover more than five percent (5%) of the wall to which it is affixed.
b. Monument Signs: Not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet per sign face, nor more than two hundred (200) square feet total.
c. Wall Signs: Not to exceed one hundred forty (140) square feet per sign face for signs mounted greater than fifty feet (50') high and not to exceed
one hundred (100) square feet per sign face for signs mounted less than fifty feet (50') high, and in no case covering more than five percent (5%)
of the wall to which it is affixed. For ground floor restaurants in an office building or hotel, a special permit is required to erect a wall sign. These
signs are permitted to have a maximum area of one hundred (100) square feet. The office buildings located at 1211, 1301, 1415 and 1515 22nd
Street, the maximum size for wall signage is increased from one hundred forty (140) square feet to two hundred fifty (250) square feet in order to
accommodate corporate names that contain a maximum of ten (10) letters. For corporate names with more than ten (10) letters, the maximum
size of the wall sign will be increased by 17.5 square feet per each additional letter including spaces between names with a maximum wall sign
being limited to no more than three hundred eighty five (385) square feet in size.
E. Maximum Height Of Signs Permitted:
1. Signs Without Permits: As provided in section 13-11-6 of this chapter for signs permitted pursuant to that section.
2. Awning And Canopy Signs: Twenty feet (20'); minimum height of eight feet (8') above grade.
3. Monument Signs: Ten feet (10').
4. Wall Signs: No wall sign shall extend beyond the roofline or parapet of the building to which it is affixed. No wall sign shall cover any architectural
features (architectural features shall include, but not be limited to: pediment, cornice, belt course, pier, windows, pilaster, roof, decorative stone or
tile inlay, kick plate/bulkhead, raised or colored brick pattern, and corbel) of the building to which it is affixed. No wall sign shall be affixed to HVAC
screening, elevator overrun, or other features protruding from the roof of the structure, with the exception of building parapets which have been
designed and integrated into the building's architecture and which are in line with and not set back from the perimeter facade of the building. For
ground floor restaurants requiring a special permit, wall signs shall be no higher than thirty feet (30') in height and located only on the first floor of the
building.
F. Minimum Setback Required:
1. Signs Without Permits: As provided in section 13-11-6 of this chapter for signs permitted pursuant to that section.
2. Monument Signs: Five feet (5') from the right of way and three feet (3') from parking areas or driveways. "Sight triangles" shall be maintained to
ensure safety.
3. Temporary Sign: Five feet (5').
G. Illumination:
1. Signs Without Permits: Signs permitted in section 13-11-6 of this chapter shall be illuminated only as permitted in that section.
2. Awnings And Canopies: Shall be illuminated using a direct light source. Direct illumination shall be aimed at the exterior of the awning/canopy.
3. Monument Signs: Monument signs shall be backlit, directly lit, or internally illuminated. All letters must be individually affixed. Any direct light source
shall be concealed from view from the right of way.
4. Wall Signs: Letters shall be individually affixed to walls of a building and be either internally illuminated or backlit. All wall signs mounted above thirty
feet (30') shall consist of internally illuminated or backlit lettering that is one consistent color for all letters of the sign. Wall signs mounted above
thirty feet (30') shall consist of the business name only and not include slogans, tag lines, or other wording. Wall signs mounted above thirty feet
(30') may also include the company's primary registered or trademarked logo, which must be no taller than the height of the lettering of the wall sign.
(Ord. G-916, 1-12-2010)
13-11-11: DISTRICT ORA3 REGULATIONS:
Signs shall be permitted in the ORA3 district as follows:
A. Illumination: All sources of light, whether by direct exposure, surface reflection or transmission, shall be shielded so that the source of light is not visible
from any adjacent residentially zoned property.
B. Ground Signs:
1. There may be a total of not more than two (2) freestanding signs having an area not to exceed, in the aggregate, two hundred forty (240) square
feet. The signs must be located:
a. Along the boundary streets;
b. At the principal entrance and in the required yard; and
c. Not less than ten feet (10') from any street right of way line; provided, however, that one additional ground sign not to exceed ten (10) square feet
may be placed at a service entrance location.
C. Directional And Identification Signs: There may be an unlimited number of directional signs not larger than six (6) square feet and there shall be not
more than one identification sign per building not larger than ten (10) square feet in addition to the other signs permitted by this chapter.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 384/438
D. Other Signage: Development plans governing developments which include a minor parcel separated by a public street from the major parcel included
in the development may provide for such other signage to be located on such separated minor parcel as is reasonably necessary to identify the
facilities to be located thereon, the entrance thereto, and/or to provide for safe access thereto; provided, however, that such signage shall not exceed:
1) one ground sign no closer than ten feet (10') from the adjoining right of way line primarily visible from the public street separating the minor parcel
from the major parcel; and 2) one double faced ground sign located at the principal entrance to such separated minor parcel; and, provided further,
that the total area of all such signs shall not exceed ninety (90) square feet and no individual sign facing shall exceed thirty (30) square feet in area.
(Ord. G-916, 1-12-2010)
13-11-12: DISTRICT R1, R2, R3 AND R4 REGULATIONS:
Except where exempted by this chapter, all of the following residential signs require permits from the village. Signs shall be permitted in the R1, R2, R3,
and R4 districts as follows:
A. Nameplates And Signs: A nameplate for a single-family dwelling shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square inches in area. For a multiplefamily
dwelling, a nameplate shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area, and may indicate the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the
building and/or the rental agents. A nameplate may be illuminated by nonflashing direct or indirect illumination.
B. For Sale Signs: One unilluminated ground sign, not more than six (6) square feet in area may be located in a front yard or side yard adjoining a street
and shall be located not closer than ten feet (10') from a street and/or side lot line.
C. Signs For Nonresidential Uses (Excluding Home Occupation Signs Which Are Prohibited): Identification signs for nonresidential uses shall be
permitted in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Illumination: One identification sign affixed flat against a building wall and one ground sign, which in both cases may be illuminated by nonflashing
direct or indirect illumination and shielded so that the source of light cannot be seen at any point within a residential district, may be erected along
each street frontage. For an educational institution, the sign may contain not only the name of the institution, but may also announce events or
activities occurring at the institution.
2. Sign Area; Setbacks: Each sign shall be limited in area to not more than sixteen (16) square feet and shall not project higher than ten feet (10')
above ground grade. No ground sign shall be located nearer than eight feet (8') from the nearest interior lot line nor closer to the front lot line than
one-half (1/2) the depth of the required front yard except:
a. A directional sign shall be not more than nine (9) square feet in area and shall not be located nearer than ten feet (10') from a street line; and
b. A sign for an educational institution shall not be located nearer than ten feet (10') from a front lot line.
3. Churches In The R2 District:
a. In the R2 district, a church where the lot, parcel or tract of land is ten (10) acres or more, shall be permitted one freestanding principal sign,
limited in area to not more than forty five (45) square feet on each of two (2) outward facing sides and may be illuminated according to this code,
and shall not project higher than ten feet (10') above grade, and not located nearer than eight feet (8') from the nearest lot line.
b. In the R2 district, a church where the lot, parcel or tract of land is ten (10) acres or more, shall be permitted one identification wall sign per street
frontage with the name, logo and symbol, affixed against a building wall and projecting out to twelve inches (12") and may be illuminated
according to this code, limited in area to not more than two hundred (200) square feet.
c. In the R2 district, a church where the lot, parcel or tract of land is ten (10) acres or more, shall be permitted entrance monument signs containing
its name, logo and symbol and directional instructions at its full access drives, and may be illuminated according to this code for safety purpose
and limited in area to not more than twenty five (25) square feet on each of two (2) sides and shall not project higher than six feet (6') above
grade.
D. Temporary Ground Signs: Temporary ground signs for residential subdivisions shall be permitted in accordance with the following:
1. Signs may be erected along each thoroughfare or highway frontage of the development not less than one thousand feet (1,000') apart.
2. Such signs shall not exceed two hundred forty (240) square feet in area each, and shall contain only the names, addresses and telephone numbers
of the development and the sales or rental agents, and types, prices, and location of dwelling units.
3. Such signs:
a. May be illuminated with nonflashing illumination shielded so that the source of light cannot be seen;
b. Shall not project higher than fifteen feet (15') above ground grade;
c. Shall not be located nearer than thirty feet (30') from a lot line; and
d. Shall be removed within thirty (30) days after completion of the development.
E. Additional Ground Signs: Additional ground signs may be used on lots containing model homes being offered for sale or rent to:
1. Identify the name and price of each house, not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
2. Provide directional and safety information, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 385/438
3. No more than one such sign is permitted on any single lot except a maximum of two (2) signs will be permitted on corner lots, so that one sign can
be located along each street frontage. The maximum size of these signs is six (6) square feet each. (Ord. G-916, 1-12-2010; Ord. G-1096, 1-24-
2017)
13-11-13: SIGNS FOR HANDICAPPED PARKING:
A. Accessible Parking Required: All facilities, which provide parking, shall provide accessible parking in compliance with the provisions of the Illinois
accessibility code of the capital development board, as amended, and of the federal Americans with disabilities act.
B. Required Minimum Number Of Off Street Accessible Parking Spaces: The required minimum number of accessible parking spaces shall be in
accordance with section 400.320 of the Illinois accessibility code and the Americans with disabilities act (ADA) accessibility guidelines.
C. Location Of Parking And Passenger Loading Zones: Accessible parking spaces for disabled and accessible passenger loading zones that serve a
particular building shall be the spaces or zones located closest to the nearest accessible entrance on an accessible route. In separate parking
structures or lots that do not serve a particular building, parking spaces for disabled persons shall be located on the shortest possible circulation route
to an accessible pedestrian entrance of the parking facility.
D. Dimensions, Marking And Signage Of Accessible Parking Spaces: Each parking space shall be at least sixteen feet (16') wide including an eight foot
(8') wide access aisle, and adjacent parking spaces shall not share a common access aisle. All access aisles shall meet at a common level with an
accessible route and shall be diagonally striped.
1. Sized, Marked And Signed Spaces: Accessible parking spaces shall be sized, marked and signed in accordance with subsection 13-12-3C of this
title and exhibits A, B and C in subsection D4 of this section.
2. Environmentally Limited Person Space: Each parking space designated as reserved for environmentally limited persons shall be equipped with a
sign which complies with section 11-301 of the Illinois rules of the road1 and meets the requirements of sign R7-8 (U.S. department of transportation
standard). The sign shall be the Illinois standard R7-8 reserved parking sign and R7-I101 $250.00 fine sign (Illinois MUTCD). (See exhibits B and C
in subsection D4 of this section for description of above referenced signs.)
3. Mounting Of Signs: Signs shall be vertically mounted on a post or a wall at front center of the parking space, no more than five feet (5') horizontally
from the front of the parking space, and set a minimum of four feet (4') from the finished grade to the bottom of the sign.
4. Exhibits:
EXHIBIT A
WIDTH AND PAVEMENT MARKINGS
Effective October 1, 1992, all parking spaces reserved for the handicapped, except those reserving on street parking areas, shall be at least 16
feet wide, including an 8 foot wide access aisle. Adjacent handicapped parking spaces shall not share a common access aisle. All access aisles
shall blend to a common level with an accessible route and should be diagonally striped (Illinois accessibility code, section 400.310(c)(2)).
EXHIBIT B
HANDICAPPED PARKING SIGN
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 386/438
Effective January 1, 1985, public act 83-1316 amended section 11-301 of the "Illinois vehicle code" to require handicapped parking signs (for parking
lots subject to "the Illinois vehicle code") to comply with the R 7-8 sign show below (U.S. department of transportation standard). Existing signs may
remain, but their useful lives shall not be extended by other means than normal maintenance.
EXHIBIT C
SIGN REQUIRING "$250-FINE"
ILLINOIS STANDARD
R7-I101
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 387/438
(Ord. G-695, 3-26-2002; Ord. G-836, 5-22-2007; Ord. G-916, 1-12-2010)
Chapter 12
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
13-12-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
The off street parking and loading provisions of this chapter shall apply as follows, subject to the restrictions set forth in section 13-12-3 of this chapter:
A. Accessory off street parking and off street loading facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations of this chapter for all uses and structures
established in each district after the effective date hereof. However, where a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date hereof, and
construction is begun within ninety (90) days after such effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, parking and loading facilities as required
for the issuance of said building permit may be provided in lieu of any different amounts required by this chapter.
B. When the intensity of use of any structure or premises is increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area or seating capacity parking
and loading facilities for the addition shall be provided in the amount specified herein.
C. Whenever the existing use of a structure shall hereafter be changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as required for such
new use. However, if the said structure was erected prior to the effective date hereof, additional parking or loading facilities are mandatory only in the
amount by which the requirements for the new use would exceed those for the existing use, if the latter were subject to the parking and loading
provisions of this chapter.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 388/438
D. The design and engineering for all new or modifications to existing parking and loading facilities shall be approved by the village engineer prior to
construction. (Ord. G-687, 10-23-2001)
13-12-2: PERMISSIVE PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off street parking and loading facilities toserve any existing uses or
structures, provided that all regulations herein governing the location, design, and operation of such facilities are followed. (Ord. G-687, 10-23-2001)
13-12-3: OFF STREET PARKING REGULATIONS:
A. Existing Parking Facilities: Accessory off street parking facilities in existence on the effective date hereof and located on the same lot as the structure
or use served shall not hereafter be reduced below the requirements for a similar new structure or use under the provisions of this chapter.
B. Location: After the effective date hereof, all off street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building, structure or use of land served;
however, off street parking spaces may also be located on a lot other than the lot on which the building, structure or use of land served is located,
provided that said spaces are also within five hundred fifty feet (550') walking distance of such building, structure, or use of land. All off street parking
spaces required for single-family residences shall be located on the same lot as the residence, provided that no required spaces may be located in
any front or side yard.
C. Size And Aisles: Each required off street parking space shall have a width and length, exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns, or office
and work areas in accordance with standards set forth below. Enclosed parking spaces shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7'). Each
required off street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of a width and design in accordance with standards set forth below:
MINIMUM STANDARDS OF PARKING SPACES, AISLES AND PARKING BAYS FOR PARKING
ACCESSORY TO NONOFFICE USES
Minimum Space Per Car: Width 9'0" Length 18'0"
Parking Space And Aisle Dimensions: Width Of Parking Bays1
Angle Of
Parking
Width Of
Space
Feet And Inches
Width Of
Space Parallel
To Aisle,
Feet And Inches
Depth Of Space
Perpendicular
To Aisle,
Feet And Inches
Width Of
Aisle
Feet And Inches
Head-In
To Curb
Feet And Inches
45° 9'0" 12'9" 19'1" 12'0" 50'2"
60° 9'0" 10'5" 20'1" 17'0" 57'2"
75° 9'0" 9'4" 19'9" 22'0" 61'6"
90° 9'0" 9'0" 18'0" 27'0" 63'0"
MINIMUM STANDARDS OF PARKING SPACES, AISLES AND PARKING BAYS FOR
PARKING ACCESSORY TO OFFICE AND HOTEL USES
Minimum Space Per Car: Width 8'6" Length 17'6"
Parking Space And Aisle Dimensions: Width Of Parking Bays2
Angle Of
Parking
Width Of
Space
Feet And Inches
Width Of
Space Parallel
To Aisle,
Feet And Inches
Depth Of Space
Perpendicular
To Aisle,
Feet And Inches
Width Of
Aisle
Feet And Inches
Head-In
To Curb
Feet And Inches
45° 8'6" 12'0" 18'5" 12'0" 48'10"
60° 8'6" 9'10" 19'5" 16'0" 54'10
75° 8'6" 8'10" 19'1" 20'0" 58'2"
90° 8'6" 8'6" 17'6" 24'0" 59'0"
D. Timing Of Construction: All required off-street parking shall be constructed in accordance with the design criteria of this chapter and shall be improved
and ready for use as a condition of occupancy for the structure, issuance of additional permits or use of land. However, the property owner may
request approval from the director of community development, to initially construct no less than seventy five percent (75%) of the required parking as a
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 389/438
condition of occupancy with the remaining required spaces to be set aside and constructed when the parking demands for the site as determined by
the village, require the construction of the set aside parking spaces. Prior to occupancy, a written covenant agreeing to construct the set aside parking
spaces shall be submitted to the village for review and approval. Once approved, this document shall be filed for recording in the office of the county
recorder of deeds and shall run with the parcel of land.
E. Access: All off-street parking facilities shall be provided with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street in accordance with regulations set forth
below:
ACCESS DRIVEWAYS FROM STREETS TO
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES
1. Width of driveways (measured at the lot line adjoining a street):
a. Residential Uses: Not less than nine feet (9') wide or more than twenty feet (20') wide.
b. Nonresidential Uses:
(1) Not less than twelve feet (12') wide or more than twenty two feet (22') wide for a one-way driveway.
(2) Not less than twenty two feet (22') wide or more than twenty five feet (25') wide for a two-way driveway serving twenty (20) or fewer parking
spaces or one loading berth.
(3) Not less than:
(A) Twenty four feet (24') wide or more than thirty eight feet (38') wide for a two-way driveway (2 lanes out and 1 lane in) without a
median; or
(B) Twenty four feet (24') wide or more than forty four feet (44') wide for a two-way driveway (2 lanes out and 1 lane in) with a median,
serving more than twenty (20) parking spaces or two (2) or more loading berths.
2. Radius connecting street pavement edge and driveway edge:
a. In Residential Districts: Not less than two feet (2').
b. In All Other Districts: Not less than fifteen feet (15').
3. Angle at intersection of a driveway and street: The acute angle formed at the intersection of driveway and street pavement edges shall be not less
than sixty degrees (60°). The required turning angle for a vehicle entering or leaving a driveway shall not exceed ninety degrees (90°).
4. Spacing between separate driveway entrances on a lot (measured center to center at the lot line adjoining a street): no less than forty percent
(40%) of the length of the lot line adjoining the street, or four hundred feet (400'), whichever is less.
5. On corner lots, spacing between driveway entrance and right-of-way line of an adjacent intersecting street (measured from the nearest edge of the
driveway pavement at its intersection with the street pavement to the nearest right-of-way line, extended, of an adjacent intersecting street): no less
than twenty percent (20%) of the length of the lot line adjoining the street being entered.
F. Use: Accessory off-street parking facilities, as accessory to specific uses listed in this chapter, shall be solely for the parking of automobiles of patrons,
occupants or employees. When bus transportation is provided for patrons, occupants or employees of a specific establishment, additional open or
enclosed off-street parking spaces for bus parking on the premises shall be provided in accordance with all other regulations set forth in this chapter.
G. Computation: When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required by this chapter results in a requirement of a fractional space,
any fraction of one-half (1/2) or less may be disregarded while a fraction in excess of one-half (1/2) shall be counted as one parking space.
H. In Yards: Off-street parking spaces, open to the sky, in nonresidential districts, may be located in required interior side yards and rear yards, no less
than ten feet (10') from the nearest lot line, except a parking area containing four (4) or more parking spaces shall be not less than forty feet (40') from
an adjoining residence district boundary; provided, however, that:
1. On any lot in a B1 local shopping center district and a B3 general business district, the required off-street parking spaces may be located in a front
yard or side yard adjoining a street not less than ten feet (10') from a street line;
2. On any lot in ORA1 or ORA2 office-research-assembly district and an O3 or O4 office district, not more than ten percent (10%) of the required offstreet
parking spaces, not to exceed six (6) spaces, may be located in a required front yard or along the side of the building adjoining the street and
not less than twenty five feet (25') from a street line or fifty feet (50') from the street lines of Cermak and York Road; and
3. On any lot in an ORA3 office-research-assembly district, the location of off-street parking spaces shall be controlled by subsection 13-10C-4E of this
title and not the provisions of this subsection H.
I. Parking Of Certain Commercial Vehicles And Equipment In Residence Districts Prohibited: No motor vehicle bearing ambulance, funeral home, livery,
taxi or tow truck state license plates shall be stored or parked on any lot in any residence district, unless such motor vehicle(s) is wholly enclosed in a
building or such vehicle is being used in connection with a legitimate service actually being rendered for the benefit of such lot. No motor vehicle
having a gross vehicle weight (including vehicle and attached equipment and maximum load)3 in excess of eight thousand (8,000) pounds, except
vehicles registered as recreational vehicles under the Illinois motor vehicle code, and no contractor's equipment, supplies or tools, shall be stored or
parked on any lot in any residence district, unless:
1. Such vehicle, equipment, supplies or tools are wholly enclosed within a building; or
2. Such vehicle, equipment, supplies or tools are being used in connection with a legitimate service actually being rendered for the benefit of such lot.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 390/438
J. Collective Provision: Off-street parking facilities for separate uses located in a principal building on a single parcel may be provided collectively if the
total number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each such use and provided that all regulations
governing location of accessory parking spaces, in relation to the use served, are adhered to. In addition, any parcel of land that has excess parking
beyond what is required by this chapter may allocate excess parking capacity to any parcel or use that is directly contiguous to it under a shared
parking arrangement if it meets the applicable requirements of this chapter. Such arrangement must be in written form with notification provided to the
village.
K. Control Of Off-Street Parking Facilities: In cases where parking facilities are permitted on a lot other than the lot on which the structure or use served is
located, a covenant running with the land must be recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of DuPage County, Illinois, on the lot upon which the
accessory off-street parking is located which prohibits any other use on that lot, and a copy of the recorded covenant certified by the office of the
recorder of deeds of DuPage County, Illinois, shall be deposited with the director of community development. The covenant shall not be released until
such time as either one of the following conditions occurs:
1. The structure on the lot containing the principal use is removed and the principal use terminated.
2. Another lot of the required size within the required distance is properly developed and used for the required accessory off-street parking in place of
and in lieu of the initial lot used for accessory off-street parking with the same requirements, covenants, and conditions attaching to such substitute
accessory use lot as approved by the same authority as required for approval of such initial lot.
L. Employee Parking: Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be based on the maximum number of employees on duty or residing, or both,
on the premises at any one time.
M. Repair And Service: Except in cases of emergency, no motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in off-street parking areas.
No gasoline or motor oil shall be sold or services performed in conjunction with any accessory parking facilities unless such facilities are located within
a completely enclosed structure, in which case gasoline and motor oil may be sold within such structure to the users of such facilities, provided that no
sign thereto is visible from outside the structure and provided further that all gasoline pumps shall be effectively screened from view of streets and
residence districts. (Ord. G-687, 10-23-2001; Ord. G-758, 8-24-2004)
13-12-4: DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE:
A. Surfacing: Except in the R1 and R2 single-family residential zoning districts where off street parking areas can be either stone or hard surfaced, all off
street parking areas shall be improved with an all weather hard surface pavement installed in accordance with the village of Oak Brook public works
construction standards.
B. Screening And Landscaping: The following landscaped and planted areas shall be provided and maintained for all parking areas:
1. Front Yards: Permanent screening at least four feet (4') high shall be installed in front yard areas adjacent to parking areas. This screening may
consist of a planted earth berm, densely planted shrubs or trees, or a combination of both.
2. Side And Rear Yards: Permanent peripheral screening at least five feet (5') high shall be installed in side and rear yards adjacent to parking areas.
This screening may consist of a planted earth berm, densely planted shrubs or trees, or a combination of both. In side and rear yards, the screening
shall be so located and constructed as not to interfere or conflict with the use of any utility easements or utility installations existing or planned to be
installed in these easement areas.
C. Interior Parking Lot Landscaping: Landscaped areas shalloccupy not less than ten percent (10%) of the total lot area excluding:
1. The building footprint or footprint of other structures,
2. All required front yard or street setback areas, and
3. Any required landscape areas along rear lot lines.
In parking areas which are wider than one bay of double parking, interior shade trees shall be planted with a maximum spacing of forty feet (40'),
provided that at least one tree is located in the area occupied by every fifteen (15) interior parking spaces. Landscaped dividers with a minimum
width of six feet (6') shall be provided between every three (3) parking bays. Individual permanent planter areas (minimum size of 8 feet 6 inches by
17 feet) are required for interior trees with a minimum caliper of three inches (3"), which shall be of a variety which do not drop a messy fruit (see
village of Oak Brook public works construction standards for list of appropriate trees).
D. Landscape Plans: Complete detailed landscaping plans shall be submitted for approval showing type, Latin and common names, size and location of
planting material.
E. Lighting: Illumination of an off street parking area shall be arranged so as not to project direct rays of light or glare into any roadway or adjacent
property. Intensity of illumination of parking areas shall be in accordance with the village of Oak Brook public works construction standards. All lighting
for business and office uses adjacent to residential districts shall be extinguished or reduced in intensity, not later than thirty (30) minutes after the
close of business of the use being served.
F. Disposal Of Storm Water: Adequate provision shall be made for the management of storm water in accordance with village standards so that such
water shall not flow into adjacent property or onto or across sidewalks in a quantity or manner that would be detrimental thereto or inconvenient to
persons using the sidewalks.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 391/438
G. Permanent Curbing: Continuous permanent concrete curbing conforming to the village of Oak Brook public works construction standards shall be
provided adjacent to all driveway, loading and parking pavement associated with nonresidential uses.
H. Striping And Traffic Circulation: Parking spaces shall be delineated by a single white or yellow line. For one-way movements along aisles and
driveways, direction of movement shall be indicated by pavement markings or directional signs or both as determined by the village.
I. Pedestrian Safety: In order to ensure pedestrian safety, where parking stalls are not aligned perpendicular to the primary pedestrian objective or where
pedestrians will be required tocross parking aisles, a pedestrian walkway at least five feet (5') wide and clearly indicated by pavement markings shall
be provided at intervals not to exceed two hundred feet (200').
J. Parking Structures:
1. Landscaping And Screening: All parking structures shall be landscaped (which includes 1 or more berms) pursuant to a landscape plan prepared by
a landscape architect to screen substantially the first level from adjacent streets and other uses. For any parking structure that is four (4) floors or
less in height, the landscaped area must be a minimum of ten feet (10') in depth but must average fifteen (15) in depth for all screening. For any
parking structure that is in excess of four (4) floors, the landscaped area must be a minimum of twenty feet (20') in depth. Any approved landscape
plan required for screening of a parking structure must incorporate evergreens within the plantings and include a maintenance schedule to ensure
that any damaged or dead trees, shrubs or ground cover shall be replaced promptly. Regular maintenance of these landscaped areas shall also be
required.
2. Architecture/Design: All exterior walls of such structures, which are visible from adjacent roadways, shall be finished with a material to maintain a
"common architectural character", as defined in section 13-8-4 of this title, with the principal building. Maintaining common architectural character
between the parking structure and the principal building(s) shall be judged in terms of: building form and materials; the pattern, size, shape, and
number of window openings; the glazing or screening of window openings; and surface treatments such as cornices, moldings, reveals and sills.
3. Lighting: Parking structures with light standards on the top floor of the structure shall be located in the center aisle of the deck and shall be of
appropriate design and scale. Low profile lighting should be used around the perimeter of the parking structure and all internal/external light sources
shall be properly screened from view to minimize glare on adjacent property. (Ord. G-687, 10-23-2001)
13-12-5: OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES REQUIRED:
There shall be provided for each structure and use hereafter erected, structurally altered, or enlarged, a minimum number of off-street parking spaces in
accordance with the following:
Dwelling And Lodging Uses:
Hotels 1 parking space for each lodging room, 1 parking space for each dwelling unit, and
1 parking space for each 100 square feet of retail sales, meeting area and dining
area.
Single-family attached and detached dwellings 2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit.
Assisted living units 0.5 parking spaces per dwelling unit.
Theaters, Schools, Institutions, Auditoriums Or Other Places Of Assembly:
Churches, chapels, temples and synagogues 1 parking space for each 4 seats.
Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations 1 parking space for every 100 square feet of floor space, or part thereof.
Colleges, universities and fine art schools For classroom and administration buildings, 1 parking space for each 2 employees
who are required to work during hours of normal operation, plus 1 parking space
for each 3 students, in accordance with designed seating capacity of classroom
facilities.
Gymnasiums, stadiums, meeting halls, convention and
exhibition halls
1 parking space for each 4 seats in accordance with designed seating capacity.
Hospitals 1 parking space for every 500 square feet of floor area, or part thereof.
Libraries, museums and art galleries 1 parking space for every 500 square feet of floor area, or part thereof.
Sanitariums, health resorts, institutions for the aged,
daycare centers, and nursing homes
1 parking space for every 1,000 square feet of floor area plus 1 space for every
employee. Adequate stacking will also be provided for drop-off areas per the
review and approval of the village engineer.
Schools:
Commercial or trade, music, dance and business 1 parking space for every 250 square feet of floor area, or part thereof.
High 1 parking space for each 6 students, plus 1 parking space for each faculty member
and other full-time and part-time employees.
Elementary and junior high 1 parking space for each faculty member, plus 1 for each other full-time employee.
Theaters, auditoriums and other places of public assembly
accessory to schools and other institutional establishments
1 parking space for each 2.5 seats.
Recreation Uses, Commercial Or Noncommercial:
Bowling alleys and arcades of floor area, or part thereof. 1 parking space for every 200 square feet
Golf courses 60 parking spaces for every 9 holes plus 1 parking space for each 250 square feet
devoted to retail sales, restaurant use or meeting space.
Health salons and skating rinks, commercial 1 parking space for every 100 square feet of floor area, or part thereof.
Parks, playgrounds, outdoor and indoor recreation 1 parking space for every 10,000 square feet of area.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 392/438
Swimming pools, commercial 1 parking space for every 75 square feet of surface water area when filled.
Business, Commercial And Industrial Use:
Appliance stores, motor vehicle sales establishments and
establishments for repair of household equipment and
furniture
1 parking space for every 200 square feet of floor area or part thereof.
Car wash (full service) 1 parking space for each 1.5 employees plus 20 stacking spaces.
Car wash (not full service including self-service) 1 parking space for each 1.5 employees plus 10 stacking spaces for vehicles that
can be accommodated at full occupancy.
Automobile service stations 1 parking space for each island of gasoline pumps, plus 2 for each service bay.
Banks and other financial institutions 1 parking space for every 250 square feet of floor area, or part thereof.
Barbershops and beauty parlors 3 parking spaces for each operator's chair.
Furniture stores 1 parking space for every 400 square feet of floor area or part thereof. As used in
this listing, "furniture store" shall mean establishments classified under standard
industrial classification (SIC) 5712 as primarily engaged in the retail sale of
household furniture with only incidental sales of:
A. Floor coverings;
B. Draperies, curtains and upholstery materials;
C. Miscellaneous home furnishings; and
D. Consumer audio and video electronic equipment but only as part of "home
entertainment centers" which contain furniture as well as electronic components,
but no significant sale of any other products or materials.
Manufacturing, fabricating, processing, storing, cleaning,
testing, assembly, repairing and service establishments (as
permitted in office-research-assembly districts)
1 parking space for each 1.5 employees as related to the working period when the
maximum number of persons are employed on the premises, or 1 for each 800
square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
Medical and dental clinics and offices of physicians and
dentists
1 space for each 200 square feet of floor area.
Offices, business, professional, administrative and public
(other than medical and dental clinics, and offices of
physicians and dentists)
1 parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area.
Public utility, governmental service and transportation uses 1 parking space for each 2 employees.
Restaurants with a drive-through in an ORA-2 zoning district
located within 1,000 feet of office buildings containing a
minimum aggregate of 250,000 square feet at the time of
initial restaurant construction
1 parking space for every 100 square feet of floor area.
Restaurants, with drive-through 1 parking space for every 662/3 feet of floor area.
Restaurants, without drive-through 1 parking space for every 100 square feet of floor area, or part thereof.
Theaters, except open air drive-ins 1 parking space for each 2.5 seats.
Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors 1 parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area.
Warehouse, storage, wholesale and mail order
establishments
4 plus 1 parking space for each 1,500 square feet of floor area over 4,500 square
feet, or 1 parking space for each 1.5 employees, whichever is greater.
B2 Regional Shopping Center Districts:
With a lot area of not more than 40 acres Parking spaces and aisles not less in area than 21/4 times the floor area of
buildings constructed.
With a lot area of 40 acres to 60 acres Not less in area than 17/8 times the gross floor area of buildings constructed.
With a lot area of 60 acres or more Not less in area than 11/2 times the gross floor area of buildings constructed.
Determination Of Unspecified Off Street Parking Facilities:
For permitted or special uses not listed above, the community development director shall determine the required number of off street parking
spaces by comparing the proposed use against the most similar use listed in this title and requiring that particular parking ratio.
(Ord. G-687, 10-23-2001; Ord. G-758, 8-24-2004)
13-12-6: HANDICAP PARKING:
See chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. G-687, 10-23-2001; Ord. G-695, 3-26-2002)
13-12-7: OFF STREET LOADING REGULATIONS:
There shall be provided off street loading berths not less than the minimum requirements specified in this section in connection with any structure which is
to be erected or substantially altered, and which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles in accordance
with the following:
A. Location:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 393/438
1. In all O districts, all accessory off street loading berths shall be on the same lot as the principal use and they shall face only interior lot lines. Open
off street loading berths shall be located only at the rear of the building and shall be not less than one hundred feet (100') from an adjoining
residence district boundary and such off street loading berths shall be effectively screened therefrom by a wall or fence, of architectural design
consistent with the principal building on the lot, not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height additionally screened by a planted
earth berm, densely planted shrubs or trees, or a combination of both.
2. In the B2 zoning district, off street loading berths may face perimeter or boundary streets if said loading berths are screened by a stone or masonry
wall at least eight feet (8') in height. No off street loading berths shall be permitted within five hundred feet (500') of a boundary street, unless such
loading berths are screened and are located at the rear of the building.
3. In B1, B3 and B4 zoning districts, all loading berths shall be at the rear of the building facing an interior lot line. If the rear of the building faces a lot
line fronting on a street, loading berths shall be enclosed by a wall of at least eight feet (8') high or shall be completely enclosed within a building.
Where the rear of the building faces a lot line which is also a residence district zoning line, loading berths shall be set back at least one hundred feet
(100') from said lot line and residence district boundary, and:
a. Completely enclosed within a building, or
b. Enclosed by a wall or fence not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height, or
c. Effectively screened by a planted earth berm, densely planted shrubs or trees, or a combination of both.
B. Size: Unless otherwise specified in this title, a required offstreet loading berth shall be at least twelve feet (12') in width and at least fifty five feet (55') in
length, exclusive of access drives, aisles, ramps, maneuvering space, columns, office and work areas, and shall have a vertical clearance of not less
than fourteen feet (14').
C. Access: Each required off street loading berth shall have an adjacent open paved area, other than a street or public way, of adequate size and so
located as to provide for all required maneuvering for truck access to the loading berth. Such areas and related access drives shall be in accordance
with the regulations set forth in subsections 13-12-3C and E of this chapter and other applicable sections of this title and shall provide sufficient and
adequate width and radii for a fifty five foot (55') long tractor semitrailer combination.
D. Surfacing: All open off street loading berths, access drives, aisles, and maneuvering spaces shall be improved in accordance with the village of Oak
Brook public works construction standards.
E. Repair And Service: No storage of any kind nor motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted within any required loading berth.
F. Use: Space allocated to any off street loading berth shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off street parking
facilities or portions thereof.
G. Required Berths:
1. The minimum number of off street loading berths accessory to office uses hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged in all business and
office-research-assembly districts shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
Floor Area Of Establishments
(Square Feet)
Required
Number
5,000 to 25,000 1
25,001 to 200,000 2
For each additional 200,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof, over 200,000 square feet of gross floor area: 1 additional loading berth.
2. The minimum number of off street loading berths accessory to nonoffice uses hereafter erected, structurally altered, or enlarged in all business and
office-research-assembly districts shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
Floor Area Of Establishments
(Square Feet)
Required
Number
5,000 to 25,000 1
25,001 to 40,000 2
40,001 to 100,000 3
For each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof, over 100,000 square feet of floor area: 1 additional loading berth. (Ord. G-687,
10-23-2001; Ord. G-750, 6-8-2004)
13-12-8: PARKING FOR DAMAGED OR DESTROYED USES:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 394/438
When any conforming or nonconforming use or structure which is in existence on the effective date hereof is restored and continued in operation after
being damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or other cause, to the extent that the cost of restoration does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of
the assessed valuation, not less than the off street parking or loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage or destruction
must be provided. However, in no case shall it be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of those required by this chapter
for equivalent new uses or construction. (Ord. G-687, 10-23-2001)
Chapter 13
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
13-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming uses, buildings and structures, and to specify those circumstances and
conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses shall be eliminated. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-575, 9-24-1996)
13-13-2: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE:
Any building, structure or use which existed lawfully at the time of the adoption of this Title, and which remains or becomes nonconforming upon the
adoption of this Title, or of any subsequent amendment thereto, may be continued only in accordance with the following regulations:
A. Repairs And Alterations: Ordinary repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or structure, provided that no structural alterations
shall be made in or to such building or structure, all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, except
those required by law, or except to make the building or structure and use thereof conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Ordinary repairs and alterations shall be determined by the Director of Community Development and shall include, among other things the
replacement of storage tanks where the safety of operation of the installation requires such.
B. Additions And Enlargements:
1. A nonconforming building or structure all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is
located shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such nonconforming building or structure, and use thereof, is made to conform to all
the regulations of the district in which it is located.
2. A nonconforming building or structure which is nonconforming only as to bulk, may be added to or enlarged, provided such additions or enlargement
conforms to all regulations of the district in which it is located.
C. Moving: No building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location unless every portion of suchbuilding or structure, and the use
thereof, is made to conform to all regulations of the district in which the moved building is located.
D. Restoration Of Damaged Nonconforming Buildings Or Structures: A building, structure or portion thereof, all or substantially all of which is designed or
intended for a use which is not permitted in the district in which it is located, and which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God
to the extent that the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was before the occurrence will exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total cost of
reconstructing the entire building or structure, shall not be restored unless said building or structure and the use thereof shall conform to all regulations
of the district in which it is located. In the event that such damage or destruction is less than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of reconstructing the entire
building or structure, no repairs or construction for restoration shall be made unless such work is started within one year from the date of the partial
destruction and is diligently prosecuted to completion.
E. Discontinuance Of Use Of Nonconforming Building Or Structure: A building, structure, or portion thereof, all or substantially all of which is designed or
intended for a use which is not permitted in the district in which it is located, and in which the use has ceased by discontinuance or abandonment, on
the effective date of this Title or thereafter is abandoned and remains unoccupied, or is not used for a continuous period of one year, shall not
thereafter be occupied or used, except by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
F. Change Of Use In Nonconforming Building Or Structure: The nonconforming use of a building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or
intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, may be changed to a use permitted in the district in which the building or structure
is located.
G. Nonconforming Use Of Conforming Buildings Or Structures: The existing nonconforming use of a part or all of a conforming building or structure may
be continued subject to the following provisions:
1. The nonconforming use of a part of such building or structure shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such building or structure,
nor changed to any other nonconforming use.
2. If a nonconforming use of such a building or structure is discontinued, or abandoned for a period of six (6) consecutive months, it shall not be
renewed, and any subsequent use of such building or structure shall conform to the use regulations of the district in which the premises are located.
H. Nonconforming Use Of Land: The nonconforming use of land not involving a building or structure, or in connection with which any building or structure
thereon is incidental or accessory to the principal use of land, may be continued subject to the following provisions:
1. Such nonconforming use shall not be expanded or extended beyond the area it occupies.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 395/438
2. If such a nonconforming use of land is discontinued or abandoned for a period of six (6) consecutive months, it shall not thereafter be renewed, and
subsequent use of land shall conform to the regulations of the district in which the land is located.
3. No nonconforming use of land shall be changed to another nonconforming use.
4. Where the nonconforming use of land is accessory to the nonconforming use of a building or structure, it shall be discontinued on the same date on
which the nonconforming use of the building or structure is discontinued. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-368, 10-22-1985; Ord. G-568, 4-1-1996;
Ord. G-575, 9-24-1996)
Chapter 14
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
13-14-1: DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT:
The director of community development shall enforce this title, and in furtherance of his authority shall:
A. Determine conformance of applications for building permits with regulations of this title.
B. Issue all zoning certificates, following approval as required in this title, and make and maintain records thereof.
C. Issue building permits.
D. Issue all certificates of occupancy, and make and maintain records thereof.
E. Issue permits for temporary parking and use of trailers.
F. Authorize, in writing, changes in residence districts signs that are more than six (6) square feet in area.
G. Conduct inspections of uses of land and structures in accordance with due process of law to determine compliance with the terms of this title.
H. Maintain permanent and current records of the administration and enforcement of this title, including, but not limited to, applications, processing and
decisions for all amendments, variations and appeals, and chart and designate each: 1) district line amendment; and 2) special use on the zoning
district map.
I. Provide and maintain a public information bureau relative to all matters pertaining to this title.
J. Receive, file and forward to the zoning board of appeals all applications for variations, appeals of other matters on which the village board is required to
act under this title.
K. Forward to the village clerk all applications initially filed with the director of community development for amendments, and other matters necessary
under this title upon which the village board of trustees is required to act.
L. Provide such clerical and technical assistance as may be required by the zoning board of appeals in the exercise of its duties. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-14-2: ZONING CERTIFICATES:
A. Zoning Certificates Required:
1. Except as hereinafter provided, no permit pertaining to the use of land or permit required by building codes shall be issued by any officer,
department or employee of the village, unless the applications for such permits have been examined by the director of community development and
he has affixed thereon certifications indicating that the applications comply with the provisions of this title.
2. An application for a zoning certificate for a structure and the use thereof or a land use which requires compliance with performance standards set
forth in general regulations of the office-research-assembly districts1 shall have affixed to it the certification of an architect or a structural engineer
registered in the State of Illinois. Such certification shall state that the structure and the use thereof, or the use of land when no structure is involved,
complies with all provisions of this Title pertaining to such performance standards. The Director of Community Development shall, upon receipt of
such application, approve and authorize the issuance of a zoning certificate, provided there is compliance with all other provisions of this Title.
Within fifteen (15) days after the date of such approval, the Director of Community Development shall examine said application and if, in his opinion,
the structure and use thereof, or use of land not involving a structure, does not in fact comply with such performance standards regulations, he shall
advise such architect, or structural engineer, in writing, of his findings, stating the reason or reasons therefor. Failure of the architect or structural
engineer, to submit additional information or make revisions in the application necessary to comply with performance standards within thirty (30)
days of such notification shall be cause for revocation of the zoning certificate.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 396/438
B. Certificate Of Occupancy:
1. No structure erected or altered hereafter shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy
shall have been issued by the Director of Community Development stating that the structure complies with all the building and health laws and
ordinances and with the provisions of this Title. No change of use shall be made in any structure or part thereof now or hereafter erected or altered
without a permit having been issued by the Director of Community Development, and no permit shall be issued to make such change unless it is in
conformity with the provisions of this Title.
2. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the continuance of the present occupancy or use of any existing structure, except as may be necessary for the
safety of life and property.
3. Application of a certificate of occupancy shall be made coincident with the application for a building permit and such certificate shall be issued within
ten (10) days after the erection or alteration of such structure has been completed. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the
Director of Community Development and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having proprietary or possessory interest in the
structure affected. A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged for each original certificate and one dollar for each copy thereof. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-
1966; Ord. G-203, 12-14-1976)
13-14-3: FILING PLANS:
All applications for zoning certificates and building permits shall be accompanied by plans in triplicate, including landscaping plans where required in ORA
and O3, drawn to scale, not less than one foot equal to one-tenth of an inch (1/10" = 1'), showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built
upon, the exact size, area and location of the lot, of the structures and accessory structures existing, and the lines within which the structure shall be
erected or altered, the existing and intended use of each structure or part thereof, the number of dwelling units or lodging rooms a residential structure is
designed to accommodate, the design and location of off-street parking facilities, vehicular drives, and outdoor lighting, and such other information with
regard to the lot and neighboring lots and performance standards as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this Title.
Applications involving single-family attached and semi-detached dwellings and multiple-family dwellings shall also be accompanied by architectural
drawings showing all elevations and indicating building materials to be used on the exterior of the structure. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-14-4: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY2:
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby designated as the proper commission or committee to publish notices as required by statute and these zoning
regulations pertaining to proposed amendments to this Title and to make a written report and recommendation to the Board of Trustees on any such
proposed amendment.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby invested with the following authority and jurisdiction:
1. To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Director of Community Development or other
authorized officials of the Village having jurisdiction under this Title.
2. To hear applications for variations from the terms provided in this Code in the manner and subject to the standards set forth in this Chapter.
3. To hold public hearings in matters pertaining to applications for amendments and special uses.
4. To hear all other matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under this Title.
5. Submit reports to the Board of Trustees setting forth its findings and recommendations in the manner prescribed in this Chapter. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-
1966; Ord. G-116, 4-14-1970)
13-14-5: APPEALS:
A. Authority: The Zoning Board of Appeals3 shall hear and decide appeals from an administrative order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the Director of Community Development or other authorized official of the Village having jurisdiction under this Title.
B. Initiation:
1. An appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or commission of the Village.
The appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the Board by a general rule by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is
taken and with the Board a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the
Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the appeal action is taken.
2. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Zoning
Board of Appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in this certificate a stay would, in his opinion
cause imminent peril to life or property. In this event the proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the Board or a court of record on
application of and on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause being shown.
C. Processing:
1. An appeal shall be filed with the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall forward the appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals for processing in
accordance with the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
2. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to parties and shall decide the
appeal within reasonable time. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement or decision or determination
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 397/438
as in its opinion ought to be made on the premises and to that end has all the powers of the official from whom the appeal is taken.
D. Decisions: All decisions, after hearing of the Zoning Board of Appeals on appeals from an administrative order, requirement, decision or determination
of the Director of Community Development or other authorized official of the Village, shall, in all instances, be final administrative determinations and
shall be subject to judicial review only in accordance with applicable statutes of the State. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-14-6: VARIATIONS:
A. Authority: The Board of Trustees shall decide all applications for variations of the provisions of this Title after a public hearing held before the Zoning
Board of Appeals on such notice as shall be required by the Illinois Compiled Statutes. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold public hearings upon
all applications for variations and shall report its recommendations to the Board of Trustees as to whether a requested variation would be in harmony
with its general purpose and intent, and shall recommend a variation only where it shall have made findings of fact specifying the reason or reasons
for recommending the variations. Such findings shall be based upon the standards prescribed in subsection D of this Section. No variation shall be
granted by the Board of Trustees without such findings of fact. In the case of a variation where the Zoning Board of Appeals fails to recommend the
variation, it can only be adopted by ordinance with the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Trustees.
B. Initiation: An application for a variation shall be in triplicate and may be made by any governmental office, department, board, bureau or commission, or
by any person having a freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, a contractual interest which may become a freehold
interest, or any exclusive possessory interest applicable to the land, or land and improvements described in the application for a variation.
C. Processing: An application for a variation shall be filed with the Village Clerk who shall forward one copy of such application to the Zoning Board of
Appeals for processing in accordance with applicable statutes of the State and one copy to the Board of Trustees.
D. Standards:
1. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not recommend a variation of the provisions of this Title as authorized in this Section unless it shall have made
findings of fact based upon the evidence presented to it on the following specific issues that:
a. The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations governing
the district in which it is located.
b. The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances.
c. The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.
2. For the purpose of supplementing the above standards, the Zoning Board of Appeals, in making the determination whether there are practical
difficulties or particular hardships, shall also take into consideration the extent to which the following facts, favorable to the applicant, have been
established by the evidence that:
a. The particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of the specific property involved would bring a particular hardship upon
the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the strict letter of the regulation were to be carried out.
b. The condition upon which the petition for variation is based would not be applicable generally to the other property within the same zoning
classification.
c. The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in
which the property is located.
d. The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of fire, or
otherwise endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.
e. That the purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to make more money out of the property.
f. That the alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property.
3. The Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend and the Board of Trustees may require such conditions and restrictions upon the premises
benefitted by a variation as may be necessary to comply with the standards set forth in this Section to reduce or minimize the injurious effect of such
variation upon other property in the neighborhood, and to implement the general purpose and intent of this Title.
E. Unauthorized Variations: The variation procedure shall in no case be used to accomplish a result which could otherwise be achieved by a rezoning of
the property involved, such as, but not limited to, establishment or expansion of a use not permitted in a residence district; authorizing the construction
of residences in other than residence districts; nor authorizing other than single-family detached residences in the R1, R2, R3 and R4 Districts.
F. Reapplications: Any person having been denied a variation to the provisions of this Title respecting a specific parcel of property may not reapply for a
like variation on said real property until the period of one year has elapsed since the denial of the application for variation by the Village President and
Board of Trustees. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-137, 9-14-1971)
13-14-7: PLAN COMMISSION JURISDICTION4:
The Plan Commission of the Village, which has been duly established with functions as prescribed by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, shall have the
following duties under this Title:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 398/438
A. Receive from the Village Clerk copies of applications for proposed amendments and thereafter may submit its recommendations thereon to the Zoning
Board of Appeals and Board of Trustees.
B. Receive from the Director of Community Development copies of applications for proposed special uses and thereafter submit its recommendations
thereon to the Director and Board of Trustees.
C. Act on all other matters which are referred to it as required by the provisions of this Title.
D. Review, from time to time, the provisions of this Title and to make reports of its recommendations with respect to proposed amendments to the Board
of Trustees. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966)
13-14-8: AMENDMENTS:
A. Authority: This Title may be amended from time to time by ordinance in accordance with applicable Illinois statutes. No vote shall be taken upon the
adoption of a proposed amendment by the Village Board of Trustees until after a public hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals and a report of its
findings and recommendations has been submitted to the Board of Trustees along with the recommendation of the Plan Commission.
B. Initiation Of Amendment: Amendments may be proposed by the Village Board of Trustees, Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals, and by any
person having a freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest
or any exclusive possessory interest which is specifically enforceable on the land which is described in the proposal for an amendment.
C. Processing:
1. A proposal for an amendment shall be filed with the Village Clerk and thereafter entered into the records of the first meeting thereafter of the Board
of Trustees.
2. A copy of such proposal shall be forwarded by the Village Clerk to the Zoning Board of Appeals with a request to hold a public hearing and submit
to the Board of Trustees a report of its findings and recommendations. Such public hearing shall be held upon notice as required by Illinois Compiled
Statutes.
3. The Village Clerk shall also transmit a copy of such proposal to the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall submit an opinion report relative
to such proposed amendment to the Zoning Board of Appeals and Board of Trustees.
D. Decisions: The Board of Trustees, upon report of the Plan Commission, if such report is made, and the report of the Zoning Board of Appeals, and
without further public hearing, may vote upon the adoption of any proposed amendment in accordance with applicable Illinois Compiled Statutes, or
may refer it back to the Boards for further consideration.
E. Reapplications: Any person having been denied an amendment to this Title respecting a specific parcel of property may not reapply for a like
amendment on said real property until the period of one year has elapsed since the denial of the application for amendment by the President and
Board of Trustees. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-137, 9-14-1971)
13-14-9: SPECIAL USES:
A. Purpose: The development and execution of this Title is based upon the division of the Village into districts, within any one of which the use of land and
buildings and the bulk and location of buildings or structures, as related to the land, are essentially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are
special uses which, because of their unique character, cannot be properly permitted in particular districts without consideration, in each case, of the
impact of those uses upon neighboring lands and upon public need for the particular use or the particular location. Such special uses fall into two (2)
categories:
1. Uses operated by public agency or publicly-regulated utilities, or uses traditionally affected with a public interest.
2. Uses entirely private in character, but of such a nature that the operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon
neighboring property or public facilities such as, but not limited to, single-family attached and semi-detached dwellings, horizontal condominiums
and other residential developments.
B. Authority: Special uses shall be authorized or denied by the village board in accordance with the statutes of the state applicable to amendments of this
title, and the regulations and conditions set forth in this title for special uses.
No application for a special use shall be acted upon by the village board until after:
1. A written report is prepared and forwarded to the board of appeals and the village board by the plan commission in a manner prescribed herein for
amendments to this title; and
2. A public hearing has been held by the zoning board of appeals, after due notice by publication as provided by the applicable statutes of the state for
amendments and upon a report of the plan commission to the board of trustees, if such a report is made.
C. Initiation: An application for a special use may be made by any person, firm or corporation or by any office, department, board, bureau or commission
requesting or intending to request a zoning certificate.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 399/438
D. Processing: An application for a special use, in such form and accompanied by such information as shall be established from time to time by the plan
commission, shall be filed with the village clerk and thereafter processed in the manner prescribed theretofore for applications and amendments.
Special use applications may be processed simultaneously with requests for amendment of this title.
E. Decisions: The village board, upon report of the zoning board of appeals and the plan commission, and without further hearing, may authorize or deny
an application for a special use in accordance with the statutes of the state applicable to amendments, or may refer it back to the board of appeals and
the plan commission for further consideration.
No special use shall be authorized by the village board unless the special use:
1. Is of the type described in subsection A1 of this section, is deemed necessary for the public convenience at that location;
2. Is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected; and
3. Would not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood in which it is located.
F. Conditions: The plan commission and zoning board of appeals may recommend, and the village board may provide, such conditions and restrictions
upon the construction, location and operation of a special use, including, but not limited to, provisions for off street parking and loading as may be
deemed necessary to promote the general objectives of this title and to minimize the injury to the value of the property in the neighborhood. (Ord. G-
60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-66, 12-19-1966)
13-14-10: FEES:
Fees for any relief under this title shall be as otherwise established by separate ordinance. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-132, 5-25-1971; Ord. G-289, 3-
24-1981)
13-14-11: VIOLATION, PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the provisions of this title shall, upon
conviction, be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
B. The director of community development is hereby designated and authorized to enforce this title. However, it shall also be the duty of all officers,
citizens and employees of the village, particularly of all members of the police and fire departments, to assist the director of community development
by reporting to him any new construction, reconstruction, improper land uses, or upon seeming violations of this title. (Ord. G-60, 3-22-1966; Ord. G-
233, 5-31-1978; 2000 Code)
13-14-12: PUBLIC HEARING NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
All applicants filing an application with the village of Oak Brook for a map amendment, variation or special use as provided for in this title shall provide
notice of all public hearings related to their application in the following manner:
A. All applicants shall provide notice of any public hearing related to their application to all record owners (as required by the Illinois municipal code) and
to the general public in the manner and in the time frame as provided in division 13 (zoning) of article 11 of the Illinois municipal code5.
B. In addition to the notice required by the Illinois municipal code, a sign shall be placed on the subject property informing the general public of an
upcoming public hearing in accordance with the following requirements:
1. Such sign shall be posted on the subject property at a location oriented to and readable from the nearest adjacent street or roadway. However,
where a parcel abuts two (2) or more streets or roadways, one such sign oriented to and readable from each abutting street or roadway is required.
2. If no public road abuts the property, the sign shall be placed on the property in question in such a position as may be most readily seen by the
public.
3. Public notification signs shall be posted not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing and shall not be removed until after the public
hearing has been completed unless otherwise directed to do so by the community development director. The applicant shall remove all signs within
forty eight (48) hours after the closing of the public hearing.
4. The public notification signs shall be weatherproof and measure no smaller than two feet by three feet (2' x 3') or be no larger than twelve (12)
square feet and shall be mounted at least three feet (3') above the ground.
5. For consistency, said sign shall read as follows:
NOTICE
PUBLIC HEARING FOR THIS PARCEL
WILL BE HELD
For more information call:
Village of Oak Brook 630-368-5103
6. Any applicant requesting the subdivision of a parcel shall also provide notice by posting a sign on the subject property in a manner consistent with
the requirements for posting public hearing signs. (Ord. G-764, 11-9-2004; per correspondence dated 2-20-2009)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 400/438
Chapter 15
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
13-15-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The purpose of the regulations, standards, and criteria contained in this chapter is to provide an alternate zoning procedure under which land can be
developed or redeveloped with innovation, imagination, and creative architectural design when sufficiently justified under the provisions of this chapter.
The objective of the planned development is to encourage a higher level of design and amenity than is possible to achieve under standard zoning
regulations. The end result is intended to be a product which fulfills the objectives of the village of Oak Brook commercial areas revitalization master plan
and planning policies of the village while allowing flexibility from the standard application of the use and bulk regulations of the zoning regulations. The
planned development is intended to permit and encourage flexibility and to accomplish the following specific purposes, among others:
A. To stimulate creative approaches to the commercial, nonsingle-family residential, and commercial/mixed use development of land.
B. To provide more efficient use of land.
C. To preserve natural features and provide open space areas and recreation areas in excess of those required under standard zoning regulations.
D. To develop and implement new approaches to the living environment through variety in type, design and layout of buildings, transportation systems,
and public facilities.
E. To unify building and structures through design.
F. To promote long term planning pursuant to the village's commercial areas revitalization master plan, which will allow harmonious and compatible land
uses or combination of uses with surrounding areas. (Ord. G-890, 7-14-2009)
13-15-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Except as provided for in subsection 13-15-5E of this chapter, no new commercial, office, or mixed use development construction within the planned
development overlay district shall be permitted except as approved as a planned development in accordance with this chapter; provided, however, that
a stand alone project for construction of outdoor dining facilities or for drive-through facilities will not require a planned development under this chapter.
B. Each planned development shall be presented and reviewed on its own merits. It shall not be sufficient justification for approval of a planned
development to rely on an already existing planned development, except to the extent that the existing planned development and the proposed
planned development are part of an approved unified, phased, or master development plan.
C. The burden of providing evidence and persuasion that any planned development is necessary and desirable shall in every case rest with the applicant.
D. Buildings and uses or combinations of uses within a planned development shall be limited solely to those approved as part of the ordinance granting a
planned development; provided, however, that any buildings and uses or combinations of uses in compliance with a unified, phased, or master
development plan approved as part of the ordinance granting a planned development may be approved by the corporate authorities.
E. To the extent provided in the ordinance approving a proposed planned development, the proposed planned development need not comply with the
density, dimension, area, bulk, use, and other zoning regulations that, but for the provisions of this chapter, would otherwise apply to the property on
which the proposed planned development is intended. Modifications and departures from the standard zoning provisions may be provided in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and to the extent that they will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals,
comfort, or general welfare. (Ord. G-890, 7-14-2009; Ord. G-904, 11-10-2009)
13-15-3: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Planned Developments Are Not Permitted As Of Right: Planned developments shall be approved by the village only in direct response to the accrual of
tangible public benefits from the planned development to the village and its residents, along with the neighborhood and area in which the planned
development is proposed. These benefits shall include, without limitation, exceptional amenities, landscape features, architectural or site design, or the
conservation of special manmade or natural features of the site, all as more specifically set forth in the standards set forth in subsection B of this
section.
B. General Design Standards: No application for a planned development shall be approved by the corporate authorities unless the proposed planned
development satisfies the standards set forth in this subsection B and subsection C of this section. All of these standards shall not be regarded as
inflexible, but shall be used as a framework by the village to test the quality of the amenities, benefits to the community, and design and desirability of
the proposal.
1. Commercial Areas Revitalization Master Plan: The planned development shall not be inconsistent with the planning policies, goals, objectives, and
provisions of the village's commercial areas revitalization master plan. A planned development must also not be inconsistent with the intent and
spirit of the village of Oak Brook comprehensive plan.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 401/438
2. Public Welfare: The planned development shall be designed, located, and proposed to be operated and maintained so that it will not impair an
adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property and will not substantially increase the danger of fire or otherwise endanger the public health,
safety and welfare.
3. Impact On Other Property: The planned development shall not be unnecessarily injurious to the use or enjoyment of other property in the
neighborhood for the purposes permitted pursuant to the applicable zoning district, shall not prevent the normal and orderly development and
improvement of surrounding properties for permitted uses, shall not be inconsistent with the community character of the neighborhood, shall not
alter the essential character of the neighborhood, and shall not substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood, or be
incompatible with other property in the immediate vicinity. The uses permitted in a planned development must be of a type and so located so as to
exercise no undue detrimental influence upon surrounding properties. The planned development must also address compliance with the village's
noise, lighting, and other performance standards.
4. Impact On Public Facilities And Resources: The planned development shall be designed so that adequate utilities, road access, drainage, and other
necessary facilities will be provided to serve the development. The planned development shall include such impact donations as may be reasonably
determined by the corporate authorities. The required impact donations, including, without limitation, obligations under the village's subdivision
regulations, shall be calculated in reasonable proportion to the impact of the planned development on public facilities and infrastructure to the extent
permitted by law.
5. Archaeological, Historical Or Cultural Impact: The planned development shall not substantially and adversely affect a known archaeological,
historical, or cultural resource located on or off of the parcel proposed for development.
6. Parking And Traffic: The planned development shall have or make adequate provision to provide ingress and egress to the proposed use in a
manner that minimizes traffic congestion in the public streets, provides appropriate cross access to adjacent properties and parking areas, and
provides adequate access for emergency vehicles.
7. Adequate Buffering: The planned development shall have adequate landscaping, public open space, and other buffering features to protect uses
within the development and surrounding properties.
8. Signage: Signage on the site of the planned development shall generally be in conformity with the village's sign regulations (chapter 11 of this title),
except as may otherwise be specifically provided in the ordinance approving a planned development.
9. Ownership/Control Area: The site of the planned development must be under ownership and/or unified control of the applicant.
10. Need: A clear showing of need for the planned development must be made by means of an economic feasibility, land utilization and marketing
study.
11. Compliance With Subdivision Regulations And Plat Act: All planned developments, whether or not they are by definition subject to the village's
subdivision regulations or the Illinois plat act, shall comply with all standards, regulations and procedures of the village's subdivision regulations and
the plat act except as is expressly provided otherwise in this chapter, or as otherwise provided by the corporate authorities pursuant to the ordinance
approving the planned development, or the applicable sections of the village's subdivision regulations.
12. Covenants And Restrictions To Be Enforceable By Village: All covenants, deed restrictions, easements, and similar restrictions to be recorded in
connection with the planned development shall provide that they may not be modified, removed, or released without the express consent of the
corporate authorities and that they may be enforced by the village as well as by future landowners within the proposed development.
13. Security And Site Control: The planned development shall include the plans necessary to describe, establish, and maintain appropriate property
and building security and site control measures for the planned development and the property on which the planned development is located. These
plans shall also include measures to prevent adverse impacts on neighboring properties.
C. Additional Standards: In addition to the standards required in subsection B of this section, the following standards shall be considered in reviewing all
proposed and amended planned developments, particularly with regard to elements of planned development proposals that do not satisfy the
otherwise applicable provisions of the underlying zoning and subdivision regulations:
1. Integrated Design: A planned development shall be laid out and developed as a unit in accordance with an integrated overall design. This design
shall provide for safe, efficient, convenient and harmonious grouping of structures, uses and facilities, and for appropriate relation of space inside
and outside buildings to intended uses and structural features.
2. Beneficial Common Open Space: Any common open space in the planned development shall be integrated into the overall design. These open
spaces shall have a direct functional or visual relationship to the main building(s) and shall not be of isolated or leftover character. The following
would not be considered usable common open space:
a. Areas reserved for the exclusive use or benefit of an individual tenant or owner.
b. Dedicated streets, alleys and other public rights of way.
c. Vehicular drives, parking, loading and storage areas.
d. Irregular or unusable narrow strips of land.
3. Functional And Mechanical Features: Exposed storage areas, trash and garbage retainers, exposed machinery installations, service areas, truck
loading areas, utility buildings and structures, and similar accessory areas and structures shall be accounted for in the design of the planned
development and made as unobtrusive as possible. These features shall be subject to such setbacks, special planting or other screening methods
as shall reasonably be required to prevent their being incongruous with the existing or contemplated environment and the surrounding properties.
4. Visual And Acoustical Privacy: The planned development shall provide reasonable visual, and acoustical privacy. Fences, insulations, walks,
barriers and landscaping shall be used as appropriate for the protection and aesthetic enhancement of property and the privacy of its occupants,
screening of objectionable view or uses, and reduction of noises.
5. Energy Efficient Design: A planned development shall be designed with consideration given to various methods of site design and building location,
architectural design of individual structures, and landscaping design capable of reducing energy consumption within the planned development. The
applicant will be encouraged, to the extent feasible, to obtain leadership in energy and environmental design ("LEED") certification for the project. A
planned development applicant may also undertake the following:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 402/438
a. Having at least one member of the applicant's project team be a "LEED accredited professional" - a person who has received the LEED
accredited professional designation from the United States green building council ("USGBC"), the Green Building Certification Institute, or another
entity authorized by the USGBC to grant that designation.
b. Having its application materials include a "LEED checklist" developed by the U.S. green building council indicating the credits pursued and total
points anticipated for a project under the most appropriate LEED rating system, in consultation with the director of community development.
6. Drives, Parking And Circulation: Principal vehicular access shall be from dedicated public streets, and access points shall be designed to encourage
smooth traffic flow with controlled turning movements and minimum hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. With respect to vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, including walkways, interior drives and parking, special attention shall be given to location and number of access points to the
public streets, width of interior drives and access points, general interior circulation, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, adequate
provision for service by emergency vehicles, and arrangement of parking areas that are safe and convenient, and insofar as feasible, do not detract
from the design of proposed buildings and structures and the neighboring properties. To the extent practical, planned developments shall provide
connections to and from existing bike and walking paths so as to ensure a continuous route without gaps or disconnections.
7. Surface Water Drainage: Special attention shall be given to proper site surface drainage so that removal of surface waters will not adversely affect
neighboring properties or the public storm drainage system. Surface water in all paved areas shall be collected at intervals so that it will not obstruct
the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. (Ord. G-890, 7-14-2009)
13-15-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT ALLOWANCES:
Proposed site development characteristics that are not consistent with the zoning regulations otherwise applicable to the property on which a planned
development or planned development amendment is proposed, may be approved in accordance with this chapter as part of the ordinance approving the
planned development or planned development amendment. The applicant shall specifically identify each site development departure and demonstrate
how each departure will be compatible with surrounding development and is not inconsistent with the planned development standards set forth in section
13-15-3 of this chapter. Each departure shall be specifically stated and approved in the ordinance approving the planned development or planned
development amendment. Any approved departures from the otherwise applicable zoning regulations shall not be deemed a nonconformity and shall not
require a variation. (Ord. G-890, 7-14-2009)
13-15-5: PROCEDURES:
The following procedures are required to assure the orderly review of every planned development application in a timely and equitable manner:
A. Preliminary Board Review:
1. A prospective applicant, prior to meeting with village staff for a formal prefiling review, shall appear before the corporate authorities for a preliminary
board review. At a minimum, the applicant shall provide the following materials to the corporate authorities for its preliminary review: a) a preliminary
concept plan of the development, and b) a brief narrative describing the overall character, intensity, uses, and nature of the proposed planned
development. Prior to submission to the corporate authorities, the community development director will review the materials to confirm that the
materials provide sufficient information to adequately inform the corporate authorities of the nature and scope of the proposed planned
development. If sufficient information is provided, the applicant shall coordinate with the village manager to be placed on a corporate authorities
agenda and scheduled for the earliest appropriate corporate authorities meeting.
2. The purpose of the preliminary board review shall be to broadly acquaint the corporate authorities with the applicant's proposal and to provide the
applicant with any preliminary views or concerns that members of the corporate authorities may have at a time in the process when positions are still
flexible and adjustment is still possible and prior to the time when the applicant is required to expend the funds necessary to prepare the complete
documentation required for a formal application.
3. At the meeting at which the preliminary board review is conducted, any member of the corporate authorities may make any comments, suggestions
or recommendations regarding the preliminary development concept plan deemed necessary or appropriate by that member; provided, however,
that no final or binding action shall be taken with respect to any preliminary application. Any views expressed in the course of the corporate
authorities' review of any preliminary development concept plan shall be deemed to be only preliminary and advisory and only the individual views of
the member expressing them. Nothing said or done in the course of such review shall be deemed to create, or to prejudice, any rights of the
applicant or to obligate the corporate authorities, or any member of it, to approve or deny any formal application following full consideration as
required by this chapter.
B. Prefiling Review And Transmittal Of Application:
1. Conference:
a. Following the preliminary board review, a prospective applicant, prior to submitting a formal application for a planned development, shall meet for
a prefiling review conference with the village manager, the community development director, and any other village official or employee designated
by the village manager. The purpose of the conference is to assist the applicant in understanding the commercial areas revitalization master plan,
the requirements of this chapter, the zoning regulations, the site development allowances, the standards by which the application will be
evaluated, and the application requirements.
b. After reviewing the planned development process, the applicant may request a waiver of any application requirement which in the applicant's
judgment should not apply to the proposed planned development. The justification for a waiver must be that the application requirement should
not apply because it does not relate and is not necessary given the nature and scope of the proposed planned development. All requests for
application waivers shall be made in writing to the community development director prior to the submission of the formal application documents.
c. All requests for waiver shall be reviewed by the community development director, who will make a final determination regarding the waiver within
fifteen (15) working days of receipt of the request.
d. If deemed appropriate by the community development director, the applicant, prior to submitting a formal application for a planned development,
will schedule a public meeting to discuss the proposed planned development and the nature and extent of impact, if any, on area residents. If a
meeting is required, the applicant shall send a written notice of the meeting via certified mail to all taxpayers of record and residents for all
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 403/438
property within five hundred feet (500') of the proposed planned development. The notice shall be mailed not more than thirty (30) nor less than
fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the meeting. A copy of the notice and mailing list shall be provided to the community development director. A
written summary of comments made at the meeting shall be maintained and submitted by the applicant with the application.
2. Filing Of Application: Following the completion of the prefiling review conference, the applicant shall file an application for a planned development in
accordance with this chapter. The community development director shall deliver copies of the application to other appropriate village departments
for review and comment.
3. Deficiencies: The community development director shall determine whether the application is complete. If the community development director
determines that the application is not complete, then the community development director shall notify the applicant in writing of the deficiencies and
shall take no further steps to process the application until the deficiencies are remedied.
4. Report On Compliance: A copy of the complete application and a written report incorporating the comments of village staff and other agencies
regarding the compliance of the proposed planned development with the requirements and standards of this chapter shall be delivered to the
planned development commission prior to the public hearing required by subsection C of this section.
5. Determination Not Binding: Neither the community development director's determination that an application is complete nor any comment made by
the community development director or village staff at a prefiling review conference or as part of the review process shall be intended or construed
as a formal or informal recommendation for or against the approval of a proposed planned development, or any component part thereof, nor shall
they be intended or construed as a binding decision of the village, the planned development commission, or village staff.
C. Review And Action By The Planned Development Commission:
1. Upon receiving the report from the community development director, the planned development commission shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed planned development.
2. Notice of the required public hearing shall be published by the village, at the applicant's expense, not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15)
days before the scheduled hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the village and shall contain the following information:
a. The identification number designation of the application;
b. The date and time of the public hearing;
c. The location of the public hearing; and
d. The general location of the property, the legal description of the property and its street address, if applicable, and a short description of the
proposed planned development and purpose of the public hearing.
3. Notice of the required public hearing shall also be provided by the village, at the applicant's expense, by posting a sign or signs on the property not
more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. The sign shall be weatherproof and contain the information as is
required in subsection C2 of this section. Failure to post the sign(s) and/or the inadvertent removal or knocking down (by the village or others) of the
sign after posting but before the public hearing shall not invalidate, impair, or otherwise affect any planned development subsequently granted
following the public hearing, nor shall it require a postponement of the public hearing.
4. Notice of the required public hearing shall also be provided by the applicant by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, to the taxpayers of
record and owners of record of the property which is the subject of the application (if different than the applicant), and the taxpayers of record and
residents of all property within five hundred feet (500') of the subject property. The notice shall contain the information as is required in subsection
C2 of this section and shall be mailed not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing. The notice shall
also include the name and address and phone number of the applicant for the planned development.
5. The transcript of testimony, if any, the commission's minutes, all applications, requests, exhibits, and papers filed in the proceeding before the
commission, and the decision and report, or reports, of the commission shall constitute the record for that particular application.
6. The planned development commission shall review the application, the standards and requirements established by this chapter, the report of the
community development director, and any oral and written comments and testimony received by the planned development commission before and
at the public hearing. The planned development commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of the proposed
planned development.
7. Every recommendation of the commission upon any application filed pursuant to this chapter shall be by a written resolution and shall include such
findings of fact and conclusions as the commission shall deem necessary. The resolutions shall generally refer to the evidence in the record and to
the exhibits, plans, or specifications upon which the recommendation is based. The resolution shall generally specify the reason or reasons for the
recommendation and shall contain a conclusion or statement separate from the findings setting forth the recommendation of the commission. Every
resolution shall expressly set forth any limitations or conditions recommended by the commission. In order to make a recommendation to approve
(with or without conditions) or a recommendation to deny a proposed planned development or an amendment to an existing planned development,
the affirmative vote of a majority of all members of the commission then holding office shall be required.
D. Review And Action By The Corporate Authorities:
1. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the report and recommendation of the planned development commission, and without further public hearing, the
corporate authorities shall, at a minimum, commence consideration of the proposed planned development. The corporate authorities will attempt to
conclude its consideration and render a final decision as soon as possible within that sixty (60) day time period, but may extend its consideration as
necessary to allow a full and complete review and consideration of the proposed planned development. Following its consideration, the corporate
authorities shall: a) deny the application; b) refer the application back to the planned development commission for further review and, if necessary,
additional public hearings; c) postpone further consideration pending the submittal of additional information, including any application requirement
previously waived but deemed necessary by the village for its consideration; or d) adopt an ordinance approving the planned development.
2. Any action taken by the corporate authorities pursuant to subsection D1 of this section shall require the concurrence of a majority of the corporate
authorities; provided, however, that any proposed planned development that does not receive a recommendation of approval (with or without
conditions) from the planned development commission shall not be approved by the corporate authorities except by the affirmative vote of two-thirds
(2/3) of the corporate authorities.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 404/438
3. In approving a planned development, the corporate authorities may attach such conditions to the approval as it deems necessary to have the
proposed use or combination of uses meet the standards set forth in this chapter and to prevent or minimize adverse effects on other property in the
immediate vicinity. The conditions may include, but are not limited to: impact donations and other related fees or property or monetary contributions;
limitations on size, bulk, location, and setbacks; requirements for landscaping, signage, and outdoor lighting; provisions for adequate ingress and
egress; hours of operation; and such other conditions as the corporate authorities may deem necessary in furtherance of the objectives of this
chapter.
E. Exemptions: At the election of the applicant, the planned development provisions of this chapter shall not apply to an existing development or a
proposed development project that satisfies all of the underlying zoning regulations applicable to the property. In such case, the proposed
development will be subject to the processes of the village that are applicable to any new construction project. (Ord. G-890, 7-14-2009; Ord. G-904,
11-10-2009)
13-15-6: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Owner To File Application: The application for a planned development must be filed by the owner of the property on which the planned development is
proposed to be located or any person or entity having a contractual interest in the property. If the application is not filed by the owner, the owner must,
at a minimum, confirm to the village in writing that the owner has authorized the applicant to apply for the proposed planned development.
B. Information Required: Applications for a planned development shall be filed with the community development director in such form and accompanied
by such information, with sufficient copies, as shall be established from time to time by the village. Every application shall contain, at a minimum, the
following information and related data:
1. The names and addresses of the owner(s) of the subject property and the applicant(s).
2. A statement from the owner of the subject property, if not the applicant, approving of the filing of the application by the applicant.
3. A survey of, and legal description and street address for, the subject property.
4. A statement demonstrating compliance of the proposed planned development with the commercial areas revitalization master plan, and evidence of
the proposed project's compliance in specific detail with each of the standards for planned developments provided in this chapter.
5. A scaled site plan showing the existing contiguous land uses, natural topographic features, zoning districts, public thoroughfares, and transportation
and utilities.
6. A scaled site plan of the proposed planned development showing lot area, the required yards and setbacks, contour lines, common space, and the
location, floor area ratio, lot area coverage and heights of buildings and structures, number of parking spaces and loading areas.
7. Schematic drawings illustrating the design and character of the building elevations, types of construction, and floor plans for all proposed buildings
and structures. The drawings shall also include a schedule showing the number, type, and floor area for all uses or combinations of uses, and the
floor area for the entire proposed planned development.
8. A landscaping plan showing the location, size, character, and composition of vegetation and other material.
9. The substance of existing covenants, easements, and other restrictions, and any to be imposed, on the use of land, including common open space,
and buildings or structures.
10. A schedule showing the approximate date for beginning and completion of each stage of construction of the planned development.
11. A professional traffic study acceptable to the village showing the proposed traffic circulation pattern within and in the vicinity of the area of the
planned development, including the location and description of public improvements to be installed, and any streets and access easements.
12. A professional environmental impact study identifying and describing the nature and extent of noise, light, and other potential environmental
impacts associated with the planned development and the property on which the planned development is located, and the plans necessary to
address those impacts.
13. A professional economic analysis acceptable to the village, including the following:
a. The financial capability of the applicant to complete the proposed planned development;
b. Evidence of the project's economic viability; and
c. A comprehensive analysis summarizing the economic impact the proposed planned development will have upon the village.
14. Copies of all environmental impact studies as required by law.
15. An analysis setting forth the anticipated demand on all village services resulting from the proposed planned development.
16. A plan showing off site utility improvements required to serve the planned development, and a report showing the cost allocations and funding
sources for those improvements.
17. A site drainage and stormwater detention and maintenance plan for the proposed planned development.
18. A photometric/lighting plan for the proposed planned development.
19. A written summary of residents' comments pertaining to the proposed application from any public meeting or hearing held pursuant to subsection
13-15-5B or C of this chapter.
20. Plans necessary to describe, establish, and maintain appropriate property and building security and site control measures for the planned
development and the property on which the planned development is located. These plans shall also include measures to prevent adverse impacts
on neighboring properties.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 405/438
C. Fees:
1. General Fees: Each application for a planned development shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established by the corporate authorities
from time to time payable to the order of the village to defray the costs and expenses of the planned development procedures, and any other filing or
other charges established pursuant to this subsection.
2. Additional Cost Recovery: Every application filed for a planned development pursuant to this chapter that requires the village to incur third party
costs or expenses, including, without limitation, legal fees incurred by the office of the village attorney or any attorney or firm retained by the village,
shall be subject to the cost recovery fee and lien provisions set forth in this subsection. The cost recovery fee shall be in addition to the general fees.
3. Responsibility For Payment: The owner of the property that is the subject of the application and, if different, the applicant, shall be jointly and
severally liable for the payment of the general fees, the cost recovery fee, and for the cost recovery lien. By signing and authorizing the application,
the owner or applicant shall be deemed to have agreed to pay, and to have consented to, the general fees and cost recovery fee, plus any costs of
collection, that have not been paid within thirty (30) days following the mailing of a written demand for payment to the owner or applicant at the
address set forth on the application, including any additional cost recovery fees assessed herein. Any lien filed pursuant to this subsection may be
foreclosed in the manner provided for mortgages or mechanics' liens under Illinois law.
4. Recoverable Costs: For purposes of calculating the cost recovery fee and general fees, the costs incurred by the village with respect to the following
items shall be deemed to be the "actual costs" incurred by the village in processing an application for a planned development:
a. Publication and mailing of notices;
b. Court reporter and recording secretarial services;
c. Professional and technical consultant services;
d. Village attorney, or other village related attorney or law firm, consultation, meeting attendance, document preparation, and review;
e. Copy reproduction;
f. Document recordation; and
g. Inspection fees.
5. Escrow: For each application filed and processed pursuant to this chapter that requires the village to incur third party costs or expenses, an
application fee escrow account shall be established as provided below:
a. Initial Deposit: Every petition filed that requires the village to incur third party costs or expenses shall be accompanied by an initial deposit for
purposes of paying additional application fees. The amount of the initial deposit shall be determined by the village manager, and the initial deposit
and any subsequent deposit shall be placed in an application fee escrow account. No interest shall be payable on any such escrow account.
b. Draws From Escrow: From the date of filing of any application, the village shall maintain an accurate record of the actual costs of processing and
reviewing the application. The village shall, from time to time, draw funds from the escrow account established to pay costs identified in
subsection C4 of this section and shall transfer funds to the appropriate village accounts. The village shall maintain an accurate record of all
draws.
c. Additional Deposits: Should the village at any time determine that the escrow account established in connection with any application is, or is likely
to become, insufficient to pay the actual costs of processing an application, the village shall inform the applicant of that fact in writing and demand
an additional deposit in an amount deemed to be sufficient to cover foreseeable additional costs. Unless and until such additional amount is
deposited by the applicant, the village may direct that processing of the application be suspended or terminated. Any termination shall be deemed
a withdrawal of the application by the applicant.
d. Final Settlement: As soon as reasonably feasible following final action on an application, the village shall cause a final accounting to be made of
the escrow deposits made in connection with the application and the actual costs of processing the application and shall make a final charge of
costs against the escrow deposit. A copy of the accounting shall be provided to the applicant. If the amount in the escrow is insufficient to pay the
total actual costs, a written demand for payment of the balance due shall be mailed to the applicant. If any unused balance remains in the escrow
account after paying the total actual costs, that amount shall be returned to the applicant.
6. Waiver For Specified Public And Charitable Bodies: The provisions of this subsection may be waived by the corporate authorities for fees applicable
to any application filed by any public body, or any agency deriving the majority of its revenues from taxes levied within the village, or any charitable
or eleemosynary organization.
7. Condition Of All Planned Development Applications And Approvals: No application filed pursuant to this chapter shall be considered complete
unless and until all fees due pursuant to this subsection C have been paid. Every approval granted and every permit issued pursuant to this chapter
shall, whether or not expressly so conditioned, be deemed to be conditioned upon payment of cost recovery fees as required by this subsection C.
8. Time Periods: Where this chapter provides that the passage of time without decision or action shall be deemed an approval or recommendation for
approval, all time periods shall be tolled during any period of nonpayment, but shall otherwise continue to run.
9. Failure To Pay: The failure to fully pay cost recovery fees when due shall be grounds for refusing to process an application and for denying or
revoking any planned development approval sought or issued with respect to the land or development to which the unpaid fee relates. (Ord. G-890,
7-14-2009)
13-15-7: EFFECT OF APPROVAL OR DENIAL:
A. Approval of the planned development by the corporate authorities authorizes the applicant to proceed with any necessary applications for building
permits, certificates of occupancy, and other permits which the village may require for the proposed planned development. The village's community
development director shall review applications for these permits for compliance with the terms of the planned development granted by the corporate
authorities and other applicable requirements. No permit shall be issued for development which does not comply with the applicable requirements of
law, including, without limitation, the terms and conditions of the planned development ordinance approved by the corporate authorities.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 406/438
B. The village shall administratively revise the official zoning map to properly note the existence and boundaries of each approved planned development;
provided, however, that any such notation of a planned development shall not constitute a map amendment to the official zoning map.
C. Subject to subsection G of this section, the corporate authorities may declare the approval of a planned development null and void if the recipient does
not file a complete application for a building permit relative to the proposed planned development within nine (9) months after the date of adoption of
the ordinance approving the planned development.
D. Subject to subsection G of this section, the corporate authorities may declare the approval of a planned development null and void if construction has
not commenced within twenty four (24) months, and is not completed within thirty six (36) months, after the date of adoption of the ordinance
approving the planned development, except as may otherwise be provided in the ordinance approving the planned development.
E. Subject to subsection G of this section, the corporate authorities may declare the approval of a planned development with a phasing plan null and void
if construction has not commenced and is not completed in accordance with the terms of the phasing plan.
F. Subject to subsection G of this section, the corporate authorities may declare the approval of a planned development with a master development plan
null and void if construction has not commenced and is not completed in accordance with the terms and conditions contained in the master
development plan.
G. An extension of the time requirements provided pursuant to subsections C, D, E, and F of this section may be granted by the corporate authorities for
good cause shown by the applicant, provided a written request is filed with the village at least four (4) weeks prior to the respective deadline.
H. The corporate authorities may declare the approval of a planned development null and void if the use or combination of uses for which the approval
was granted ceases for a consecutive period of one year.
I. No application for a planned development which was previously denied by the corporate authorities shall be considered by the planned development
commission or the corporate authorities if it is resubmitted in substantially the same form and content within one year of the date of such prior denial.
1. The community development director shall review the application for a planned development and determine if the application is or is not
substantially the same as a previously denied application. An applicant has the right to request a meeting before the corporate authorities to appeal
the determination of the community development director that the application is substantially the same, provided a petition for appeal is filed in
writing with the village manager within ten (10) days after the community development director's determination.
2. The corporate authorities shall affirm or reverse the determination of the community development director, regarding whether the new application is
substantially the same as a previous application, within forty five (45) days after receipt of the appeal.
3. If it is determined that the new application is not substantially the same, then the applicant shall be entitled to continue with the application process
and have the application reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. G-890, 7-14-2009)
13-15-8: AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES TO APPROVED PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PERMITS:
A. Except for "minor changes" as provided in subsection B of this section, any modifications to an approved planned development or any addition to or
expansion of an existing planned development shall require separate review and approval under the provisions applicable to the initial approval of a
planned development.
B. A "minor change" is any change in the site plan or design details of an approved planned development which is consistent with the standards and
conditions applicable to the planned development and which does not alter the concept or intent of the planned development. A minor change shall not
increase the planned development's density, add new uses, increase any applicable bulk regulation, reduce open space, modify the proportion of
housing types, change or add new parking areas, alter alignment of roads, utilities or drainage, amend final development agreements, provisions or
covenants, or provide any other change inconsistent with any standard or condition imposed by the corporate authorities in approving the planned
development. A minor change may be approved by the village manager, following receipt of a recommendation of the community development
director, without obtaining separate approval by the corporate authorities.
C. The provisions and limitations of subsections A and B of this section are subject to such additional conditions and provisions as the corporate
authorities may include in the ordinance approving a planned development. (Ord. G-890, 7-14-2009)
Chapter 16
CEMETERIES
13-16-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The purpose of the regulations, standards, and criteria contained in this chapter is to provide regulations for cemeteries and cemetery structures within
the village. (Ord. G-989, 1-22-2013)
13-16-2: NEW CEMETERIES AND EXPANSIONS:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 407/438
Any new cemetery established after January 22, 2013, shall contain a minimum of twenty five (25) acres. The incorporation of any new land into any
cemetery after January 22, 2013, shall be subject to the review and approval of a special use permit pursuant to sections 13-6A-2, 13-6E-2, and 13-9-3 of
this title, provided, however, any two (2) cemeteries that are contiguous and existing as of January 22, 2013, may be incorporated into one cemetery
without requiring a special use permit. (Ord. G-989, 1-22-2013)
13-16-3: HEIGHT, BULK LIMITATIONS:
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in other sections of this title, any of the following structures built, altered, or improved after January 22, 2013,
shall comply with the following height and bulk restrictions:
A. Burial structures: Twenty feet (20') in height, including all attached architectural features.
B. Cemetery accessory structures located in a residence district: Fifteen feet (15') in height.
C. Cemetery accessory structures located in an institutional district: Shall comply with the height and bulk regulations of the residence district adjacent to
the property on which the cemetery accessory structure exists. If more than one type of residence district is adjacent to the property on which the
cemetery accessory structure exists, the height and bulk regulations of the residence district with the greatest amount of frontage along the cemetery
property shall apply.
D. Community burial structures: Forty five feet (45') in height; eight thousand (8,000) square feet in total gross floor area on the ground floor; twenty four
thousand (24,000) square feet in total gross floor area on all floors.
E. Memorial structures: Seven feet (7') in height. (Ord. G-989, 1-22-2013)
13-16-4: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in other sections of this title, any of the following structures built, altered, or improved after January 22, 2013,
shall comply with the following setback restrictions:
A. Cemetery structures located in a residence district:
1. Burial structures not more than eight feet (8') in height: No setback requirements.
2. Burial structures more than eight feet (8') in height: Not less than one hundred feet (100') from any right of way or property line.
3. Memorial structures: No setback requirements.
4. Cemetery accessory structures: Not less than one hundred feet (100') from any right of way or property line.
B. Cemetery structures located in an institutional district:
1. Community burial structures: Not less than three hundred feet (300') from the centerline of any adjacent street; and not less than one hundred fifty
feet (150') from any other private property line or district boundary.
2. Burial structures not more than eight feet (8') in height: No setback requirements.
3. Burial structures adjacent to a street and more than eight feet (8') in height: Not less than one hundred twenty feet (120') from the centerline of the
adjacent street.
4. Burial structures not adjacent to a street and more than ten feet (10') in height: Not less than one hundred feet (100') from the property line;
however, a cemetery owner may request that the setback requirement contained in this subsection B4 be reduced to not less than thirty five feet
(35') to permit burial structures not more than ten feet (10') in height subject to the review and approval of a special use to designate the area as a
"special cemetery development area".
5. Memorial structures: No setback requirements.
6. Cemetery accessory structures: Shall comply with the setback regulations of the residence district adjacent to the property on which the cemetery
accessory structure exists. If more than one type of residence district is adjacent to the property on which the cemetery accessory structure exists,
the setback regulations of the residence district with the greatest amount of frontage along the cemetery property shall apply. (Ord. G-989, 1-22-
2013)
13-16-5: NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A cemetery owner shall provide advance written notice to the village prior to the commencement of construction or the placement of any burial structure
regardless of whether a building or other permit is required. If a permit is required pursuant to section 13-16-6 of this chapter, the application for such
permit shall constitute the advance written notice required by this section. (Ord. G-989, 1-22-2013)
13-16-6: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 408/438
All cemetery structures, with the exception of: a) memorial structures and b) burial structures not more than eight feet (8') in height, shall require the
issuance of a building permit from the village pursuant to the provisions of title 10 of this code. Memorial structures and burial structures not more than
eight feet (8') in height are not subject to the issuance of a building permit from the village. (Ord. G-989, 1-22-2013)
13-16-7: SCREENING:
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions contained in this title, permanent landscape screening shall be installed and maintained along the perimeter of
any new cemetery or the expansion of any cemetery existing as of January 22, 2013, provided, however, any two (2) cemeteries that are contiguous
and existing as of January 22, 2013, may be incorporated into one cemetery without requiring permanent landscape screening to be installed and
maintained along the perimeter of the cemetery. The landscape screening shall be no shorter than eight feet (8'). This landscape screening may
consist of a planted earth berm, densely planted shrubs or trees, or a combination thereof. The landscape screening shall be located and constructed
in a manner that does not interfere or conflict with the use of any utility easement or utility installation that is existing or planned to be installed.
B. Notwithstanding any other provisions contained in this title, permanent landscape screening shall be installed and maintained along the perimeter of
any new burial structure not more than eight feet (8') in height or new cemetery accessory structure, that is located within the setback requirements
provided in subsections 13-16-4A2 and 13-16-4B3 of this chapter. The landscape screening shall only be required on the sides of the burial structure
or cemetery accessory structure that are visible from the property adjacent to the cemetery with the noncemetery use. The landscape screening shall
be no shorter than the lesser of: 1) eight feet (8') or 2) the height of the structure. This landscape screening may consist of a planted earth berm,
densely planted shrubs or trees, or a combination thereof. The landscape screening shall be located and constructed in a manner that does not
interfere or conflict with the use of any utility easement or utility installation that is existing or planned to be installed. The landscape screening
requirements contained in this subsection shall not apply to any cemetery accessory structure located in a cemetery zoned in the institutional district
and located east of Madison Street. (Ord. G-989, 1-22-2013)
Title 14
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
14-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS OF OAK BROOK, ILLINOIS. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
14-1-2: PURPOSE, SCOPE AND JURISDICTION:
A. Purpose:
1. The purpose of these regulations is to set forth rules, regulations and standards to guide the subdivision of land in order to promote the public
health, safety, convenience and general welfare within the jurisdiction of the village. Regulations should be administered to ensure orderly growth
and development, the conservation, protection and proper use of land and adequate provisions for traffic circulation, utilities and services.
2. An additional purpose of these regulations is to set forth, so far as applicable, rules, regulations and standards to guide the development of parcels
of land for which a development plan has been approved under title 13, chapter 10, article C of the zoning regulations of the village.
B. Scope And Jurisdiction: Because each new subdivision accepted by the village becomes a permanent unit in the basic physical structure of the future
community, and to which the future community will, of necessity, be forced to adhere, all subdivisions hereafter planned within the incorporated limits
of the village, and within the area of planning jurisdiction as established by statute up to one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond, shall, in all respects, be
in full compliance with these regulations. These regulations are designed to provide for the orderly and harmonious development of the village, for the
coordination of streets within new subdivisions with other existing or planned streets, to secure a uniform system of utilities and services and to
otherwise promote realization of the official plan. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
14-1-3: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. Subdivision Regulations Complied With: No land shall, afterthe adoption of these subdivision regulations, be subdivided without complying with these
regulations.
B. Lots Recorded Before Sale: No lot, tract, or parcel of land within any such proposed subdivision (smaller than the entire tract) shall be offered for sale
or be sold until such subdivision plans have been properly reviewed and officially approved by the village board and a final plat recorded.
C. Issuance Of Building Permits: No building permit shall be issued for any building or other structure on a lot, tract or parcel of land which does not meet
applicable provisions of this title.
D. Prerequisites To Improvements: No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply, storm water drainage, sewerage facilities, gas service, electric
service or lighting, grading, paving or surfacing of any street, shall be made within any such proposed subdivision by any owner or owners or his or
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 409/438
their agent, or by any public utility corporation at the request of such owner or owners or by his or their agent until the plat for the subdivision and also
the plans for the improvements have been properly reviewed by the village engineer, and officially approved by the village board and the final plat
recorded.
E. Construction In Phases: Where a tract of land is proposed to be subdivided in several stages over a period of years, and the subdivider requests
approval in parts, he shall, at the time of submission of the first part, submit a detailed plan of the entire tract to be eventually developed, with
appropriate sectioning to demonstrate to the Oak Brook village plan commission that the total design as proposed for the entire subdivision is
acceptable under the terms of these regulations. The plan commission and village board may give preliminary approval to the overall plan and final
approval on the parts as submitted from time to time.
F. Minimum Requirements: The provisions of this title shall be the minimum requirements necessary in the subdivision of land. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
14-1-4: ASSESSMENT PLAT PROCEDURES:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide a method and procedures for the platting of property into lots not involving a "subdivision", as defined
in section 14-2-2 of this title.
B. Jurisdiction: The provisions of this section shall not be utilized to evade the intent and purpose of the subdivision regulations of this title, but are
applicable only to the platting of single lots legally created prior to November 9, 1971, or the consolidation of such lots.
Nothing contained herein shall otherwise permit the subdivision of property under the jurisdiction of this title from being so subdivided except in
accordance with the terms of this title. No assessment plat shall be recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds for DuPage County, Illinois, until
such assessment plat has been properly reviewed and officially approved by the village president and board of trustees.
C. Definitions:
ASSESSMENT PLAT: A plat of property prepared in accordance with the plat act1, which describes property as a single lot other than by a metes
and bounds description and as referred to in 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/35, which plat does not involve a "subdivision" as defined in section 14-
2-2 of this title.
LEGALLY CREATED LOT: A lot created pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois plat act or created pursuant to an exception thereto.
D. Procedures:
1. The owner shall file an application for approval of the assessment plat with the village clerk. Such application shall be accompanied by the original
ink tracing on linen or Mylar, eighteen (18) prints of the assessment plat, or such other number as the village clerk may designate by administrative
order, and four (4) copies of all required supporting data, drawings and documents.
2. Within sixty (60) days from the date the application for approval of the assessment plat and all supporting documents were filed with the village
clerk, the village president and board of trustees shall approve such plat provided that it complies with all applicable requirements of the village.
Upon approval of an assessment plat, the village clerk shall certify such approval and affix the corporate seal of the village on the assessment plat.
3. Upon approval by the village president and board of trustees, the village clerk shall have the plat as approved by the village president and board of
trustees recorded and on its return to the village have one Mylar or equal transparency made and deliver a copy of the assessment plat or
transparency to the owner. The cost of recording and the transparency shall be paid by the owner.
4. On recording, one copy of the recorded plat and one set of supporting data shall be retained in the village clerk's files, two (2) sets retained by the
village engineer and one approved set returned to the owner.
E. Assessment Plat Requirements: The requirements for an assessment plat shall be the same as those established for a final plat of subdivision as
detailed in subsections 14-4-2A through D, inclusive, of this title. In addition to all of the requirements herein contained, the assessment plat shall
clearly delineate any dedications or grants of easement to the village as required by the village president and board of trustees including, but not
limited to, public bicycle and pedestrian path easements, dedication for roadways, and easements for public utilities and shall depict all other existing
easements or dedications.
F. Fees: Fees for assessment plats shall be as found in title 1, chapter 14 of this code. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
14-2-1: RULES:
The language set forth in the text of these regulations shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:
A. The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
B. The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future the present.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 410/438
C. The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive.
D. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
E. Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of these regulations, its meaning should be construed as set forth in the definition
thereof; and any word appearing in parentheses directly after a word herein defined should be construed in the same sense as that word. (Ord. G-708,
12-10-2002)
14-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following are definitions of terms used in these regulations:
ALLEY: A right of way which affords a secondary means of access to properties abutting upon a street.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of one or more streets and other lines of demarcation.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line within a lot or other parcel of land so designated on the plat, which denotes the area between such line and the
adjacent street right of way line, where an enclosed building and other structures are prohibited, except those structures that are permitted by zoning
ordinance regulations.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street which carries traffic from local streets, and serves as a principal traffic way within or between various districts.
CUL-DE-SAC: A local street with only one outlet.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A proposal for the development of a parcel of land zoned ORA3 under the zoning ordinance of the village1 containing a
statement setting forth the information specified in subsection 13-10C-6C1 of this code and a plat setting forth graphically the information specified in
subsection 13-10C-6C2 of this code.
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT: The director of community development of the village of Oak Brook, Illinois, or his duly authorized
representative as approved and designated by the village manager.
EASEMENT AREA: A designated parcel of land on, over or under which a liberty, privilege, or advantage for use of land (dedicated and distinct from
ownership of the land), is granted either to the public, a particular person or firm, or a combination of both.
FINAL PLAT: The final map or plan of a subdivision presented to the village for approval and which, if approved, will be recorded in the office of recorder
of deeds of DuPage County.
FRONTAGE ROAD: A local or collector street which is parallel to, adjacent to and separated from the main traveled pavement surface of a thoroughfare.
HALF STREET: A street where less than the ultimate total required right of way width has been dedicated along one or more exterior property lines of a
subdivision.
HOUSE SERVICES: The portions of piping running from a utility service main to serve individual parcels of property and for the purpose of these
regulations shall include sewer and water services.
IMPROVEMENT PLAN: A plat setting forth graphically the location and layout of all or a part of the proposed land improvements and buildings to be
constructed on a parcel of land zoned ORA3 and for which a development plan has been approved, together with such additional information as may be
required under the provisions of this title.
LAND IMPROVEMENT: Any and all sanitary sewerage systems, water distribution systems, storm drainage systems, public utility systems, sidewalk
systems, street systems, street lighting systems, pedestrianways, sediment and erosion control measures, grading plan, off street parking areas and other
improvements which the village of Oak Brook may require under these regulations.
LOCAL STREET: A street of limited continuity used primarilyfor access to abutting properties and to serve local needs of a neighborhood.
LOT: A designated parcel of land in a subdivision or assessment plat.
LOT, FLAG OR INTERIOR: A parcel of land which fronts on a street only by virtue of an unbuildable area which provides access to the buildable portion
of said parcel of land.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) substantially parallel streets and which is not a corner lot.
NO VEHICULAR ACCESS AREA: That portion of a through lot along its side and/or rear lot line abutting a street through which motorized vehicular
access is not permitted and no driveways shall be permitted.
OFFICIAL PLAN: Refers to the composite of the functional and geographic elements of the comprehensive village plan, or any segment thereof, in the
form of plans, maps, charts, text of reports, the official map and the current zoning ordinance as adopted by the village of Oak Brook.
OWNER OR SUBDIVIDER: Shall include any person, group of persons, firm, association, partnership, private corporation, public or quasi-public
corporation, institution, or a combination of any of them, or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided or
divided, to commence and maintain proceedings under the provisions of these regulations.
PARKWAY: That part of a public way between the paved roadway portion and right of way line, in the case of a public right of way, or in the case of a
private street, the easement line.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A right of way across or within a block and designated for pedestrian use.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 411/438
PLAN COMMISSION: The Oak Brook plan commission2.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision indicating a proposed layout submitted to the village for its consideration.
PUBLIC WAY: Public rights of way, public street areas by common usage, public bicycle or pedestrian paths, or access easement areas granted to the
village.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land dedicated to the public for access purposes including, but not limited to, streets, alleys and pedestrianways and may
include surface access for vehiclesor pedestrians, overhead access, when permitted, for certain public utilities and underground access for sewers and
public utilities.
ROADWAY: The improved portion of the street available for vehicular traffic.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street right of way or pedestrianway intended for pedestrian use only.
STREET: A permanent public or private right of way which affords a primary means of access to abutting property.
STREET WIDTH: The shortest distance between the right of way lines of a given street.
SUBDIVIDER: Any owner commencing proceedings under these regulations.
SUBDIVISION: The division of any tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels, or consolidation of two (2) or more parcels, or any division of
land when a new street or easement for access is involved. The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five (5) acres or more in size and
not involving any new streets, easements of access, or the sale or exchange of existing lots, parcels or tracts of land with no change in their boundaries
shall not be termed to be a subdivision. The term "subdivision" includes "resubdivision" and, where it is appropriate to the context, relates to the process
of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS: The basic land planning requirements established by this title for the preparation of plats and installation of
required improvements.
SUBDIVISION GATEWAY: A structure, guardhouse, monument or landscaping arranged in such a fashion as to identify a subdivision and provide an
entranceway for the subdivision.
THOROUGHFARE: A street with a high degree of continuity and serving as a principal traffic way between the various areas of Oak Brook and its
environs. Those streets shown in the "Oak Brook Transportation Plan Phase II Report" dated January 1971, figure 1, functional classification and
designated as "expressway", "major arterial" and "minor arterial" shall be considered as thoroughfares for application of this title, plus such additional
streets as may in the future be designated by resolution of the village board.
VILLAGE BOARD: The president and board of trustees of the village of Oak Brook, Illinois.
VILLAGE CLERK: The village clerk of the village of Oak Brook, Illinois.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: The village engineer of the village of Oak Brook, Illinois, or his duly authorized representative as approved and designated by the
village manager.
VILLAGE MANAGER: The village manager of the village of Oak Brook, Illinois, or his duly authorized representative as approved by village president with
the advice and consent of the board of trustees.
WATERCOURSE: Any stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depressions, slough, gulch, wetlands, reservoir, lake, pond or natural or
manmade drainageway in or into which storm water runoff and floodwaters flow either regularly or intermittently. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
Chapter 3
PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS
14-3-1: PLATS REQUIRED:
A. Plats Prerequisite To Subdividing Lands: Before subdividing any tract or parcel of land in the village and the unincorporated areas within one and onehalf
(11/2) miles of the village limits, an owner or subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat and a final plat to be acted upon by the village authorities in
accordance with the following requirements. Prior to preparation of preliminary plat drawings, it is suggested that the subdivider consult with the plan
commission and other village officials to determine conformity to the official plan, zoning ordinance and compliance with this and other applicable
village ordinances.
B. Subdivisions Of Not More Than Five Lots:
1. When an application for approval of a subdivision plat containing not more than five (5) lots and located within the village limits is submitted, and is
accompanied by an affidavit that such plat comprises the entire contiguous undeveloped land area in which the applicant has any interest, the
village clerk shall refer such plat to the village board and if, upon its consideration thereof and after receiving a report from the plan commission
which includes a finding that the plat contains the entire contiguous undeveloped land in which the applicant has any interest, it finds that the intent
and purpose of this title is not violated, the village board may approve such plat without further procedure.
2. The plat of such a subdivision submitted by the subdivider for approval shall meet all requirements for a final plat as required by these regulations.
(Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
14-3-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURES:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 412/438
Except as provided in subsection 14-3-1B of this chapter, applications for preliminary plat approvals are subject to the following procedures:
A. The owner or subdivider shall file an application for approval of the preliminary plat with the village clerk. Eighteen (18) copies of the preliminary plat, or
such other number as the village clerk may designate by administrative order, and the required filing fee shall accompany theapplication.
B. The village clerk shall refer all copies of the preliminary plat to the plan commission, and one copy to the village engineer, at least fourteen (14) days in
advance of the next meeting of the plan commission.
C. The plan commission shall notify the owner or subdivider as to the time and place of the plan commission meeting at which he will be afforded an
opportunity of being heard. The village engineer shall furnish the plan commission a report on his review of the preliminary plat.
D. The plan commission shall approve or disapprove the application for preliminary plat approval within ninety (90) days from the date of filing the
application or the filing by the applicant of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by mutual
consent.
E. When the preliminary plat has been acted upon by the plan commission, it shall be referred to the village board. If the plan commission approves the
plat it shall so indicate on the plat, and if it disapproves such plat it shall furnish the village board and the applicant a written statement setting forth the
reason for disapproval and specifying with particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to these regulations and official plan.
The village board shall accept or reject said plat within thirty (30) days after its regular stated meeting following the action of the plan commission,
unless such time is extended by mutual consent.
F. Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the village board, the following notice of approval shall be placed upon the prints thereof, and required
signatures affixed:
NOTICE OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
Notice is hereby given that the preliminary plat of the subdivision shown hereon has received approval by the Village Board of the Village of Oak
Brook, Illinois, and upon compliance by the subdivider with the following requirements or qualifications, the Village Board will receive the final plat for
consideration, if submitted by the subdivider within one year in such form as required by the subdivision regulations ordinance.
The Village Board of the Village of Oak Brook, Illinois
Date
By
President
Attest
Village Clerk
G. The four (4) approved prints of such preliminary plat shall be distributed by the village clerk as follows:
1. One print to the director of community development;
2. One print to the village engineer;
3. One print shall be retained by the village clerk for filing; and
4. One print shall be returned to the subdivider.
H. Approval of the preliminary plat by the plan commission and village board shall be conditioned upon stipulations as set forth in subsection F of this
section. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
14-3-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Identification And Description:
1. Proposed name of subdivision not duplicating name of any plat heretofore recorded in DuPage County, Illinois.
2. Location by section, township and range, and by other legal description necessary to clearly locate and describe the subdivision area.
3. A scale drawing prepared and certified by a registered surveyor showing the topography, the boundary lines and the area being subdivided drawn to
a scale not smaller than one hundred feet to one inch (1" = 100').
4. Names and addresses of the owner and subdivider having control of the tract and the surveyor who prepared the plat.
5. North point (true north).
6. Date of survey and preparation.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 413/438
B. Existing Conditions:
1. Boundary lines of proposed subdivision in accordance with subsection A3 of this section.
2. Total acreage of subdivision.
3. Existing zoning districts in proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts.
4. Location, widths, and names of all existing or previously platted streets or other rights of way showing type of improvement (if any), railroad and
utility rights of way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, easements, and section and corporate lines within the
tract and to a distance of at least two hundred feet (200') beyond the tract.
5. Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract and to a distance of at least two hundred
feet (200') beyond the tract; also indicating such data as grades, invert elevations and locations of catchbasins, manholes and hydrants.
6. Location map, drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals one thousand feet (1" = 1,000'), showing boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided
or subdivided land within an area bounded by nearest arterial streets or other natural boundaries, but not less than one-half (1/2) mile beyond the
subdivision boundaries in subdivisions located beyond the village limits, identifying type of use and ownership of surrounding land and showing
alignments of existing streets.
7. Topographic data including existing contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet (2'), except in unusual topographical conditions such
vertical intervals may be required to be altered as determined by the village engineer. Topographic data shall refer to the United States geological
survey datum. The location of watercourses, marshes and other significant features. Soil boring data and seepage tests may be required at
locations and depths as determined by the village engineer.
8. Locations of or reference to locations of existing monuments or survey markers used in preparation of survey and grade elevation of each
monument and marker.
C. Proposed Subdivision Design Features:
1. The proposed subdivision layout shall be in substantial accord with the official plan as amended from time to time.
2. Layout of streets showing right of way widths and street names and showing proposed through streets extended to boundaries of subdivision. Street
names shall not duplicate the name of any street heretofore used in the village or its environs unless the street is an extension of or in line with an
already named street, in which event that name shall be used.
3. Location and width of alleys, pedestrianways and easements.
4. Layout, numbers, typical dimensions of blocks and lots to the nearest foot and areas of all lots.
5. Building setback lines, indicating dimensions.
6. The proposed village of Oak Brook zoning districts for subdivisions to be annexed.
7. Areas, other than those listed in subsections C2, C3 and C4 of this section, if any, intended to be dedicated or reserved for nonresidential purposes,
indicating in each the approximate acreage and proposed use. Such areas shall be designated by letter or number.
8. Proposed location of sewers, water mains, storm drains and detention facilities, and proposed method of sewage disposaland water supply.
9. No land which is subject to periodic flooding which lies in floodplain areas as designated in title 9 of this code, or which contains inadequate
drainage facilities will be approved for occupancy in a subdivision, unless the subdivider agrees to make all necessary improvements and agrees to
all required covenants which will, in the opinion of the village engineer, plan commission and board of trustees make such land safe for occupancy,
and provide necessary safeguards for adjacent property which would be affected by the filling, grading, drainage or other changes being permitted
or required for this subdivision.
10. The proposed location and design of any subdivision gateway.
11. The proposed improvements shall be designed and constructed substantially in compliance with the public works construction standards as
referenced in section 8-1-3 of this code.
D. Information Required For Subdivision Involving A Floodplain: Accompanying the preliminary plat of each proposed subdivision which involves any
portion of a floodplain as described within title 9 of this code, there shall be furnished the information and data as required within said title 9 of this
code. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002; Ord. G-781, 6-14-2005)
Chapter 4
FINAL PLAT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS
14-4-1: FINAL PLAT PROCEDURES:
A. Within one year after approval of the preliminary plat by the village president and board of trustees, the owner or subdivider shall file an application for
approval of the final plat with the village clerk. Such application shall be accompanied by the original final plat inked tracing on linen or Mylar, eighteen
(18) prints of the final plat or such other number as the village clerk may designate by administrative order, and four (4) copies of all required
supporting data, drawings and documents. The final plat shall retain the design characteristics of the approved preliminary plat, except that the village
president and board of trustees may require such changes or revisions as are deemed necessary in the interest and needs of the community in
keeping with the provisions of this title. The village president and board of trustees shall refer the application for approval of the final plat to the plan
commission for its recommendations and report relative to design characteristics of the final plat. Preliminary plat approval shall expire unless the final
plat is submitted within one year of the date of the preliminary plat approval unless an extension of time is granted by the village board.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 414/438
B. In case application for approval of a final plat is made for a part or parts of an approved preliminary plat, the village board may extend the time for
application of approval of final plats for other parts of the approved preliminary plat until later date or dates beyond the foregoing one year period.
C. Within sixty (60) days from the date of filing the last required document or other paper or within sixty (60) days from the date the application for
approval of the final plat was filed with the village clerk, whichever date is later, the village president and village board shall by resolution approve or
disapprove such plat. Upon the adoption of the resolution approving a final plat, the village clerk shall certify such approval and affix the corporate seal
of the village on the final plat.
D. Upon approval by the village president and board of trustees, and receipt of any remaining required documents, the village clerk shall have the plat in
final form as approved by the village president and board of trustees recorded and, on its return to the village, have one Mylar or equal transparency
made and deliver the plat or transparency to the subdivider at his option. The cost of recording and the transparency shall be paid by the subdivider.
E. On recording, one copy of the recorded plat and one set of supporting data shall be retained in the village clerk's files, two (2) sets by the village
engineer and one approved set returned to the subdivider. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
14-4-2: FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
A. General: The final plat shall be drawn with black waterproof drawing ink on transparent linen tracing cloth, or equal, in a manner that clear and legible
transparent or contact prints can be made.
B. Identification And Description:
1. Proposed name of subdivision.
2. A full and detailed description of the land embraced in the plat, showing the township and range in which such land is situated, and the sections and
parts of sections platted, and in the case of replatting or resubdividing, a description of the part of, and the name of, the original plat which is
replatted or resubdivided, containing the name of the town, city, village or addition platted, the name of the proprietor required to sign the plat and
the surveyor making it. If there is any excepted parcel within the plat boundary it must be accurately described by metes, bounds and courses.
3. Scale of plat, one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or other scale approved by the village engineer.
4. North point (indicating true north).
5. Date of preparation.
C. Delineation Of Final Plat:
1. Boundary of the plat based on an accurate traverse, with all angular and linear dimensions shown.
2. All blocks, lots, streets, alleys, crosswalks, easements and setback lines within or adjacent to the plat, all of which shall have all angular and linear
dimensions given and all radii, internal angles, bearings, points of curvature, tangents and lengths of all curves so that no dimensions or data are
missing which are required for the future relocation of any of the corners or boundaries of blocks, lots, streets,etc., as listed above. All dimensions
shall be given to the nearest hundredth of a foot.
3. True angles and distances to the nearest established official monuments, not less than three (3) of which shall be accurately described on the plat.
4. Municipal, township or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and angles.
5. Block and lot numbers of all blocks and lots. Names of all existing streets and all streets in the subdivision.
6. Accurate outlines, legal descriptions of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use or for the exclusive use of property owners within the
subdivision.
7. Location of all iron stakes and all permanent monuments required by this chapter.
8. Any protective covenants.
9. Statements covering easement provisions.
10. All other information required by state statutes.
In addition to all other requirements herein contained, there shall be submitted with the final plat a document over the signature of the engineer or
surveyor, who prepared such plat, indicating the total square footage of each lot shown on the plat.
D. Certificates: The following certificates shall be on the final plat when submitted:
1. Owner.
2. Owner's notary.
3. Surveyor.
4. County clerk's certificate on unpaid taxes.
5. Plat certification by county board of supervisors if outside the village.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 415/438
6. Sanitary district certificate on unpaid assessments (where applicable).
7. Village engineer.
8. Village treasurer.
9. Plan commission.
10. Village board.
11. Recorder.
12. Drainage (where applicable).
13. Highway department (where applicable).
14. Health department (where applicable).
The application for approval of the final plat shall not be deemed completed until all certificates, other than the village certificates, have been duly
executed.
Note: Except as otherwise required by statute, certification on final plats of subdivisions located in the unincorporated areas within one and onehalf
(11/2) miles beyond the village limits shall be those required by the DuPage County subdivision regulations; except when the Oak Brook
subdivision regulations are more restrictive, the applicable certification contained herein shall also be required.
E. Supporting Documents: The final plat shall be accompanied by the following supporting documents when submitted:
1. Complete plans, specifications and cost estimates of the improvements to be installed, prepared by a registered professional engineer and based
upon the conditions of approval of the preliminary plans and specifications. Such plans and specifications shall be approved by the village engineer
and other public officials having jurisdiction and such approval certified on the final plat.
2. Complete plans and specifications of any subdivision gateway prepared by a registered professional architect and based upon the conditions of
approval of the preliminary plans and specifications. The applicant will have obtained approval from all governmental agencies having jurisdiction
over or rights in the property on which such subdivision gateway is proposed to be located, other than the village, prior to submission of said final
plat to the plan commission. Plans and specifications shall be approved by the village engineer, director of community development and other public
officials having jurisdiction and such approval certified on the final plat. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
14-4-3: CONSTRUCTION OF LAND IMPROVEMENTS:
All land improvements shall be completed by the subdivider in a good and workmanlike manner in conformance with village ordinances and standards
and in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the village engineer and all obligations of the subdivider shall be accomplished within three
(3) years following the date of the subdivision improvement agreement unless otherwise modified by the village board. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
14-4-4: AGREEMENTS AND PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE:
A. Subdivision Improvement Agreement: Any owner or subdivider filing an application for approval of a final plat shall submit a signed subdivision
improvement agreement listing, at a minimum:
1. The land improvements the subdivider proposes to make at his expense; and
2. The time of completion of said land improvements; and
3. That the contractors engaged by the subdivider to construct the land improvements are to be approved by the village engineer and that they are
required to submit evidence of insurance meeting village requirements; and
4. The method of payment for the land improvements; and
5. That the subdivider post a subdivision security for the construction of the land improvements and also that the subdivider be responsible for repairs
and corrections which may be required due to failures or faulty construction for one year beyond final acceptance of such land improvements by the
village board (maintenance security); and
6. That the one year maintenance security shall be in the amount of fifteen percent (15%) of the subdivision security; and
7. These land improvements shall be completed by the subdivider in a good and workmanlike manner in conformance with village ordinances and
standards and in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the village engineer within three (3) years following the date of the
subdivision improvement agreement unless otherwise modified by the village board; and
8. That all plan review and inspection fees have been paid; and
9. That the following shall be filed with the village engineer prior to acceptance of the land improvements by the village board:
a. The original Mylar tracings or Mylar copies of the improvement drawings corrected to show all actual as built improvements; and
b. Electronic files in an electronic format as specified by the village depicting the corrected improvement drawings.
Said documents shall be in a form acceptable to the village engineer; and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 416/438
10. A fully executed copy of an agreement between the subdivider and the registered professional engineer representing the subdivider providing for
the design, layout and inspection of the construction of all land improvements, hydrant benchmark listing, record drawing generation, and
certification after completion.
11. A fully executed copy of an agreement between the subdivider and the registered land surveyor providing for the surveying services required within
subsection 14-6-3J of this title.
12. That the hydrant benchmark listing referenced in subsection 14-6-3B3 of this title shall be submitted.
B. Subdivision Security:
1. As security for the performance by the subdivider of the subdivider's obligations to complete the installation, construction or maintenance of land
improvements required by these regulations or to otherwise faithfully perform the subdivider's undertakings pursuant to these regulations or a
subdivision improvement agreement, the subdivider shall, prior to recording of the final plat, post a subdivision security with the village clerk. The
subdivider shall bear the full cost of securing and maintaining said subdivision security. The subdivision security shall include:
a. A schedule, agreed upon by the subdivider and the village engineer, for the completion of the construction of any land improvements required by
these regulations and/or a subdivision improvement agreement; and
b. An irrevocable letter of credit, or such other adequate security as the village engineer may approve, in an amount equal to not less than one
hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated probable cost of the following:
(1) Construction of any land improvements required by these regulations and/or a subdivision improvement agreement; and
(2) Providing the necessary record drawings; and
(3) Providing the necessary engineering and surveying services that are required in subsections B1b(1) and B1b(2) of this section,
which estimated probable cost shall be agreed upon by the subdivider and the village engineer; and
c. A statement signed by the subdivider granting the village engineer the right to draw on the security and the right to enter the development site to
complete required work in the event that work is not completed according to the work schedule and to prepare the necessary record drawings;
and
d. A statement signed by the subdivider that the subdivider shall indemnify the village for any additional costs incurred attributable to concurrent
activities of or conflicts between the subdivider's contractor and the village's remedial contractor at the site.
2. The subdivision security required by this section shall be maintained by the subdivider and shall be held in escrow by the village until the conditions
set forth in this title or other applicable provisions are satisfied.
3. Upon completion of major portions of the land improvements, as determined by the village engineer, the village board may reduce the amount of
that portion of the subdivision security covering such land improvements completed, but such reduction shall not be more than an amount equal to
eighty five percent (85%) of each portion of the subdivision security.
4. After approval of record drawings, a final inspection by the village engineer determines that all work has been completed, and all obligations of the
subdivider have been accomplished, not more than eighty five percent (85%) of the subdivision security may be released. A minimum of fifteen
percent (15%) of the subdivision security shall be retained providing for the subdivider to be responsible for repairs and corrections which may be
required due to failures or faulty construction for a period of time not to exceed:
a. One year after acceptance of the land improvements by the village board, if the development involves no wetland mitigation; or
b. Five (5) years after acceptance of the land improvements, if the development involves wetland mitigation.
C. Letters Of Credit:
1. Letters of credit posted pursuant to these regulations shall be in a form satisfactory to the village.
2. Each letter of credit shall be from an institution:
a. Acceptable to the village; and
b. Having capital resources of at least ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00), or such other amount acceptable to the village; and
c. With an office in the Chicago metropolitan area; and
d. Insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
3. Each letter of credit shall, at a minimum, provide:
a. That it shall not be canceled without the prior written consent of the village engineer; and
b. That it shall not require the consent of the subdivider prior to any draw on it by the village engineer; and
c. That the letter of credit provider shall provide not less than forty five (45) days' written notice prior to the expiration of the letter of credit to the
village engineer. Notwithstanding the expiration date stated on the letter of credit, the letter of credit shall not expire without said forty five (45) day
written notice; and
d. That, if at any time it will expire within forty five (45) or any lesser number of days, and if it has not been renewed, and if any applicable obligation
of the developer for which its security remains uncompleted or is unsatisfactory, then the village engineer may, without notice and without being
required to take any further action of any nature whatsoever, call and draw down the letter of credit and thereafter either hold all proceeds as
security for the satisfactory completion of all such obligations or employ the proceeds to complete all such obligations and reimburse the village
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 417/438
for any and all costs and expenses, including legal fees and administrative costs, incurred by the village, as the village engineer shall determine;
and
e. That, if at any time the village engineer determines that the funds remaining in the letter of credit are not, or may not be, sufficient to pay in full the
remaining unpaid cost of all land improvements, sediment and erosion control measures, record drawings, or engineering and surveying services,
then, within ten (10) days following a demand by the village engineer, the developer shall increase the amount of the letter of credit to an amount
determined by the village engineer to be sufficient to pay such unpaid costs. Failure to so increase the amount of the security shall be grounds for
the village engineer to draw down the entire remaining balance of the letter of credit; and
f. Repealed.
g. Penal sum in accordance with subsection B of this section; and
h. Expiration date (4 years from the date of the subdivision improvement agreement); and
i. Description of land improvements to be constructed; and
j. For the record drawings and engineering and surveying services; and
k. For repairs and corrections which may be required due to failures or faulty construction; and
l. Such other provisions as may be required by the project.
4. If at any time the village engineer determines that theinstitution issuing the letter of credit is without capital resources of at least ten million dollars
($10,000,000.00), is unable to meet any federal or state requirement for reserves, is insolvent, is in danger of becoming any of the foregoing, or is
otherwise in danger of being unable to honor such letter of credit at any time during its term, or if the village engineer otherwise reasonably deems
the institution to be insecure, then the village engineer shall have the right to demand that the developer provide a replacement letter of credit from
an institution satisfactory to the village engineer. Such replacement letter of credit shall be deposited with the village engineer not later than ten (10)
days following such demand. Upon such deposit, the village engineer shall surrender the original letter of credit to the developer.
5. If the developer fails or refuses to meet fully any of its obligations under these regulations, then the village engineer may, in his or her discretion,
draw on and retain all or any of the funds remaining in the letter of credit. The village engineer thereafter shall have the right to take any action he or
she deems reasonable and appropriate to mitigate the effects of such failure or refusal, and to reimburse the village from the proceeds of the letter
of credit for all of the village's costs and expenses, including legal fees and administrative expenses, resulting from or incurred as a result of the
subdivider's failure or refusal to fully meet its obligations under these regulations. If the funds remaining in the letter of credit are insufficient to repay
fully the village for all such costs and expenses, and to maintain a cash reserve equal to the required letter of credit during the entire time such letter
of credit should have been maintained by the subdivider, then the subdivider shall, upon demand of the village engineer therefor, immediately
deposit with the village engineer such additional funds as the village engineer determines are necessary to fully repay such costs and expenses and
to establish such cash reserve. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002; Ord. G-781, 6-14-2005)
14-4-5: VILLAGE CLERK APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
The village clerk shall not certify the approval of the village board on the final plat until the required plan review and inspection fees have been paid, the
improvement plans and specifications have been approved by the village engineer, the subdivision improvement agreement is approved, the required
subdivision security has been filed, and written evidence from any governmental agencies, if other than the village, filed showing their willingness, ability
and agreement to accept and maintain all applicable dedicated areas or improvements. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
14-4-6: VILLAGE ENGINEER'S SERVICES AND FEES:
The village engineer shall review the improvement plans and specifications, confer with the subdivider's engineers and make periodic inspection during
construction of all required land improvements to assure compliance with the requirements of this title. The fee for this work will be paid by the owner or
subdivider in accordance with the resume of fees as otherwise established by separate ordinance by the village. The fees shall be due and payable
following approval of the final plat and prior to recording of the final plat. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
14-4-7: SCHOOL CONTRIBUTIONS:
In the case of the subdivision of land into two (2) or more lots or upon approval of a planned unit development for residential purposes and as a condition
of approval of a final plat of subdivision, each owner or subdivider thereof will be required to dedicate land for school purposes to serve the immediate and
future needs of the residents of the subdivision for school facilities, or in lieu of actual land dedication, a cash contribution, or a combination of land and
cash, all in accordance with the following criteria and formula; provided, that any lot already improved with a single-family dwelling after a subdivision or
resubdivision of land shall not be subject to these criteria and formulas:
A. Requirement And Population Ratio: The number of students to be generated by a subdivision shall bear directly upon the amount of land required to be
dedicated for school sites. This land dedication requirement shall be determined by obtaining the ratio of:
1. The estimated number of children to be generated in each school classification by the subdivision over
2. The maximum recommended number of students to be served in each school classification as stated herein, and then applying that ratio to
3. The minimum recommended number of acres for a school site for each school classification as stated herein.
The product thereof shall be the number of acres of land deemed needed for school site purposes to serve the needs of the children in each
school classification generated by the subdivision.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 418/438
B. School Classifications And Size Of School Site: For purposes of this title, school classifications and the size of school sites within the village shall be
determined in accordance with the following criteria:
School
Classification
By Grades
Maximum Number
Of Students For
Each Such School
Classification
Minimum Number
Of Acres Of
Land For Each
School Site Of
Such Classification
Elementary schools, grades kindergarten through 5 600 11
Junior high schools, grades 6 through 8 900 19
High schools, grades 9 through 12 2,300 48
C. Location Sites: The standards adopted by the affected school district shall be used as a guideline in locating sites.
D. Criteria For Requiring Cash Contribution In Lieu Of Land Dedication: When a subdivision is small and the resulting acreage too small to be practical, or
when the available land is inappropriate for school site purposes, or when the owner or subdivider shall otherwise agree with an involved school
district or other such public body with jurisdiction, the village shall require or permit the owner or subdivider to make a cash contribution in lieu of the
required land dedication under this title. Such cash contributions shall be paid to the appropriate school district or other public body having jurisdiction
over schools in the area in which the particular subdivision is located, to be held in trust by such school district or public body solely for use in the
acquisition of land for facilities, or the construction of new facilities, or the addition to existing facilities, to serve the immediate or future school needs
of the residents of the subdivision, or for the improvement of any existing school site that already serves such needs, except that when an owner or
subdivider shall otherwise reach agreement with an involved district as hereinbefore referred to, then any cash contributions shall be paid and used as
provided in said agreement. In the event any portion of a cash contribution made under the provisions of this title is not expended for the purposes
expressed in this title within ten (10) years from the date of payment, it shall be refunded to such owner or subdivider who made the contribution;
provided, however, that all earnings on investment of such funds during said period shall accrue to and become the property of the particular school
district or public body. A condition to the payment of such cash contributions shall be the execution by the receiving body and the delivery thereof to
the village of an agreement in form acceptable to the village, whereby said receiving body shall defend, save and hold the village and its officers,
agents and employees harmless from and against allloss, expense and liability arising out of the payment of such cash contributions and the intended
use thereof under the provisions of this title.
E. Fair Market Value: Cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on the fair market value of the land, improved as specified herein, that otherwise
would have been dedicated for school purposes under the provisions of this title. The owner or subdivider shall submit to the village a current written
appraisal prepared by a qualified appraiser showing fair market value of such improved land. Thereupon, the village shall make a determination, which
shall be final, of such value. In making this final determination, the village shall take into account the information submitted by the owner or subdivider
and such other information as it shall deem pertinent and advisable, including such information as may be submitted by the affected school district.
F. Criteria For Requiring Both Dedication Of Land And Cash Contribution: It is recognized that there are occasions in the development of subdivisions
when a combination of land dedication and, partly in lieu thereof, a cash contribution both, shall be necessary and advisable. These occasions include:
1. When only a portion of the land to be subdivided is proposed as the location of a school site, that portion of the land within the subdivision situated
in the proposed location shall be dedicated in the manner herein provided, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional
land that would have been required to be dedicated in accord with the provisions of this title; or
2. When a major portion of the school site has already been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed to complete the site, such remaining
portion shall be required by dedication, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof for the balance shall also be required.
G. Student Generation:
1. The number of students generated by a residential unit in a subdivision shall be periodically determined by the village. In making this determination,
the village shall take into account the average number of elementary and secondary school students historically generated by the various residential
developments in the village for a period of at least five (5) prior years, and such other information as the village deems pertinent, including such
information as is available from sources such as the Illinois School Consulting Service, Naperville, Illinois, and that which may be submitted by the
affected school district.
2. The number of students to be generated by each residential unit to be constructed in the subdivision shall also be determined by the village and
shall be done at the time offinal plat approval and shall be based on the number of lots contained in the subdivision. The owner or subdivider may
file a written objection to the determinations of the village made in the manner described above in which event the owner or subdivider of the
subdivision shall submit his own demographic study showing the student population to be generated by the subdivision. Thereupon, the village shall
make a determination of the same, which determination shall be final.
3. It is to be recognized that population densities, student generation figures, age distribution and local conditions change over the years and the
specific formula for the dedication of land, or in lieu thereof a cash contribution, as herein provided, is subject to periodic review, as herein
contemplated or otherwise, and amendment as necessary.
4. The number of elementary school children (kindergarten through grade 5) per residential unit to be utilized shall be 0.35; the number of junior high
school children (grades 6 through 8) per residential unit to be utilized shall be 0.30; and the number of secondary school children (grades 9 through
12) per residential unit to be utilized shall be 0.30.
H. Topography Of Sites: The slope, topography and geology of a dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended purpose.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 419/438
I. Improved Sites: All sites shall be dedicated fully improved in the manner prescribed under the ordinances, rules and regulations of the village as
applicable to the location of the site, or acceptable provision made therefor.
J. Annexations: Any dedication and contributions required by this section shall also be required as a condition to the annexation of any land to the village
and provisions therefor shall be incorporated in any preannexation agreement governing such land. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
14-4-8: RECORDING OF FINAL PLATS:
Upon approval of a final plat of subdivision by resolution of the corporate authorities, as provided in subsection 14-4-1C of this chapter, the subdivider
shall within six (6) months thereof submit to the village the plat and all other documentation required pursuant to said resolution and this title. Failure to
comply with this provision shall render such approved final plat as null and void, unless an extension is granted by the village. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
Chapter 5
ORA3 DISTRICT IMPROVEMENTS
14-5-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Before commencing development of any tract or parcel of land in an ORA3 district, the owner shall submit an improvement plan to be acted upon by the
village authorities in accordance with the requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
14-5-2: IMPROVEMENT PLAN PROCEDURES:
A. Subsequent to the approval of an ORA3 district development plan for a tract or parcel of land in accordance with title 13, chapter 10, article C of the
zoning ordinance, and prior to applying for building or other permits, the owner shall file with the village clerk, together with the required filing fee, an
application for approval of an improvement plan for all or a portion of the proposed development. The development may be divided into several
improvement phases and shall be so divided if the time for full implementation thereof is expected to exceed four (4) years. No work shall be included
in an improvement plan unless it can, under normal circumstances, be completed within four (4) years and completion within such period is planned.
Applications shall be accompanied by an original inked tracing on linen or Mylar, eighteen (18) prints of the proposed improvement plan, or such other
number as the village clerk may designate by administrative order, and four (4) copies of all required supporting data, drawings and documents. The
proposed improvement plan shall be consistent with the approved development plan. The village board shall refer the application for approval of the
proposed improvement plan to the plan commission for its recommendations and report.
B. The village clerk shall refer seventeen (17) copies of the proposed improvement plan to the plan commission, and one copy to the village engineer at
least twenty one (21) days in advance of the next meeting of the plan commission.
C. The plan commission shall notify the owner as to the time and place of the plan commission meeting at which he will be afforded an opportunity of
being heard. The village engineer shall furnish the plan commission a report on his review of the proposed improvement plan.
D. The plan commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of the improvement plan within ninety (90) days from the date of filing the application or
the filing by the applicant of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by mutual consent.
E. When the proposed improvement plan has been acted upon by the plan commission, it shall be referred to the village board. If the plan commission
recommends approval of the plan, it shall so indicate on the plan; and if it recommends disapproval of the plan, it shall furnish the village board and
the applicant a written statement setting forth the reason for disapproval and specifying, with particularity, the aspects in which the proposed plan fails
to conform to these standards and the approved development plan. The village board shall approve or disapprove said plan within thirty (30) days after
its first regular meeting following the action of the plan commission.
F. Recommendation for approval of the proposed improvement plan by the plan commission, and approval by the village board, may be conditioned upon
compliance with such stipulations as they may deem necessary and proper.
G. Upon approval of the improvement plan in final form by the village board, and the receipt of any remaining required documents, the village clerk shall
certify such approval on the plan and have one Mylar or equal transparency made and deliver the plan or transparency to the owner at his option. The
cost of the transparency shall be paid by the owner.
H. On certification, one copy of the approved improvement plan, together with one set of supporting data, shall be retained in the village clerk's files, two
(2) complete sets retained by the village engineer and one complete set returned to the owner. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
14-5-3: IMPROVEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
A. General: The improvement plan shall be drawn with black waterproof drawing ink on transparent linen tracing cloth, or equal, in such a manner that
clear and legible transparent or contact prints can be made.
B. Identification And Description: The improvement plan shall include:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 420/438
1. Location by section, township and range and by other legal description necessary to clearly locate and describe the entire tract described in the
approved development plan which includes the area to be improved.
2. A scale drawing prepared and certified by a registered surveyor showing the topography, the boundary lines and the area of the tract as a whole
and of the part thereof to be improved drawn to a scale not smaller than one hundred feet to one inch (1" = 100').
3. Names and addresses of the owner of the tract and of the surveyor who prepared the plat.
4. North point (true north).
5. Date of survey and preparation.
C. Existing Conditions:
1. The improvement plan shall include:
a. Boundary lines of the entire tract of land included in the approved development plan.
b. Total acreage of the tract.
c. Existing zoning classifications of adjacent tracts.
d. Boundary lines of each part of the tract showing those areas reserved for open space and those reserved for buildings and parking under the
approved development plan.
e. Location, widths and names of all existing or previously approved streets or other rights of way showing type of improvement (if any), utility rights
of way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, easements and section and corporate lines within the tract and
to a distance of at least two hundred feet (200') beyond the tract.
f. Location map, drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals one thousand feet (1" = 1,000'), showing boundary linesof adjoining unsubdivided
or subdivided land within an area bounded by the nearest arterial streets or other natural boundaries, identifying the type of use and ownership of
such surrounding land and showing the alignments of all existing streets and boundaries.
g. Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground facilities within the tract and to a distance of at least two
hundred feet (200') beyond the tract, also indicating such data as grades, invert elevations and locations of catch basins, manholes and hydrants.
h. Topographic data including existing contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet (2'), except in unusual topographical conditions such
vertical intervals may be required to be altered as determined by the village engineer. Topographic data shall refer to the United States geological
survey datum and shall show the location of watercourses, marshes and other significant features. Soil boring data and seepage tests may be
required at locations and depths as determined by the village engineer.
i. Locations of, or reference to, locations of existing monuments or survey markers used in preparation of survey and grade elevations of each
monument and marker.
2. The improvement plan shall be accompanied by:
a. A copy of the approved development plan and each prior approved improvement plan for the tract, all certified by the village clerk.
b. As built drawings for all land improvements on the tract completed pursuant to prior approved improvement plans.
c. When the proposed improvement plan contains less than the entire tract included in the development plan, the improvement plan shall also be
accompanied by preliminary drawings indicating any proposed extension of land improvements in areas of the development plan not yet included
in an approved improvement plan.
d. When an improvement plan or plans have previously been approved for the tract or any part thereof, the application shall show:
(1) All improvements approved in earlier improvement plans.
(2) The extent to which those improvements have been completed.
(3) A summary of floor area ratio, open space, structure heights and off street parking for each such phase.
D. Proposed Improvement Design Features: The proposed improvement plan shall:
1. Be in substantial accord with the approved development plan.
2. Indicate the layout of private streets showing proposed pavement widths and street names. Street names shall not duplicate the name of any street
heretofore used in the village or its environs unless it is an extension of, or in line with, an already named street, in which event that name shall be
used.
3. Indicate the location and width of bicycle and bridle paths, pedestrianways and easements.
4. Indicate the exact location, heights and square footage of floor area of proposed buildings and parking areas.
5. Indicate building setback lines, where applicable, indicating dimensions.
6. Indicate the proposed location of sewers, water mains, storm drains and detention facilities, and proposed methods of sewage disposal and water
supply.
7. No land which is subject to periodic flooding, which lies in floodplain areas as designated in title 9 of this code, or which contains inadequate
drainage facilities, will be approved for occupancy in an improvement plan; unless the owner agrees to make all necessary improvements and
agrees to all required covenants which will, in the opinion of the village engineer, plan commission and village board, make such land safe for
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 421/438
occupancy and provide necessary safeguards for adjacent property which would be affected by the filling, grading, drainage or other changes being
permitted or required for this improvement.
8. All streets (private or public) and easements within or adjacent to the property included in the plan shall have all angular and linear dimensions
given and all radii, internal angles, bearings, points of curvature, tangents and lengths of all curves reflected so that no dimensions or data are
missing which may be required for the future relocation of any of the corners or boundaries of streets and easements. All dimensions shall be given
to the nearest hundredth of a foot.
9. Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use within the tract.
10. The proposed location of any entrance structures and landscaping intended to identify the development and provide an entranceway or
entranceways to the development.
11. The general design and development standards of chapter 6 of this title shall govern all ORA3 development, except for the following parts:
subsections 14-6-3A2, E, F and H of this title, all of which are waived.
E. Information Required For Development Involving A Floodplain: Accompanying the first improvement plan for each development which involves any
portion of a floodplain as described within title 9 of this code, there shall be furnished the information and data as required within said title 9 of this
code.
F. Supporting Documents: The improvement plan shall be accompanied by the following supporting documents when submitted:
1. Final plans, specifications and cost estimates prepared by a registered professional engineer for all planned land improvements including a detailed
grading plan. The village engineer and other public officials having jurisdiction shall approve such plans and specifications provided that they comply
with all applicable requirements of the village, and such approval shall be certified on the improvement plan.
2. Complete plans and specifications of any development gateway prepared by a registered professional architect, and based upon the conditions of
approval of the development plan. The applicant will have obtained approval from all governmental agencies having jurisdiction over, or rights in, the
property on which such gateway is proposed to be located, other than the village of Oak Brook, prior to submission of said improvement plan to the
plan commission. Plans and specifications shall be approved by the village engineer, director of community development and other public officials
having jurisdiction provided that they comply with all applicable requirements of the village, and such approval certified on the improvement plan.
3. A draft of all necessary or advisable covenants and easements acceptable in form and substance to the village board.
4. An improvement plan agreement signed by the owner listing the following:
a. The land improvements the owner proposes to construct at his expense, the time of their completion and the method of payment for such
construction.
b. The amount, method and time of payment of any agreed reimbursement by the owner to the village for such improvements necessitated by the
development to be constructed by the village.
c. Additional requirements:
(1) The method of selection of contractors to be engaged by the owner, provision for the village engineer's review and approval of said
contractors, provision requiring that the improvements be completed in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the village
engineer within four(4) years following the approval of the improvement plan by the village board, and provision requiring them to submit
evidence of insurance covering their employees.
(2) That all inspection fees are paid.
(3) That one set of specifications and the original tracings or Mylar copies of the improvement drawings, corrected to show all actual as built
improvements, shall be filed with the village engineer prior to acceptance of the improvements by the village board.
d. Standard documents to be filed shall include two (2) signed copies of an agreement between the owner and the registered professional engineer
representing the owner providing for the design, layout and inspection of the construction of all improvements to be constructed by the owner,
hydrant benchmark listing, record drawing generation, certification after completion, and a statement and bond in the amount of fifteen percent
(15%) of the cost of the public improvements to be constructed by the owner, providing for the owner to be responsible for repairs and corrections
which may be required due to failures or because of, or on account of, faulty construction for one year beyond final acceptance of such
improvements by the village board.
5. A detailed landscaping plan as required under the provisions of the zoning ordinance to be approved by the village board.
G. Completion Bond: A completion bond shall be posted by the owner with the village clerk prior to the village clerk's certification of the approval of the
improvement plan. Such completion bond shall be in a penal sum sufficient to cover the cost of the public improvements to be constructed by the
owner and executed by a surety acceptable to the village board, or in lieu of bond, a deposit of cash, or other security or undertaking acceptable to the
village board. If a completion bond or other guarantee is posted, there should be a good and sufficient surety thereon, approved as to form by the
village attorney and conditioned upon the installation of said public improvements, and payment of inspection fees, within four (4) years following the
approval of the improvement plan. If cash or other security is deposited, it may be used to defray the cost of making such improvements as provided in
an agreement between the village and the owner accepting said deposit as complying herewith. Such agreement shall provide that no payments shall
be made from the cash or other security deposited without the joint consent of the village engineer and the owner. Any unused balance will be
returned to the depositor after acceptance of the public improvements by the village. There shall be no reduction of that portion of the bond or other
guarantee or deposit applying to a particular improvement unless, and until, that improvement is complete and accepted or approved by the village
board; except that upon the completion of majorportions of the work, as determined by the village engineer, the village board may reduce the amount
of that portion of the bond or other guarantee or deposit covering such public improvements completed, but such reduction shall not be more than an
amount equal to ninety percent (90%) of the estimated cost. The completion bond shall be acknowledged before a notary public by the principal and
surety, and shall include the following provisions:
1. A penal sum in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this subsection.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 422/438
2. Irrevocably bind the principal, surety, their heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, jointly and severally.
3. Completion date of public improvements to be constructed by the owner.
4. Description of public improvements to be constructed by the owner.
5. Provide for construction of the improvements in a good and workmanlike manner in conformance with the ordinances and standards of the village
and in accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
6. Provide for repairs and corrections which may be required due to failures or faulty construction.
7. Payment of all inspection fees.
8. Such other provisions as may be required by the village.
In addition to these requirements in this subsection G, security requirements of title 9 of this code shall also apply.
H. Village Clerk Certificate: The village clerk shall not certify the approval of the village board on the improvement plan until the required bond or deposit
has been filed, and written evidence from any governmental agencies, if other than the village, filed showing their willingness, ability and agreement to
accept and maintain all applicable dedicated areas or improvements.
I. Village Engineer's Services And Fees:
1. The village engineer shall review the land improvement plans and specifications, confer with the owner's engineers and make periodic inspections
during construction of all required land improvements to assure compliance with the requirements of this title. The fee for this work will be paid by
the owner in accordance with subsections 1-14-1E3 and E4 of this code. The fee shall be due and payable following approval of the improvement
plan and prior to certification of the plan by the village clerk.
2. Upon completion of the land improvements, the owner's registered professional engineer responsible for the improvement plans shall file the as built
Mylar tracings of the improvement drawings with the village engineer and shall file a certificate with the village clerk stating all construction has been
completed in accordance with the plans and specifications and meets the requirements of applicable village ordinances. As built drawings shall also
include the requirements of subsection 14-6-3B3 of this title. Upon satisfactory completion of the work and receipt of these, the village engineer shall
submit a statement to the village board recommending acceptance of said improvements by the village. Upon receipt of this statement and
acceptance of the improvements by the village board, the improvements shall be considered complete and the improvement bonds or deposits
released, as applicable.
J. Definition: For purposes of subsections F4d and G of this section, the term "public improvement" shall mean land improvements that are to be owned
and maintained by the village or other governmental body, after completion of construction, and in addition, other land improvements that are privately
owned which, if not completed, may adversely affect other properties, such as, but not limited to, on site storm water detention ponds, and bicycle
pathways.
K. Storm Water Facilities: Any improvements to be constructed shall also be governed by title 9 of this code as they relate to storm water facilities. In case
of conflict between this chapter and title 9 of this code, title 9 of this code shall govern. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
Chapter 6
GENERAL DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
14-6-1: CONFORMANCE REQUIRED:
All subdivision plans shall conform to design standards that will encourage good development patterns and adhere to the goals and standards which are
generally exhibited in the official plan. The streets, drainage, rights of way, school sites, public parks, playgrounds and other public facilities that are
shown on the officially adopted comprehensive plan and/or official map shall be considered in the subdivision plat. Every subdivision approved shall be in
harmony with all applicable sections of the zoning ordinance of the village including any amendments. The proposed improvements shall be designed and
constructed substantially in compliance with the public works construction standards as referenced in section 8-1-3 of this code. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002;
Ord. G-781, 6-14-2005)
14-6-2: DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Block Layout:
1. In determining the shape and size of blocks, existing topographic features, basic street system and traffic plan, areas designated for public and
other nonresidential land use, and the minimum lot areas and dimensions required by the village zoning ordinance for the applicable zoning area
shall be considered.
2. In residential subdivisions, the maximum length of blocks shall be two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) linear feet. No blocks shall be less than
nine hundred (900) linear feet in length unless approved by the plan commission. In nonresidential subdivisions, maximum length of blocks shall be
as approved by the plan commission.
Where a subdivision borders upon or is traversed by a thoroughfare and frontage access is necessary, frontage roads (on 1 or both sides of such
thoroughfare) shall be provided as needed.
B. Lot Design Standards:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 423/438
1. Lots shall abut on a street. Flag or interior lots shall not be permitted unless after review by the village engineer, plan commission, and board of
trustees, a determination is made that the land in question cannot be reasonably developed in any other way. When a flag or interior lot is permitted,
the area of any such lot which is used for access shall not be construed as the front yard of said lot nor shall the access area be used to satisfy any
other yard, setback or minimum lot area requirement as set forth in the zoning ordinance, and said access area shall be a minimum of twenty feet
(20') in width except when the plan commission may deem additional width to be necessary.
2. Side lines of lots should be approximately at right angles to straight streets and on radial lines on curved streets. Very irregular lots should be
avoided.
3. Through lots should be avoided except that in residential districts along thoroughfares, lots shall face on the interior street with a no vehicular
access area along such thoroughfares. Through lots in all ORA (including O) and all business districts shall meet such special access requirements
as the village board on recommendation of the plan commission may require.
4. Minimum lot areas, dimensions and setback lines shall conform to the provisions of the zoning ordinance for the district in which the subdivision is
located within the corporate limits of the village. Lot sizes in those areas outside the corporate limits shall be in conformance with the applicable
ordinances regulating lot sizes outside the corporate boundaries.
5. Wherever retail stores are to be located, it is recommended that a unit shopping center based on sound development standards be designed in
contrast to the platting of lots for individual commercial use.
6. Corner residential lots shall be of sufficient width to permit appropriate setbacks from both streets.
7. Lots abutting upon watercourses, drainageways, channels or streams shall have an additional depth or width as required by the plan commission if
necessary to provide adequate acceptable building sites.
8. Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage easement, granted to the village of Oak Brook if
within the village or to the county of DuPage if outside the village conforming substantially with the floodplain areas bordering such watercourse. The
floodplain areas shall be as determined by the village engineer in accordance with title 9 of this code. Such easement shall include access for the
purpose of maintenance of such watercourse.
C. Public Use Areas: When an area of land for public use (in addition to streets, alleys, pedestrianways and utility easements) shall be required by the
plan commission to be located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the subdivider shall designate on the preliminary plat and final plat that such land is
reserved for public use.
D. Topography:
1. In the subdivision of any lands, due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as large trees, watercourses, topography and other elements
which, if preserved, would add attractiveness to the proposed development.
2. Consideration should be given to varying the building setback lines for a subdivision in order to retain large trees, use existing topography, and add
variety of appearance.
3. Land that is subject to periodic flooding cannot be developed unless it complies with the standards established in subsection 14-3-3C9 of this title.
4. No construction shall take place within the areas subject to flooding as depicted upon the flood hazard maps, except where appropriate exhibits and
documents are prepared and approved for use in the floodplain in accordance with title 9 of this code. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002; Ord. G-781, 6-14-
2005)
14-6-3: LAND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS:
The following improvements and standards for those improvements are hereby required for all subdivisions in the planning jurisdiction area of the village:
A. Streets: A paved street system designed and constructed in accordance with village standards shall be installed to serve all lots in the subdivision.
1. Comply With Official Plan: Street layout shall be in accordance with the official plan of the village and environs, or federal, state or county authorities
having jurisdiction, whichever has the greater requirements.
2. Width: Minimum right of way and pavement widths shall be as follows:
Thoroughfares Collector Streets
Local
Streets Frontage
Roads
Row Width 100'* 80' 66' 40' residential
50'
nonresidential
Residential
Pavement
width
Nonresidential
2 @ 24'*
2 @ 24'*
32'
Alternate
2 @ 20'
40'*
Alternate
2 @ 20'
27'
32'
27'
32'
Separate turn lanes required for
all left turn movements
Median strip 18' recommended Optional (10' Optional (10'
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 424/438
10' minimum
(8' minimum @ turn lanes)
minimum if used) minimum if used)
*Additional width may be required by the village board on recommendation of the plan commission if deemed necessary to carry projected traffic loads
when recommended by the village engineer and applicable county and state agencies.
a. Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations and where the village board finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided.
Wherever an existing or dedicated half street is adjacent to a tract being subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract.
b. Pavement Widths: Pavement widths given are face to face of curbs.
c. Roadway Pavements: Roadway pavements in cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum diameter, measured from faces of the outside curb or outside
edges of roadway pavement of one hundred twenty feet (120'). Roadway pavements in T-type or other variations of the circular type terminus may
be as approved by the village board on recommendation of the plan commission on a temporary basis.
3. Curbs And Gutters: Curbs and gutters shall be required and installed in accordance with the village standards and specifications in all subdivisions,
provided that this requirement may be waived by the village board for good cause shown by the owner. The plan commission, when making its
recommendations to the village board, shall state whether or not in its opinion such requirement should be waived.
4. Street Gradients:
Minimum all streets 0.5%
Maximum minor residential 9.0%
Maximum all other 5.0%
5. Alignment Of Local Streets: Local streets should be so aligned that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
6. Street Jogs: Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall not be permitted.
7. Intersections: All street intersections should be at or near right angles avoiding acute angles.
An intersection of more than two (2) streets shall be avoided unless specific conditions of design preclude a different layout.
8. Residential Alleys: Alleys are not permitted in any residentially zoned areas.
B. Water Distribution System: A water distribution systemdesigned and constructed in accordance with village standards and requirements shall be
installed to serve all properties within the subdivision and shall include water mains, fittings, fire hydrants with auxiliary valves, valves and valve vaults
and water service lines to property line for each lot.
1. System layout shall conform with the long range water plans of the village of Oak Brook. All mains shall be a minimum of six inch (6") diameter.
2. Fire hydrants with auxiliary valves and valve boxes shall be installed at intervals not to exceed three hundred feet (300') and not less than four feet
(4') from the edge of street pavement.
3. Upon satisfactory construction and adjustment of all proposed fire hydrants, the developer shall have a registered land surveyor ascertain and list
the elevation of either the arrow on the hydrant bonnet or the letters "MUE" on the bonnet flange of each fire hydrant. These elevations shall be
based on USGS datum as currently used within the village of Oak Brook as determined by the village engineer. Said list shall be certified as correct
by the registered land surveyor and submitted to the village engineer prior to the acceptance of the land improvements by the village.
C. Sanitary Sewer System: Sanitary sewer lines including house service sewer stubs to the property line for each lot shall be installed to adequately
service all property in the subdivision.
1. Sanitary sewer layout shall conform to the long range sanitary sewer plans of the village.
2. Design and construction of sanitary sewers shall conform to the design criteria adopted by the Illinois environmental protection agency.
3. All sanitary sewers will be checked on completion in accordance with the appropriate sanitary district's requirements. This work will be the
responsibility of and at the cost of the developer. The developer shall meet the record drawing requirements of subsection 14-6-4A of this chapter.
D. Storm Drainage System: Storm water drainage systems shall be designed and constructed to service the entire subdivision to carry off water from all
sump pumps, inlets, catch basins, or open drainageways, and be connected with an adequate outfall. The storm drainage system shall be separate
and independent of the sanitary sewer system. It shall consist of sewers, manholes, inlets, catch basins and other necessary facilities to adequately
drain the subdivision, protect roadway pavements, and prevent standing water except in designed retention basins.
1. Storm sewer system shall conform to the long range needs of the village. The storm sewer system shall be designed and installed to meet the
requirements for sewer construction of the village.
2. The amount of runoff from the proposed improvement shall not exceed the existing capacity of downstream outfall or the increased capacity of
downstream outfall as improved.
3. All runoff in excess of that amount carried by the downstream outfall shall be stored safely without damage to public or private property.
4. Storm water drainage and detention systems shall meet the requirements of title 9 of this code.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 425/438
E. Sidewalks: Paved sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of each street, provided that this requirement may be waived by the village board for good
cause shown by the owner. The plan commission, when making its recommendations to the village board, shall state whether or not in its opinion such
requirement should be waived.
Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet (5') and be constructed in accordance with standard requirements of the village.
F. Street Lighting System: A street lighting system shall be installed on all streets within the subdivision, designed and constructed in accordance with the
lighting standards as adopted by the village, unless waived by the village board for residential subdivisions. The plan commission, when making its
recommendations to the village board, shall state whether or not in its opinion such requirements should be waived or modified.
G. Public Utilities:
1. All utility distribution lines, including, but not limited to, telephone, electric and gas service in the subdivision, shall be placed underground.
2. Underground telephone, electric and gas service shall be placed within easements or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not conflict with
other underground services. All transformer boxes and service posts shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public.
H. Signs: Street signs shall be furnished and erected to identify every street within the subdivision and shall be so designed and constructed as to
conform with village standards1.
I. Grading, Landscaping, And Sediment And Erosion Control:
1. A grading, landscaping, and sediment and erosion control plan shall be submitted for all property within the subdivision. Except for the traveled
portions of areas designated as rights of way or as bicycle and pedestrian pathways, all areas shall be graded, seeded and planted in accordance
with the approved grading, landscaping, and sediment and erosion control plan. Such plan shall conform to the standards set forth in title 9 of this
code.
2. Street trees should be provided by the subdivider along all streets where trees do not exist. Trees should be of approved species at least two and
one-half inch (21/2") caliper, spaced not more than forty feet (40') apart, and planted in accordance with village standards.
3. Median strips shall be planted with trees and shrubs in accordance with a landscaping plan approved by the village board and village engineer.
4. The shoreline of all lakes shall be protected by use of a nonerodible material or appropriate bioengineering technique.
J. Monuments And Markers:
1. Permanent monuments consisting of steel pipes or bars not less than three-quarters of an inch (3/4") in diameter and thirty six inches (36") long
incased in concrete at least four inches (4") in diameter and thirty six inches (36") long shall be located at the four (4) extreme corners of the
subdivision.
2. Markers consisting of steel pipe or bars not less than three-quarters of an inch (3/4") in diameter and thirty inches (30") long shall be located as
follows:
a. At all points where lot lines intersect street right of way lines.
b. At all angles in the lot property lines and at the beginning and end of all curves in the property lines.
c. At all other lot corners.
d. In the case of a private street without a dedicated right of way, at all points where lot lines intersect street easement lines or an offset from street
easement lines of a dimension approved by the village engineer and specified on the final plat.
3. Monuments and markers should be provided by the subdivider and so placed that the center point should coincide with the intersection of lines to
be marked and the top level with the surface of the surrounding ground after final grading.
K. Easements: Utility distribution or transmissioninstallations serving the subdivision, and storm water drainageways shall be located in easements as
designated on the subdivision plat of record. Such easements shall be located along the rear lot lines or side lot lines. They shall occupy not less than
the rear ten feet (10') of lot depth on each lot and not less than six feet (6') adjacent to side lot lines. Additional easements at other locations on the lot
or additional widths may be required for specific conditions by the village engineer.
L. Subdivision Gateways:
1. May be located in the right of way of a street providing access to a subdivision (hereinafter referred to as an "access street") and on the right of way
of the collector street into which such street connects, provided that the subdivision gateway does not extend more than sixty feet (60') from the
centerline of the access street at the point where said centerline intersects right of way of said collector street and that said subdivision gateway is
located on the right of way between the roadway and the subdivision. The subdivision gateway may be located on the access street right of way
provided it conforms to all applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the village.
2. Must be located twelve feet (12') or more from the back of the curb or edge of the pavement, if there is no curb, of the above described streets,
except that portions thereof not more than forty two inches (42") above the ground may be located not less than seven feet (7') from the back of the
curb or edge of the pavement, if there is no curb, of the above described street.
3. Must be three feet (3') or more from the nearest lot line of the nearest buildable lot.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 426/438
4. Structures shall be not more than fifteen feet (15') in height.
5. Shall provide an acceptable sight distance and safe pathway for pedestrian and bicycle access as determined by the village engineer. Such
pathways shall be at least six feet (6') wide on one or both sides of the above described street.
6. May be located on a median in the access street provided the portion on such median is not more than forty two inches (42") above the ground.
7. May have lettering not exceeding twelve inches (12") in height attached thereto identifying the subdivision, excluding the subdivision logo.
8. May include guardhouses and bays if such structures are not located in a right of way and provide adequate stacking of vehicles, screening and
adequate sight distance as determined by the village engineer.
9. Must be maintained by the developer or successor homeowners pursuant to covenants running with the land acceptable to the village board. The
developer or homeowners shall be responsible for all costs or increases in costs, incurred by public utilities or public bodies in carrying out their
public duties, if such costs, or increases in costs, result from the existence of said subdivision gateway.
10. May be removed by the village at the developers' or homeowners' expense upon thirty (30) days' notice if said subdivision gateway is not being
maintained to the satisfaction of the village board. The cost of such removal shall constitute a lien against the land in the subdivision for the benefit
of the village.
11. If illuminated, should be illuminated so that passing traffic can readily identify these entrances as an aid in judging turning movements, as opposed
to high intensity lighting.
M. Flood Control: The following rules shall govern the design of land improvements with respect to floodplains:
1. General: All proposed subdivision and other developments, within the floodplain, shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage, that all public utilities and facilities (such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems) are
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and that adequate drainage is provided.
2. Design: Streets, blocks, depths of lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize
natural streams, channels and detention basins. Whenever possible, the larger streams and floodplains shall be included within parks or other public
grounds.
3. Development Within Floodplains: The requirements of title 9 of this code as they relate to development within floodplains shall be followed.
4. Street Pavements: The crown of street pavements hereafter constructed in floodplains shall not be lower than the established base flood elevation
plus one foot (1') in the case of collector or higher classification streets and plus zero feet (0') in the case of local streets.
5. Rear Lot Lines: Whenever the plans call for the passage of floodwaters, surface runoff, or excess storm water along rear lot lines, the grading of all
such lots shall be prescribed and established as part of the subdivision plat. Within these floodway areas so designated for the passage of such
waters, no structure or fences may be erected, no shrubbery or trees may be planted, and no changes may be made to the prescribed grades and
contours of the specified floodwater or storm waterrunoff channels.
6. Manholes: All sanitary sewer manholes constructed in a floodplain must have a rim elevation of a minimum of three feet (3') above the base flood
elevation or shall have waterproof covers.
7. Water Supply And Sanitary Sewer Systems: The design of water supply and sanitary sewer systems to be located in the floodplain shall minimize or
eliminate the discharges from the system into the floodwaters and the infiltration of floodwaters into the system. On site waste disposal systems
shall be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during or subsequent to the 100-year flood. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-
2002; Ord. G-781, 6-14-2005)
14-6-4: RECORD DRAWINGS, ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATION, SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATION, AND ACCEPTANCE OF
IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Record Drawings: Upon completion of the land improvements, the subdivider's registered professional engineer responsible for the improvement plans
shall take the original Mylar improvement plans or Mylar copies and correct them to show all actual as built improvements, shall create electronic files
in an electronic format as specified by the village depicting the corrected improvement drawings, and shall supply them to the village engineer.
B. Engineer's Certification: Upon completion of the land improvements, the subdivider's registered professional engineer responsible for the improvement
plans shall file a certificate with the village engineer stating that all construction has been completed in accordance with the plans and specifications
approved by the village and meets the requirements set forth by the village.
C. Surveyor's Certification: Upon completion of the land improvements, the subdivider's surveyor responsible for the required surveying services shall file
a certificate with the village engineer stating that all requirements of subsection 14-6-3J of this chapter have been completed.
D. Acceptance Of Improvements: Upon completion of all required land improvements as determined by the village engineer and submission of:
1. Evidence of payment in full for all work acceptable to the village attorney; and
2. Mylar record drawings and electronic record drawings; and
3. The engineer's certification; and
4. The surveyor's certification; and
5. The hydrant benchmark listing,
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 427/438
the village engineer shall submit a statement to the village board indicating the satisfactory completion of the subdivider's obligations and
recommending acceptance of said improvements by the village. Upon receipt of this statement and acceptance by the village board, the
improvements shall be considered complete and the subdivision security reduced to fifteen percent (15%) of its original amount and remain in force
for one year as a maintenance security to ensure that the subdivider repairs and corrects any land improvement failures or faulty construction. (Ord.
G-708, 12-10-2002)
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
14-7-1: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
A. Subdivision Regulations: No plat of any subdivision shall be recorded in the recorder's office of DuPage County or have any validity until it shall have
been approved in the manner prescribed in these regulations.
B. Building Codes And Other Applicable Ordinances: No permit shall be issued by any official for the construction of any building, structure or
improvement to land or any lot:
1. Within a "subdivision", as defined herein, prior to recording of the final plat therefor; or
2. Within a tract for which an improvement plan is required, prior to certification of the approval of the improvement plan by the village clerk pursuant to
subsection 14-5-2G of this title.
C. Occupancy Permits: No occupancy permit shall be granted by any official for the use of any structure within a subdivision approved for platting or
replatting until required utility facilities have been installed and made ready to service the property; and provided further that roadways providing
access to the subject lot or lots have been constructed or are in the course of construction and are suitable for vehicular traffic. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-
2002)
14-7-2: PLAT FEES:
A. Preliminary Plat Filing: Fees for preliminary plats shall be as stated in title 1, chapter 14 of this code.
B. Final Plat Filing: Fees for final plats shall be as stated in title 1, chapter 14 of this code.
C. Final Plat Recording: The subdivider shall pay the village the recording fees and the cost of printing any required copies.
D. Engineering Review And Inspection: Fees for review andinspection of improvements shall be as stated in title 1, chapter 14 of this code. (Ord. G-708,
12-10-2002)
14-7-3: RECORD OF PLATS:
All of such plats of subdivisions, after the same have been submitted, approved and recorded as provided by statute and in these regulations, shall be
filed and kept by the village clerk among the records of the village. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
14-7-4: VARIATIONS AND AMENDMENTS:
A. Variations: The plan commission may recommend variations from the requirements of this title in specific cases which, in its opinion, are in harmony
with the intent and purpose of the official plan of the village and in harmony with the spirit and intent of these regulations. Such recommendations shall
be communicated to the corporate authorities and, where the land affected lies outside the corporate limits, to the appropriate governing authorities of
DuPage County. The village president and board of trustees may approve variations from these requirements for subdivisions within the village limits
or for those where the land affected lies within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the limits of the village, when, in its opinion, such variations will not be
contrary to the purpose or intent of the official plan and the spirit and intent of this title.
B. Amendments: These regulations may be amended by the village board from time to time. The plan commission shall hold a public hearing, due notice
of which shall be given, on proposed amendments. Upon completion of the public hearing, the plan commission shall make written recommendation to
the president and board of trustees for the board's consideration. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
14-7-5: CERTIFICATES:
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 428/438
COUNTY OF DUPAGE )
This is to certify that the undersigned is the owner of the land described in the annexed plat, and has caused the same to be surveyed and subdivided,
as indicated thereon, for the uses and purposes therein set forth, and does hereby acknowledge and adopt the same under the style and title thereon
indicated.
The undersigned hereby dedicates for public use the lands shown on this plat for thoroughfares, streets, alleys and public services; and hereby also
reserves for and grants easements for public use and for the installation of various public utilities as designated and/or as stated in the utility easement
provisions which are stated hereon.
All easements indicated as public utility easements on this plat are reserved for and granted to the Village of Oak Brook and to those public and private
utility companies operating within the Village including, but not limited to, Ameritech, Commonwealth Edison Company, Northern Illinois Gas Company,
Downers Grove* or Hinsdale* Sanitary District, and their successors and assigns for the perpetual right, privilege and authority to install, construct,
reconstruct, inspect, replace, alter, enlarge, remove, repair, clean, operate and maintain various utility, transmission, distribution, collection and drainage
systems together with any and all necessary buffalo boxes, connections, hydrants, manholes, catch basins, pipes, sanitary or storm sewers, swales,
water mains, cables, wires, conduits, transformers, pedestals, and without limitation such other appurtenances or devices as may be deemed necessary
by said Village or utility company upon, along, under and through said indicated easements, together with right of access across the property for
necessary workers and equipment to do any of the above work and the right is also granted to cut down, trim or remove any trees, shrubs or other plants
on the easement that interfere with the operation of sewers or other utilities. No permanent buildings or structures shall be placed on said easements,
except as referenced above, but same may be used for gardens, shrubs, landscaping and other purposes that do not then or later interfere with the
aforesaid uses or rights. Whenever the Village or affected utility company determines that any tree, shrubs, vegetation, or other structures or objects
(herein collectively known as "obstruction") on said easements interfere with the aforesaid uses or rights, the Village or utility company has the right, but
not the obligation, to remove the obstruction at the property owner's expense. The Village or affected utility company will apply grass seed where the
obstruction has been removed, but is not required to replace or repair any obstruction. All installations are subject to the ordinances of the Village of Oak
Brook.
Address
Dated this day of , 20 .
(*Insert only applicable agency where italicized)
NOTARY CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF DUPAGE )
I, , a Notary Public in and for said County, in the state aforesaid, do hereby certify that personally known to me to be the same persons whose names
are subscribed to the aforesaid instrument as such owners, appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that they signed the annexed plat
as their own free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes therein set forth.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this day of , 20 .
Notary Public
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF DUPAGE )
This is to certify that I, , Registered Illinois Land Surveyor No. , have surveyed and subdivided the following described property:
(Insert legal description)
as shown by the annexed plat, which is a correct representation of said survey and subdivision. All distances are shown in feet and decimals thereof. I
further certify that all regulations enacted by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Oak Brook relative to plats and subdivisions have been
complied with in preparation of this plat. I further certify that the land is within the Village of Oak Brook (or within 11/2 miles of the corporate limits of the
Village of Oak Brook) which has adopted a Village Comprehensive Plan and Map and is exercising the powers authorized by Division 12 of Article 11 of
the Illinois Municipal Code as amended. I further certify that a part of* (all of*)(none of*) the lands shown on this plat are located within a special flood
hazard area as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Given under my hand and seal at , Illinois, this day of , 20 .
(*Insert only applicable portion where italicized)
SCHOOL DISTRICT CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF DUPAGE )
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 429/438
This is to certify that I, , as owner of the property described as the Subdivision and legally described on this plat of the same name, have determined, to
the best of my knowledge, the school districts in which each of the following lots lies:
School Districts
Lot Number(s) Elementary High School
Dated this day of , 20 .
Address
CERTIFICATE AS TO SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF DUPAGE )
I, , Village Treasurer of the Village of Oak Brook do hereby certify that there are no delinquent or unpaid current or forfeited special assessments or any
deferred installments thereof that have been apportioned against the tract of land included in the plat.
Dated at Oak Brook, DuPage County, Illinois, this day of , 20 .
Treasurer
COUNTY CLERK CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF DUPAGE )
I, , County Clerk of DuPage County, Illinois, do hereby certify that there are no delinquent general taxes, no unpaid forfeited taxes, and no redeemable
tax sales against any of the land included in the annexed plat.
Given under my hand and seal at Wheaton, DuPage County, Illinois,this day of , 20 .
County Clerk
COUNTY RECORDER'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF DUPAGE )
This instrument was filed for record in the Recorder's Office of DuPage County, Illinois, on the day of , 20 , at o'clock m., and was recorded in Book of
Plats on Page .
Recorder of Deeds
DRAINAGE CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF DUPAGE )
To the best of our knowledge and belief, the drainage of surface waters will not be changed by the construction of such subdivision or any part thereof,
or, that if such surface water drainage will be changed, reasonable provision has been made for collection and diversion of such surface waters into public
areas, or drains which the subdivider has a right to use, and that such surface waters will be planned for in accordance with generally accepted
engineering practices so as to reduce the likelihood of damage to the adjoining property because of the construction of the subdivision.
Dated this day of , 20 .
Engineer Owner or Attorney
PLAN COMMISSION CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF DUPAGE )
Approved by the Plan Commission of the Village of Oak Brook, DuPage County, Illinois, this day of , 20 .
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 430/438
Chairman
SANITARY DISTRICT CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF DUPAGE )
I, , Secretary of the Sanitary District, DuPage County, Illinois, hereby certify that there are no delinquent or unpaid current or forfeited special
assessments or any deferred installments thereof that have been confirmed against the tract of land included in the plat.
Dated at , Illinois, this day of , 20 .
Secretary
VILLAGE CLERK'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF DUPAGE )
I, , Village Clerk of the Village of Oak Brook, Illinois, hereby certify that the annexed plat was presented to and by resolution duly approved by the
Village Board of said Village at its meeting held on , 20 , and that the required bond or other guarantee has been posted for the completion of the
improvements required by the regulations of said Village.
In witness whereof I have hereto set my hand and the seal of the Village of Oak Brook, Illinois, this day of , 20 .
Village Clerk
VILLAGE ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF DUPAGE )
I, , Village Engineer of the Village of Oak Brook, Illinois, hereby certify that the land improvements described in the annexed plat and the plans and
specifications therefor meet the minimum requirements of said Village and have been approved by all public authorities having jurisdiction thereof.
Dated at Oak Brook, DuPage County, Illinois, this day of , 20 .
Village Engineer
CERTIFICATE OF COUNTY ENGINEER
(if required)
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF DUPAGE )
This plat has been approved by the DuPage County Division of Transportation with respect to roadway access to County Highway , pursuant to 765
ILCS 205/2; however, a highway permit for access is required of the owner of the property prior to construction within the County Right-of-way.
Dated this day of , 20 .
County Engineer
CERTIFICATE OF STATE HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT
(if required)
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF DUPAGE )
This plat has been approved by the Illinois Department of Transportation with respect to roadway access pursuant to Section 2 of "An Act to revise the
law in relation to plats," as amended. A plan that meets the requirements contained in the Department's "Policy on Permits for Access Driveways to State
Highways" will be required by the Department.
Dated this day of , 20 .
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 431/438
District Engineer
Illinois Department of Transportation
CERTIFICATE OF HEALTH DEPARTMENT
(if required)
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF DUPAGE )
Approved this day of , 20 .
Senior Environmental Engineer
(Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002; Ord. G-781, 6-14-2005)
14-7-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Anyone violating any of the provisions of this title shall, upon conviction, be fined as prescribed in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each
violation, and each day that such violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. (Ord. G-708, 12-10-2002)
Title 15
ILLICIT DISCHARGE
Chapter 1
PURPOSE
15-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the IDDE ORDINANCE OF OAK BROOK, ILLINOIS. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
15-1-2: PURPOSES OF THIS TITLE:
A. The purpose of this title is to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Oak Brook, Illinois, and protect and enhance water quality
in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.) through the regulation of
nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system. This title establishes methods for controlling the introduction of discharges other than those
occurring as a direct result of precipitation and/or snowmelt into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and the storm drainage system in
order to comply with requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) phase II permit process. Other purposes of this title
include:
1. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 and the storm drainage system by nonstormwater discharges; and
2. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4 and the storm drainage system; and
3. To protect and enhance the quality, quantity, and availability of surface and ground water resources; and
4. To preserve and enhance existing aquatic and riparian environments and encourage restoration of degraded areas; and
5. To promote equitable, acceptable, and legal measures for stormwater management. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
15-2-1: INTERPRETATION OF TERMS AND WORDS:
The terms and words used in this title shall be interpreted as follows:
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; and
B. Words used in the singular number include the plural number and words used in the plural number include the singular number; and
C. The words "shall", "will", and "must" are mandatory, not permissive; and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 432/438
D. The phrase "administrator" refers to the individual responsible for the enforcement. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
15-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Within the context of this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings set forth except where otherwise specifically indicated. Words and
terms not defined shall have the meanings indicated by common dictionary definition.
ADMINISTRATOR: The person administering the implementation and enforcement of this title. The administrator shall be the village engineer.
BUILDING: A structure that is constructed or erected partially or wholly aboveground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term "building" includes
manufactured homes and includes both the aboveground and the belowground portions of the structure.
CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA): The federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
COMMUNITY: The village of Oak Brook acting as a unit of local government.
COUNTY: The county of DuPage, Illinois.
DEPARTMENT: The DuPage County stormwater management division or successor agency.
DIRECTOR: The DuPage County director of stormwater management or successor position or his or her designee.
DRAIN: Piping and appurtenances for conveying a fluid.
FACILITY: Something that is built, installed, or established to serve a particular purpose.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material which may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial hazard to human health, safety, property, or the
environment.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: Either of the following:
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage system including, but not
limited to, any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm
drainage system and any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the community; or
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drainage system that has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records and has not been approved by the community.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm drainage system except as exempted in subsection 15-5-1C of this
title.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to an industrial NPDES stormwater permit as defined in 40 CFR section 122.26(b)(14).
LINE: A hollow conduit through which fluids are transported between two (2) or more points.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): A conveyance or system of conveyances (including, but not limited to, sidewalks, roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, and storm sewers) owned or operated by a governmental
entity and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT: A permit issued by Illinois environmental protection agency (IEPA)
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide
basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is not the direct result of precipitation and/or snowmelt in the
tributary drainage basin.
NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI): Illinois environmental protection agency notice of intent to participate in coverage under the general permit to discharge
stormwater associated with industrial activity.
OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE: The zoning board of appeals of the village of Oak Brook.
PARCEL: Contiguous land under single ownership or control.
PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership, public or private corporation, municipality, political subdivision, government agency, or any other legal
entity, including heirs, successors, agents, officers, and assigns of such entity.
pH NEUTRAL: pH value between 6.5 and 9.0 standard units.
PLAN: The DuPage County stormwater management plan, adopted by the DuPage County board in September 1989, as amended from time to time,
county ordinance OSM-0001-89.
POLLUTANT: Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, wastewater, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a
building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 433/438
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
RUNOFF: The waters derived from precipitation and/or melting snow within a tributary drainage basin that exceeds the infiltration capacity of that basin.
SEWAGE: Polluted stormwater, wastewater, or other refuse liquids usually conveyed by sewers.
SEWER: An artificial conduit to carry off sewage and/or surface water (as from rainfall), including sanitation, stormwater, and/or combined sewers.
SEWERAGE: A system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation, pumping, and treatment of sewage.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: A facility by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, rivers, creeks, natural and humanmade or
altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
STRUCTURE: Anything that is erected or constructed. The term "structure" includes, without limitation: buildings, manufactured homes, tanks, dams,
sewers, constructed channels, outfalls, parking lots, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and concrete patios.
WASTEWATER: Water that has been used and is not for reuse unless treated by a wastewater treatment facility.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES: As defined in the CWA, "waters of the United States" applies only to surface waters, rivers, lakes, estuaries, coastal
waters, and wetlands. Not all surface waters are legally "waters of the United States". Generally, those waters include the following:
A. All interstate waters;
B. Intrastate waters used in interstate and/or foreign commerce;
C. Tributaries of the above;
D. Territorial seas at the cyclical high tide mark; and
E. Wetlands adjacent to all the above. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
Chapter 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
15-3-1: APPLICABILITY:
This title shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system from any developed or undeveloped lands within the jurisdiction of the village unless
explicitly exempted by subsection 15-5-1C of this title, including any amendments or revisions thereto. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
15-3-2: INTERPRETATION:
A. The provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity,
and general welfare and the environment of the residents of the village, and to effectuate the purposes of this title and enabling legislation.
B. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this title are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any
other applicable statute, law, ordinance, regulation, or rule, the provision that is most restrictive or imposes the higher standards or requirements shall
apply.
C. The provisions of this title shall be interpreted to be cumulative of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other ordinances, laws, codes, and
regulations in existence or which may be passed governing any subject matter of this title. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this title
shall be construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of such other ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations and with each
other, to the end that all such provisions may be given their fullest application. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATION
15-4-1: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The administrator shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this title. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the administrator may
be delegated in writing by the administrator to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest, or in the employ of, the village as representatives,
contractors, designees, and/or assigns. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 434/438
15-4-2: DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATOR:
The duties and functions of the administrator shall include:
A. Determining policy related to and directing the enforcement of this title, as applicable; and
B. Supervising the execution of this title; and
C. Notifying the IEPA of any amendments to this title. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
15-4-3: REPRESENTATIVE CAPACITY:
In all cases when any action is taken by the administrator, or his or her duly appointed designee, to enforce the provisions of this title, such action shall be
taken in the name of and on behalf of the village and neither the administrator nor his or her designee, in so acting for the village, shall be rendered
personally liable. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
Chapter 5
DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS
15-5-1: PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES:
A. No person shall place, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under their control to place, drain, or otherwise discharge into the storm
drainage system or MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants other than normal stormwater unless specifically exempted in subsection C
of this section.
B. The following discharges into the MS4 or the storm drainage system shall be prohibited:
1. Discharges that are not a direct result of precipitation and/or snowmelt within the drainage area of the MS4.
2. Discharges from an illicit connection.
C. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established herein provided they do not cause an adverse effect on water quality as
determined by the administrator:
1. Discharges caused by governmental public works and stormwater management units as part of their standard operations in compliance with all
applicable regulations.
2. Discharges required by law or authorized by permit, including any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the USEPA and/or IEPA.
3. Water line and fire hydrant flushing.
4. Landscape irrigation water.
5. Rising groundwaters.
6. Groundwater infiltration.
7. Pumped groundwater.
8. Discharges from potable water sources.
9. Foundation drains.
10. Air conditioning condensate.
11. Irrigation water (except for wastewater irrigation).
12. Springs.
13. Water from crawl space pumps.
14. Footing drains.
15. Storm sewer cleaning water.
16. Water from any outdoor residential, charitable, or automobile dealership premises car wash.
17. Routine external building washdown which does not use detergents.
18. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 435/438
19. Dechlorinated pH neutral swimming pool discharges.
20. Residual street wash water.
21. Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
22. Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges.
23. Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spilled material has been removed).
24. Discharges associated with dye testing of water lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, private drains or septic systems; however, this activity shall
not take place until the discharger, or tester, has provided notification to the village at least two (2) full business days prior to the test date, unless an
emergency situation does not allow time for such notification.
25. Other discharges approved by the village as being substantially like any of the discharge types enumerated in this subsection C. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-
2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
15-5-2: PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS:
A. The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage system or MS4 is prohibited.
B. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past regardless of whether the connection was permissible under
law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
C. A person is considered to be in violation of this title if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm drainage system or MS4, or allows
such a connection to continue.
D. Connections in violation of this title must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved wastewater management system or the sanitary
sewer system upon approval of the village and the appropriate sanitary treatment facility.
E. Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system or MS4,
shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the village requiring that such locating be
completed. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain
or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system,
MS4, sanitary sewer system, or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the
administrator. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
Chapter 6
COMPLIANCE MONITORING
15-6-1: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
A. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person owning, leasing or exercising control over a property, or responsible for emergency
response for a property, has information of any known or suspected spill of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants
discharging into the MS4 or the storm drainage system, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup
of such spill.
1. In the event of such a spill, said person shall immediately notify local emergency dispatch services and act in accordance with Illinois emergency
management agency (IEMA) and IEPA regulations.
2. Said person shall notify the village of the spill in person or by phone, facsimile, or e-mail no later than the next business day. Notifications in person
or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the village within three (3) business days of the phone notice.
3. If the spill emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on site written
record of the spill and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five (5) years.
B. Proper notice, including containment and cleanup as outlined in subsection A of this section shall exempt the notifying parties from applicable fines set
forth in section 15-7-6 of this title.
C. Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this title.
D. Notwithstanding the language of subsection B of this section, a party causing a spill that contaminates or harms a storm sewer system shall not be
relieved of liability for damages resulting from such act. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
Chapter 7
VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 436/438
15-7-1: ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS:
A. The administrator shall have primary responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this title. The village may enter into agreements with other
governmental units for the purpose of implementing this title.
B. A person violates this title when that person:
1. Performs any act expressly prohibited by any provision of this title; or
2. Disobeys, neglects, or fails to carry out or comply with any provision of this title or of any order or notice issued by the administrator; or
3. Allows any condition or act that violates any provision of this title to continue unabated on property owned, leased, managed, or under the control of
such person; or
4. Directs, orders, permits, or allows a second person to do any act expressly prohibited by any provision of this title, or to maintain or continue
unabated any condition or act that violates any provision of this title on property owned, leased, managed or under the control of the first person.
(Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
15-7-2: NOTICE TO CORRECT VIOLATIONS; ADMINISTRATOR MAY TAKE ACTION:
A. The administrator may issue a notice of violation ordering a person to take action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this title and/or to cease
and desist from any action conducted in violation of this title. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a notice of violation and/or order to
cease and desist shall constitute a violation of this title.
1. The administrator shall set forth the form and content of any notices issued under this title.
2. The administrator may issue a warning of violation ordering a person to take action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this title. If a person
fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a warning, the administrator may, thereafter, issue a notice of violation.
3. The administrator may issue a warning of violation and disburse educational materials outlining appropriate measures to minimize the discharge of
pollutants.
B. If a person fails to comply with an order issued under this section, the administrator may direct the appropriate legal counsel to commence any legal
proceeding authorized by this title, under the law or equity, necessary to enforce any provision of this title and/or to protect public health and safety.
Any legal action brought under this title shall be in the name of the village of Oak Brook. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
15-7-3: EMERGENCY CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS:
A. The village may issue an emergency order in the event of the following:
1. Any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this title or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations are
likely to recur; and
2. That the person's violation has caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or storm drainage system and an imminent
threat of violation is present.
B. The village may issue the emergency order to the violator directing that the violator:
1. Immediately cease and desist all such violations; and/or
2. Immediately comply with all title requirements; and/or
3. Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
C. Any person notified of an emergency order under this subsection shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In the
event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the village may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize harm to the MS4, storm drainage system, or waters of the United States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment,
including immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility services. The village may allow the person to
recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the village that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further
termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this title. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken
to prevent any future occurrence, to the administrator within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and
desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
15-7-4: VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this title shall constitute a threat to public health and safety and is declared and
deemed a public nuisance. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
15-7-5: NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 437/438
Whenever a nuisance shall be found to exist on any premises, the administrator may order such nuisance to be abated upon determination that the
nuisance constitutes a threat to public health or safety.
A. In the event of an emergency situation, as determined by the administrator, involving an immediate threat to public health and safety, the administrator
may direct the village attorney to immediately commence any legal or equitable proceeding necessary to restrain, abate, and/or remedy said situation.
The administrator may take such action without having to first issue a notice of violation to the person(s) having control of, or acting as agent for, such
premises where the nuisance is located, or, waiting for such person(s) to abate or remove such nuisance as previously ordered by the administrator.
B. In all other cases, the administrator may notify, in writing, the person(s) having control of, or acting as agent for, such premises where the nuisance is
located and directing such person(s) to abate or remove such nuisance within such time as is stated on the notice. Upon the failure or refusal of such
person(s) to comply with the notice, the administrator may direct that appropriate proceedings commence to compel the abatement or removal of such
a nuisance in any manner allowed by law, equity, or this title and/or authorizing the village to act to abate, or remove, such nuisance. The person(s)
having control of such premises, in addition to the other remedies provided by this title, shall be liable to the village for any costs incurred by the village
to effect such abatement, or removal, including reasonable attorney fees and other costs of enforcement, to be recovered by a court of competent
jurisdiction. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
15-7-6: FINES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists enforcement of any provision of this title, shall be subject to
a fine pursuant to section 1-3-1 of this code. Each calendar day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009,
eff. 9-8-2009)
15-7-7: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this title are not exclusive of any other remedy available under this title or under any applicable federal, state, or local law and do
not supersede or limit any and all other penalties provided by law. The administrator may seek, at his discretion, cumulative remedies. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-
2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
Chapter 8
SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS
15-8-1: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS DUE TO DETECTION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES:
A. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this title may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge. The village shall notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the village for a reconsideration
and hearing. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior
approval of the village.
B. In emergency situations, the village may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop
an actual or threatened discharge, which presents, or may present, imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the MS4, storm drainage system, or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an
emergency, the village may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4, storm drainage system, or waters of
the United States, or to minimize danger to public health and safety. The village shall obtain an emergency court order authorizing such termination.
(Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
Chapter 9
APPEALS
15-9-1: RIGHT TO APPEAL:
A. Every request for an appeal shall be made in writing to the administrator. The administrator may delegate the hearing of appeals to the oversight
committee of the village in the manner provided for below.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling, or determination by the administrator, or by any interpretation or application of any provision of this title
may appeal such matter. An appeal of any decision made by the administrator shall be made within seven (7) calendar days of the decision contested;
except for an appeal involving the assessment charge or calculation of any fine or penalty, in which cases such an appeal shall be brought before said
amount becomes thirty (30) days past due.
1. The appeal procedure shall commence when the person aggrieved notifies the administrator in writing of the intent to appeal the decision of the
administrator. Such notice shall contain a short, clear, statement stating the following:
a. Identifying the decision of the administrator which such person is appealing and how this title has been misread, misinterpreted, or misapplied in
this instance and/or any mistakes of fact the aggrieved believes the administrator to have relied upon.
b. The name and both a mailing address and a telephone number of the person making the request, which contact information shall be used for
giving notices related to the appeal. The person making the request shall attach all written materials on which he or she intends to rely upon in
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=333 438/438
support of the request.
2. The administrator may, without conducting a hearing, grant relief sought by the appeal, or may set the matter over for a hearing in the manner
provided in subsection B3 of this section.
3. Upon receipt of such notice of appeal, if relief is not granted by the administrator, the administrator shall set a date for a hearing. Such hearing shall
take place no fewer than fourteen (14) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date that the administrator receives such notice of appeal unless
the administrator and party requesting the hearing agree to a different schedule. The administrator shall notify the person making the appeal of the
date of such hearing.
4. At the hearing, the person making the appeal may appear in person or be represented by counsel. The decision concerning the appeal shall be in
writing, shall be communicated to the person making the appeal, and shall state a finding upon which the decision is based.
C. The oversight committee shall have the authority to reverse, modify, or affirm any decision, ruling, or determination by the administrator made pursuant
to this title upon appeal. The oversight committee shall not act in a manner that would violate or in any way conflict with any federal or state standard
or requirement. The oversight committee or village board may adopt such additional rules and procedures as it deems appropriate for performing such
matters.
D. The decision of the oversight committee may be appealed to the village board. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
15-9-2: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within seven (7) days
of the decision of the administrator or oversight committee upholding the decision of the administrator, then representatives of the village are authorized to
take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. In no case shall an appeal stay or bar the village from
commencing a legal action seeking emergency relief. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
Chapter 10
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
15-10-1: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this title are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this title or the application thereof to
any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this title. (Ord. G-
897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
15-10-2: MOST RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS APPLY:
A. The provisions of this title shall be interpreted to be cumulative of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other ordinances, laws, codes, and
regulations in existence or which may be passed governing any subject matter of this title. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this title
shall be construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of such other ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations, and with each
other, to the end that all such provisions may be given their fullest application.
B. This title is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. Where any provision of this title imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or
imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)
15-10-3: ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this title are minimum standards; therefore, this title does not intend or imply that compliance
by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. G-897, 9-8-2009, eff. 9-8-2009)