PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Chapter 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the
"Code of Ordinances, Village of Palatine, Illinois" and may be so cited.
Sec. 1-2. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
Board or Board of Trustees means the Board of Trustees of Palatine, Illinois.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of
time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be
counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted.
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Cook, Illinois.
Debt due and owing or debt means a specified sum of money owed to the Village for fines, penalties,
fees, interest, or other types of charges or costs imposed by this code, or administrative or judicial judgments
after: (i) the period granted for payment has expired; or (ii) the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust or
conclusion of judicial review procedures. (Ord. 0-68-10, §2, 6/21/10)
Denial of Village Services means the Village may deny municipal services to any Person. Such
municipal services shall include but not limited to issuance of permits, licensing, utility services, inspections,
plan review, or consideration of any petitions for zoning relief. (Ord. 0-68-10, §2, 6/21/10)
Any Debt due and owning to the Village shall be deemed to be delinquent and the Village Manager
may authorize the Denial of Village Services to any Person who fails to pay any debt when due and/or refer the
matter to a firm or agency specializing in collection work to pursue collection of such debt including all fees
and charges incurred by the Village in the collection of the debt. These remedies are not exclusive and the
Village may pursue any and all other legal remedies that it deems fit.”
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend to and be applied to females and to
firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males.
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code it shall be held to be
the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and
general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the
general provisions imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be
deemed to be controlling.
Name or title of officer, board, commission or agency. Whenever reference is made to officials,
boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, i.e., "village clerk," "chief of police," etc., they shall be
deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of the Village of Palatine.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-2
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and
things as well as to one (1) person and thing.
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be
equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it.
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, tenant in partnership, or joint tenant, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation or
other legal entity, in his or its own capacity or as administrator, conservator, guardian, executor, trustee,
receiver or other representative appointed by the court. Whenever the word “person” is used in any section of
this code prescribing a penalty, fine, or cost recovery action as applied to partnerships, associations or joint
ventures, the word shall include the members thereof, and as applied to corporations shall include the officers,
agents or employees thereof who intentionally, recklessly or negligently cause or allow any violation of the
section. (Ord. No. 0-68-10, §1, 6/21/10)
Personal property includes every species of property except real property.
President shall mean the Village President of the Village of Palatine, Illinois.
Shall, May. Wherever "shall" is used, it shall be mandatory; "may" is permissive.
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Illinois.
Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present or past.
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of
such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
Sec. 1-4. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance
repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the
repeal took effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense
committed under the ordinance repealed.
Sec. 1-5. Severability of parts of Code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of trustees that the sections, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction,
such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or
sections of this Code.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-3
Sec. 1-6. Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language.
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect
this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed
for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion
thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from said Code by omission from reprinted pages. The
subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence
of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances
numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the board of trustees.
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by
specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ________ of the
Code of Ordinances, Village of Palatine, Illinois is hereby amended to read as follows . . . ." The new
provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language
shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Village of Palatine, Illinois is hereby amended by adding a
section to be numbered ________ which said section reads as follows:. . . ." The section shall then be set out in
full as desired.
All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by
section, article or chapter number, as the case may be.
Sec. 1-7. Altering Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of
this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village of Palatine to be misrepresented thereby.
Sec. 1-8. General penalty; continuing violations.
Whenever, in any ordinance of the village, or by any provision of this Code of Ordinances, any act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever, in such ordinance or provision, the
doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is
provided therefor, the violation of any such ordinance or provision shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day any violation of any ordinance or provision of this Code shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord.No.0-5-98, 1 1-26-98)
In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in
violation of any ordinance or provision of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be, by the
village, abated as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and
separate offense. (Ord. No. O-16-80, 1, 2-11-80)
Sec. 1-9. Supervision as an alternative penalty.
In any case involving a charge of violation of an ordinance of the Village of Palatine, upon a) a plea of
guilty, or b) a stipulation by the defendant to the facts supporting the charge, or c) a finding of guilt after trial,
the court, in its sole discretion, may defer further proceedings and the imposition of a sentence, and enter an
order for supervision of the defendant for a period not to exceed two (2) years. In determining whether
supervision is appropriate, the court shall consider the circumstances of the offense and the history, character
and condition of the defendant. Supervision may be ordered if the court is of the opinion that: (1) the defendant
is not likely to commit further ordinance violations or crimes; (2) the defendant and the public would best be
served if the offense were not on the defendant's record; (3) in the best interests of justice an order of
supervision is more appropriate than a sentence otherwise permitted under the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-4
No order of supervision shall be entered in any matter including violations of section 18-28 of this
Code, where the defendant has previously been placed on supervision by any court for any ordinance or statute
violation committed less than twelve (12) months prior to the date of the instant offense. Under no
circumstances shall any person be placed on supervision for violation of the Code of Ordinances of the Village
of Palatine if such person has been previously placed on supervision for any offenses two (2) or more times.
For violation of any traffic offense under the Palatine Code of Ordinances, the court shall consult an
available abstract of the driving record of the defendant, or shall question the defendant under oath with regard
to his past driving history. The court shall consider the statement of the prosecuting authority with regard to the
standards set forth in this section.
Except for parking violations, no order of supervision may be entered for a violation of this Code
unless as a condition of supervision, a fine of at least twenty-five dollars ($25.00), exclusive of court costs, is
also assessed. This fine may be waived or reduced if the person, testifying under oath, satisfies the court that it
would be an undue financial hardship to pay such a fine. (Ord. No. O-32-82, 1, 4-12-82)
Sec. 1-10. Collection of Debt to the Village; including collection charges.
“Debt due and owing” or “debt” means a specified sum of money owed to the Village for fines,
penalties, fees, interest, or other types of charges or costs imposed by this code, or administrative or judicial
judgments after: (i) the period granted for payment has expired; or (ii) the exhaustion of, or the failure to
exhaust or conclusion of judicial review procedures.
“Denial of Village Services” means the Village may deny municipal services to any Person. Such
municipal services shall include but not limited to issuance of permits, licensing, utility services, inspections,
plan review, or consideration of any petitions for zoning relief.
Any Debt due and owning to the Village shall be deemed to be delinquent and the Village Manager
may authorize the Denial of Village Services to any Person who fails to pay any debt when due and/or refer the
matter to a firm or agency specializing in collection work to pursue collection of such debt including all fees
and charges incurred by the Village in the collection of the debt. These remedies are not exclusive and the
Village may pursue any and all other legal remedies that it deems fit. (Ord. No. O-9- -28-91; Ord.
No. 0-68-10 §2, 6/21/10)
Sec. 1-11. Reimbursement for Insuffient Fund Checks.
In addition to the face value of the check, any person having written a check to the Village of Palatine
which is returned by a Bank for insufficient funds shall also be liable for the full amount of any Bank charges,
in addition to a $2.00 administration fee. Such payment shall be in cash, cashier s check or money order. No
further personal checks will be accepted from a person who has had three checks returned for insufficient
funds. All subsequent payments shall be in cash, casher s check or money order. (Ord. No. 0-46-97, 4-14-
97)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-1
Chapter 2 ADMINISTRATION*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Eminent domain, Ch. 20.
----------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance #0-15-02 enacted January 28, 2001 replaced Articles II through X, and XXV
Editor’s Note: Ordinance #0-132-03 enacted October 20, 2003, added a new Article XXX
Editor’s Note: Ordinance #0-109-05 enacted June 6, 2005, amended Article XXX
Editor’s Note: Ordinance #0-15-08 enacted January 21, 2008 replaced Article XIX Board of Health
Editor’s Note: Ordinance #0-110-11 enacted October 10, 2011 replaced Article XIII Peer Review Board
Editor’s Note: Ordinance #0-101-12, enacted July 9, 2012 replaced Article XX Fire & Police Commission
-----------
Art. I. In General, §§ 2-1--2-15
Art. II. Village Council, §§ 2-16--2-41
Art. III. Officers and Employees, §§ 2-42--2-65
Art. IV. Village Clerk, §§ 2-66--2-90
Art. V. Village Mayor, §§ 2-91--2-105
Art. VI. Village Manager, §§ 2-106--2-120
Art. VII. Village Attorney, §§ 2-121--2-135
Art. VIII. Village Prosecutor, §§ 2-136--2-150
Art. IX. Village Treasurer, §§ 2-151--2-170
Art. X. Department of Public Works, §§ 2-171--2-190
Art. XI. Department of Community Development, §§ 2-191--2-210
Art. XII. Palatine Youth Council, §§ 2-211--2-225
Art. XIII. Peer Jury and Youth Officer, §§ 2-226--2-250
Art. XIV. Board of Local Improvements, §§ 2-251--2-270
Art. XV. District Citizen Advisory Councils, §§ 2-271--2-290
Art. XVI. Electrical Commission, §§ 2-291--2-305
Art. XVII. Environmental Committees, §§ 2-306--2-325
Art. XVIII. Director of Environmental Health, §§ 2-326--2-340
Art. XIX. Board of Health, §§ 2-341--2-360
Art. XX. Fire and Police Commission, §§ 2-361--2-380
Art. XXI. Police Pension Board, §§ 2-381--2-400
Art. XXII. Firemen's Pension Fund, §§ 2-401--2-420
Art. XXIII. Plan Commission, §§ 2-421--2-430
Art. XXIV. Board of Zoning Appeals, §§ 2-431--2-440
Art. XXV. Code of Ethics, §§ 2-441--2-458
Art. XXVI. Finance, ?? 2-459--2-500
Div. 1. Generally, §§ 2-459--2-480
Div. 2. Issuance of Bonds, §§ 2-481--2-500
Art. XXVII. Emergency Services and Disaster Agency (ESDA), §§ 2-501--2-614
Art. XXVIII. Palatine Business Development Commission, §§ 2-615--2-619
Art. XXIX. Department of Data Processing and Information Management §§ 2-620--2-622
Art. XXX. Administrative Hearing Division §§ 2-700 – 2-712
Art. XXX1. Administrative Adjudication of Vehicular Standing, Parking, Automated Traffic
Law and Compliance Violations §§ 2-720 – 2-739
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. Corporate seal.
The corporate seal of the village shall be as follows: A circular emblem, with the words “VILLAGE
OF” around the top of the circular border and the words “WHERE QUALITY IS A WAY OF LIFE” around
the bottom border; the center of the circle will contain the word “PALATINE” in white on a black ground,
topped by the Village logo, made up of replicas of the Community Center, the Patton House, the Clayson
House, and Renaissance Towers in a half circle, and “PALATINE”, centered, with
“COOK COUNTY, IL” on a ribbon below.(Code 1961, § 8.601, Ord. No. 0-61-93 § 2 6-14-93; Ord. No. 0-
168-97, § 1, 10-13-97; Ord.No.0-203-97; §1 12-22-97)
Sec. 2-1-1. Organizational Structure.
Council Manager Form of Government
The Village operates under the Council Manager Form of Government as that form of Government is
defined in the Illinois Statutes. This statement is declarative of the existing form of Government of the Village.
(Ord. #0-16-09, §1, 1/19/09
Sec. 2-2. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the village shall begin on the first day of January and end on the thirty-first day of
December of each year. (Code 1961, ? 8.602; Ord.No.0-141-98, ?1, 9-14-98)
State law reference(s)--Similar provisions, 65ILCS5/1-1-2.
Sec. 2-3. Elections.
Elections for municipal offices shall be held as is provided by statute, and at the
time prescribed by statute. (Code 1961, ? 8.605)
State law reference(s)--For provisions controlling local elections see 10ILCS5/4-1.
Sec. 2-4. Surety bonds.
Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the village is required as a prerequisite to exercising the duties
of any office or position, or to the issuance of a license or permit or for the exercise of any special privilege, the
surety on such bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do business in this state as a surety
company, in the absence of specific provision to the contrary by ordinance. Whenever in its opinion additional
sureties or an additional surety may be needed on any bond to indemnify the village against any loss or liability
because of the insolvency of the existing surety or sureties or for any other reason, the board may order a new
surety or sureties to be secured on such bond. If such new surety or sureties are not procured within ten (10)
days from the time such order is transmitted to the principal on the bond, or his assignee, the board shall
declare the bond to be void, and thereupon such principal or assignee, shall be deemed to have surrendered the
privilege or position as condition of which the bond was required. (Code 1961, ? 8.606)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-3
Sec. 2-5. Use of village-owned or leased building.
No person, group or organization, excepting boards, and agencies of the village, shall be granted a
permit to use or occupy a building owned or leased by the village other than meeting rooms unless such person,
group or organization shall first furnish and deliver to the village a certificate of insurance, issued by an
insurance carrier and approved by the village, providing the Village of Palatine with public liability (and dram
shop liability when necessary) insurance covering such use or occupancy, with a policy limit of not less than
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). (Ord. No. O-82-75, §1, 11-24-75; Ord. 0-16-09, §2, 1-19-09)
Editor's note: Ord. No. O-82-75, §1, amended 1961 Code by adding the provisions included herein as §
2-5.
Sec. 2-6. Disposition of unclaimed security deposits.
(a) In all cases where monies are deposited with the village as a bond or security for the satisfactory
construction, repair or installation of improvements to property or for the performance of any other act, which
monies are refundable upon the satisfactory completion or performance of the same pursuant to this Code or
any other ordinance of the village, said monies will be considered abandoned, unclaimed and forfeited to the
village if not claimed by the person or persons entitled thereto within two (2) years after the time when such
monies have become refundable (hereinafter referred to as the "forfeiture date"). For purposes of this section,
"refundable" shall mean repayable by the village to the party depositing such monies with the village, upon
such party's meeting or performing the work, improvements or other act for which the same monies were
deposited as security under the requirements of the village Code or ordinances.
(b) Except as provided in subparagraph (c) below, not more than ninety (90) nor less than thirty (30)
days before the forfeiture date, the village clerk shall notify the depositor or any successors or assigns of the
depositor of which said clerk has notice, by registered mail to such persons at their last known address or
addresses, that the deposit will be forfeited to the village if not claimed on or before the forfeiture date. In the
event said monies are not claimed by the person or persons entitled thereto on or before the forfeiture date, said
monies shall be deemed forfeited to the village and the village clerk shall notify the village treasurer that the
monies have been forfeited to the village. The village treasurer thereupon shall promptly transfer said monies
to the Palatine General Fund.
(c) In the case of cash deposits made pursuant to section 2.07(a)(9) of the Building Code of Palatine
before commencing any work for which a building permit has been issued, such deposits shall become
refundable following final inspection and approval by the village of the project for which the building permit
has been issued. Refunds shall be made by the village directly to the permittee; provided, however, that final
inspection must be requested by the permittee within the two-year term of the building permit, or any extension
or renewal thereof. Failure by the permittee to request final inspection within said term, extension or renewal,
shall cause the deposit to be forfeited to the village. The village shall send notice of the forfeiture date to the
permittee as provided in subparagraph (b) above not more than ninety (90) days nor less than thirty (30) days
before the forfeiture date.
(d) A copy of this section 2-6 shall be made part of the receipt given by the village to any person
depositing monies with the village which are subject to forfeiture hereunder. (Ord. No. O-99-79, ? 1, 8-27-79;
Ord. No. O-21-84, ? 1, 4-23-84)
Sec. 2-7. Use of village name, departments, agencies, etc., in solicitations and promotions.
No person, firm or corporation, including any employee, department, division or agency of the village,
shall use the name: "The Village of Palatine" or the name of any department, agency, committee, commission
or office of the village, or the seal or other insignia or symbol of the village, in the promotion of or solicitation
for funds or donations, including fund-raising events or benefits, without the prior written permission of the
village manager. Any application for a permit to promote, solicit or conduct a benefit or fund-raising event
shall be made to the village manager upon forms provided by him. Such applications shall set forth the
proposed plan for fund raising, including methods of solicitation and promotion, and shall designate a
reasonable amount or percent of the proceeds to be allocated for village expenses to be incurred in connection
with the event, promotion or solicitation. Any approval or fund-raising event shall specify the amount or
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-4
percent of the proceeds which will be allocated to the village to cover its expenses.
Any denial of an application for such permit may be appealed by a written letter of appeal to the
president and board of trustees of the village. Such letter of appeal must be delivered to the village manager
within ten (10) days following his denial. The president and board of trustees shall hear and act on said appeal
at their next regular meeting following receipt of the letter of appeal by the village manager. The decision of
the president and board of trustees shall be final. (Ord. No. O-70-81, ? 1, 8-10-81)
Sec. 2-8. Displaying the Flag
All Village public buildings shall display the flag(s) at in accordance of the Flag Code, Title 4, United
States Code, Chapter 1.
The flags of the United States, the State of Illinois, and the Village of Palatine can be flown at halfstaff
upon the death of public officials. The flags shall remain at half-staff during each day they are normally
flown until lowered at the end of the day on which the funeral is solemnized.
On occasions where Village public safety personnel or military personnel residing in Palatine or
employed by the Village are killed in the line of duty, the Mayor may deem it appropriate to order all flags
flown at half-staff. The flags shall remain at half staff during each day they are normally flown until lowered at
the end of the day on which the funeral is solemnized.
The honor and reverence accorded this solemn act shall not be diminished by the display of the
Nation’s and State’s flags at half-staff on occasions of local tragedy wherein the Village’s flag flown at halfstaff
would be more appropriate. (Ord. No. 0-268-04, §1, 12/13/04)
Secs. 2-9--2-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. VILLAGE COUNCIL
-------------------------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-15-02 enacted January 28, 2002, replaced Article II in its entirety.
-------------------------
Sec. 2-16. Election; functions.
The village council shall consist of six (6) council members. Each council member shall be elected
from a district as established by Ordinance 0-100-80, a true copy of which shall be maintained in the office of
the village clerk. Each of the districts established under said ordinance shall be represented by one council
member who shall have been an actual resident of the district for at least six (6) months prior to his or her
election. Only the electors of a district shall elect the council member from that district. Commencing with the
village council elected in 1981, the office of council member from three (3) of the districts shall be for a
two-year term and the office of council member from the other three (3) districts shall be for a four-year term.
After the initial election of council members from districts in 1981, the council members elected shall draw lots
to determine to which of the districts the two-year terms shall apply and to which of the districts the four-year
terms shall apply. All council members thereafter elected shall hold office for a four-year term, and until their
successors are elected and have qualified. This village council shall be the legislative department of the village
government, and shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be delegated to it by statute, this code
or ordinance. All policies, directives and requests from the village council or a council member to any
department director or employee shall be made or transmitted through the manager. (Code 1961, § 2.101; Ord.
No. O-34-81, § 1, 4-20-81)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-5
On and after April 14, 1997, the Board of Trustees of the Village of Palatine shall be the Village
Council of the Village of Palatine, and shall be known as Council Members.
The term "Trustee" as used in any ordinance, resolution, motion or other action of the corporate
authorities shall mean "Council Member." (Ord. No. O-190-96, § 1, 10-14-96)
The term "Corporate Authorities" as used in this Code, any ordinance, resolution, motion or other
action shall mean collectively the "Mayor" and the "Village Council". Nothing contained herein, however, in
the use of the term "Corporate Authorities" shall be deemed to modify or otherwise expand the limits on the
Mayor's authority to vote pursuant to 2-96 of the Village Code or pursuant to the Illinois Municipal Code.
The terms of the elected municipal officials shall commence at the first regular or special meeting of
the corporate authorities during the month of May that is to commence not less than five (5) days following the
proclamation of the results of the regular municipal election at which the officers were elected. (Ord. #0-26-
09, §2, 3/2/09)
Sec. 2-17. Oath; salary.
Each Council Member shall take the following oath of office:
"I, ________, having been elected to the office of Council Member of the Village of Palatine
in the Village of Palatine, County of Cook, do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of
the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the
duties of the office of Council Member according to the best of my ability."
and shall receive such compensation as may be from time to time provided by ordinance.
(Code 1961, § 2.102)
State law reference(s)--Similar provisions, 65ILCS5/3-14-3.
Sec. 2-18. Meetings--Regular.
The regular meetings of the Corporate Authorities shall be held on the first, second and third Monday
of each month, except when such regular meeting falls on one of the following holidays: Memorial Day,
Veteran's Day, December 24 or December 25. In each such case, the regular meeting shall be held on the
Tuesday following such holiday, except when December 25 falls on a Tuesday or a Wednesday, in which cases
the regular meeting shall be held on the next day following such holiday. All regular meetings shall begin at
7:00 p.m. and no notice thereof shall be required. (Code 1961, § 2.103; Ord. No. O-143-86, § 1, 10-13-86,
Ord. 0-31-03, § 1 2-3-03)
Sec. 2-19. Same--Special.
Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by any three (3) Council Members upon at least
forty-eight (48) hours notice to all Council Members and the Mayor; provided that the Mayor and all Council
Members are present at a special meeting, no notice of the meeting shall be necessary other than the public
notice required by statute. (Code 1961, § 2.104; Ord. No. 0-55-95, §1, 5-22-95.)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-6
Sec. 2-20. Committees--Standing.
The following shall be the standing committees of the Village Council:
(1) Administration, Technology and Community Health;
(2) Business, Finance and Budget;
(3) Community and Economic Development;
(4) Fire Policy and Community Information;
(5) Infrastructure and Environment;
(6) Police Policy and Code Services.
The Chair and Vice Chair of each committee shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the
Village Council for a one year term starting May 1. The Chair and Vice Chair shall rotate each year by
District. (District 1 shall be succeeded by District 2 on the following May 1, etc.) Each member of the
Village Council, including the Mayor, shall, by virtue of his office, be a member of all committees with the
right to vote. A quorum of the committee shall be determined to be present whenever four (4) members are
present. In the event that the Chair and Vice Chair are not present for a quorum, the remaining members shall
select an Acting Chair for that meeting.
Each committee shall have such powers and consider such matters as may be referred to it from time to
time by the Mayor and Village Council. However, each committee shall only make policy recommendations to
the Village Council and shall not provide administrative direction to the departments that report to the
manager. (Code 1961, § 2.106; Ord. No. O-44-76, § 1, 4-26-76; Ord. No. O-43-77, § 1, 5-23-77; Ord. No.
O-60-85, § 1, 7-22-85; Ord. No. O-33-91, § 1, 4-15-91; Ord. No. 0-49-95, § 1, 5-22-95; Ord. No. 0-157-96,
§1, 8-26-96)
Sec. 2-21. Same--Special.
Special committees shall be created from time to time as is directed by the Mayor and Village Council.
(Code 1961, § 2.107)
Sec. 2-22. Advisory referenda.
It shall be the policy of the Corporate Authorities to submit questions of public policy to the voters of
the village in special advisory referenda upon receipt of a petition therefor, signed by not less than twenty per
cent (20%) of the registered voters residing in the village.
Such special advisory referenda shall be held not more than ninety (90) days after the receipt of such
petition. Notice of such election shall be published and given not less than fifteen (15) or more than thirty (30)
days prior to the date of such election.
Such petition may be filed with the Corporate Authorities and/or with the clerk. (Code 1961, § 2.108)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-7
Sec. 2-23. Ordinances; approval; veto.
All resolutions and motions:
(1) Which create any liability against the village, or
(2) Which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, or
(3) Sell any village property and all ordinances passed by the Corporate Authorities.
shall be deposited with the clerk. If the Mayor approves of them, the Mayor shall sign them. Those of which
the Mayor disapproves, the Mayor shall return to the Village Council, with the Mayor's written objections, at
the next regular meeting of the Village Council occurring not less than five (5) days after their passage. The
Mayor may disapprove of any one (1) or more sums appropriated in any ordinance, resolution, or motion
making an appropriation, and if so, the remainder shall be effective. However, the Mayor may disapprove
entirely of an ordinance, resolution or motion making an appropriation. If the Mayor fails to return any
ordinance or any specified resolution with the Mayor's written objections, within the designated time, it shall
become effective despite the absence of the Mayor's signature. (Code 1961, § 2.111)
Sec. 2-23.1 Ordaining Clause.
The ordaining clause of ordinances in the Village of Palatine shall be: "Be it ordained by the Mayor
and Village Council of the Village of Palatine". (Ord. No. 0-90-97,5-27-97)
Sec. 2-24. Reconsideration; passing over veto.
Every resolution and motion specified in the preceding section, and every ordinance, which is returned
to the Village Council by the Mayor shall be reconsidered by the Village Council. If, after such reconsideration
of two-thirds (2/3) of all the Council Members then holding office the Village Council shall agree to pass an
ordinance, resolution, or motion notwithstanding the Mayor's refusal to approve it, then it shall be effective.
The vote on the question of passage over the Mayor's veto shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be recorded in
the journal. (Code 1961, § 2.112)
Sec. 2-25. Order of business.
The order of business to be observed at all meetings of the Corporate Authorities shall be as follows:
1. Roll call;
2. Pledge to the flag;
3. Public hearings;
4. Approval of minutes of previous meeting or meetings;
5. Mayor’s Report;
6. Committee of the Whole Meeting
(Individual Committee Meetings);
7. Consent agenda;
8. Reports of standing committees;
9. Reports of village officers;
10. Closed Session, as required;
11. Recognition of audience-non-agenda items
(Code 1961, § 2.201; Ord. No. O-67-78, § 1, 8-14-78; Ord. No. O-172-86, § 1, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 0-166-96,
§1, 9/23/96, Ord. No. 0-149-04, §1, 7-12-04)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-8
Sec. 2-26. Consent agenda.
The manager shall prepare and list on the agenda for each regular meeting of the Corporate Authorities
under "consent agenda" all items to be submitted to the Corporate Authorities for a vote which are deemed by
the manager to be non-controversial. The monthly warrant covering the approval of payment of bills shall be a
consent agenda item unless the Mayor or any Council Member(s) advise the manager to the contrary. A copy of
the consent agenda shall be posted on the village hall bulletin board not later than 10:00 a.m. of the third
calendar day preceding the day of the regular meeting at which it will be considered. The public records of all
proceedings held and action taken on each consent agenda item shall be available for public inspection at all
reasonable times during normal business hours. Upon request of the Mayor or any Council Member, made
prior to the vote on consent agenda items, any item listed on the consent agenda shall be removed therefrom
and considered separately.
When the consent agenda shall be reached in the order of business, a single motion shall be in order to
act on all such items and a single roll call shall be taken on such motion. The resulting vote shall be deemed to
be the vote of the Corporate Authorities on each item on the consent agenda. (Ord. No. O-67-78, § 2, 8-14-78;
Ord. No. O-64-81, § 1, 6-22-81)
Sec. 2-27. Resolutions.
Any resolutions submitted to the Corporate Authorities shall be reduced to writing before being voted
upon, on request of any two (2) members of the Village Council. (Code 1961, § 2.203)
Sec. 2-28. Addressing meetings.
No person other than the Mayor or a member of the Village Council shall address that body at any
regular or special meeting except upon consent of a majority of the members present.
(Code 1961, § 2.204)
Sec. 2-29. Procedure for passing ordinances.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in section 2-24 of this Code, each ordinance to be passed shall be
introduced at a regular, adjourned or special meeting of the Corporate Authorities. At that time,
notwithstanding any state statute pertaining to the requirement for an extraordinary vote, if a majority of the
corporate authorities then holding office vote to accept the ordinance as to its first reading, the ordinance will
be held over until the next regular, special or adjourned meeting. At such subsequent meeting or at any
subsequent meeting, said ordinance may be passed as to its final passage. Provided, however, that by a majority
of the corporate authorities then holding office any ordinance may be passed at its first reading without
following the procedure set forth in this section.
(b) Where any member of the corporate authorities believes that he or she has a conflict of interest on
any matter before the Corporate Authorities, that member shall publicly so state the existence and general
nature of the interest prior to the time a vote is taken and shall recuse him or herself from voting on that matter.
Where recusal occurs, that member's failure to vote shall not be counted as either an "aye" or "nay" vote, and
that member shall be counted toward a quorum, but shall not be counted toward the number of members upon
which a majority is based.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-9
(c) This section shall not otherwise effect the instances in which the Mayor is required to vote under
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/5-3-5. (Code 1961, § 2.205; Ord. No. O-154-89, § 1, 10-16-90; Ord. No.
O-146-91, § 1, 10-14-91)
Sec. 2-30. Suspension of rules.
The rules of order, other than those prescribed by statute, may be suspended at any time by the consent
of a majority of the Corporate Authorities present at any meeting. (Code 1961, § 2.206)
Sec. 2-31. Committee of the whole.
The rules of order governing the Village Council shall permit the committee of the whole to rise to
standing or special committees as may from time to time be appointed by the Mayor and Village Council.
(Code 1961, § 2.206.1)
Sec. 2-32. Robert's rules of order.
Robert's rules of order shall govern the deliberations of the Village Council except when in conflict
with any of the foregoing rules. (Code 1961, § 2.207)
Secs. 2-33--2-41. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
-------------------------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-15-02 enacted January 28, 2002, replaced Article III in its entirety.
-------------------------
Sec. 2-42. Effect.
The provisions of this article shall apply alike to all officers and employees of the village,
regardless of the time of the creation of the office or position or the time of the appointment of the officer
or employee. (Code 1961, § 8.101)
Sec. 2-43. Term of office; vacancies.
Every appointed officer of the village shall hold office until his successor is appointed and qualified,
unless otherwise provided by statute, any other provision of this Code or other ordinance. A vacancy in any
such office shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment. (Code 1961, § 8.103)
Sec. 2-44. Reserved.
Sec. 2-45. Oath.
Every officer of the village shall, before entering upon his duties, take an oath of office.
(Code 1961, § 8.105)
State law reference(s)--Similar provisions, 65ILCS5/3-14-3.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-10
Sec. 2-46. Salaries.
All officers and employees of the village shall receive such salary as may be from time to time
provided by ordinance. (Code 1961, § 8.106)
Sec. 2-47. Assignment of duties.
In the event of a conflict between an appointed officer and the manager, the Corporate Authorities
shall have the power to resolve any dispute over an assignment to any appointed officer or over any duty which
is not assigned by ordinance to some other specific appointed officer; and shall determine disputes or questions
relating to the respective powers or duties of such officers. (Code 1961, § 8.107)
Sec. 2-48. Records.
All records kept by any officer of the village shall be open to inspection by the Corporate Authorities
at all reasonable times, whether or not such records are required to be kept by statute or ordinance. (Code
1961, § 8.108)
Sec. 2-49. Bond.
Every officer and employee shall, if required by the Corporate Authorities, and at the expense of the
village, upon entering upon the duties of his office, to give a bond in such amount and with such sureties as
may be determined by said Corporate Authorities, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of
the office or position.
(Code 1961, § 8.109)
Sec. 2-50. Termination of office.
Every officer and employee of the village, upon the expiration of his term for any cause whatsoever,
shall deliver to his successor all books and records which may be the property of the village, and if no
successor has been appointed within one week after the termination of office such property shall be delivered
to the manager. (Code 1961, § 8.111)
Sec. 2-51. Campaigning and political involvement.
No employee, or compensated officer, other than an elected officer of the village shall campaign for, or
make a contribution, either in cash or kind, to the campaign of any candidate for office within the village. It
shall be unlawful for any person to coerce or solicit an officer or employee of the village to campaign for or
contribute, either in cash or in kind, to the campaign of any candidate for village office within the village. No
appointment to employment by the village, or discharge or removal therefrom, or demotion or other
unfavorable personnel action affecting an officer or employee of the Village of Palatine shall be conditioned
upon a requirement that such officer or employee campaign for, support or contribute, either in cash or in kind,
to the campaign of any candidate for village office with the village.
The manager shall post, in prominent locations in the village offices, notices setting forth the text of
this section, and in addition, shall serve copies of the same upon each employee of the village not less than
sixty (60) days prior to any village election. (Code 1961, § 8.112)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-11
Sec. 2-52. Power to arrest.
The Mayor, members of the Village Council, the manager, members of the fire department and every
member of the police department are hereby declared to be conservators of the peace, with such powers to
make arrests as are given to conservators of the peace by statute. (Code 1961, § 8.110)
Sec. 2-53. Actions against employee; defend and indemnify.
For the purposes of only this section, the word "employee" includes the Mayor, a Council Member, the
village clerk, the manager, the village attorney, the village prosecutor, the treasurer, an officer, member of a
board, commission or committee, servant or employee, whether or not compensated, but does not include an
independent contractor.
If any claim or action is instituted against an employee or former employee of the village based on an
injury allegedly arising out of an act or omission occurring within the scope of his employment as such
employee, the village may elect to do any one or more of the following:
(1) Appear and defend against claim or action;
(2) Indemnify the employee or former employee for his court costs incurred in the defense of
such claim or action;
(3) Pay, or indemnify the employee or former employee for a judgment based on such claim or
action, or
(4) Pay, or indemnify the employee or former employee for, a compromise or settlement of such a
claim or action. (Ord. No. O-58-82, § 1, 6-14-82)
Secs. 2-54--2-65. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. VILLAGE CLERK*
----------
*State law reference(s)--For powers and duties of clerk see 65ILCS5/3-10-9.
----------
-------------------------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-15-02 enacted January 28, 2002, replaced Article IV in its entirety.
-------------------------
Sec. 2-66. Election; term.
The clerk shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term and until a successor is elected and
qualified. (Code 1961, § 3.001)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-12
Sec. 2-67. Bond.
Before entering upon the duties of office the clerk shall execute a bond in such amount and with such
sureties as is provided by statute, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the clerk's duties. (Code 1961,
§ 3.002)
Sec. 2-68. Signatures.
The clerk shall seal and attest all ordinances, resolutions and motions adopted by the Corporate
Authorities and all contracts of the village and all licenses, permits and such documents that require the clerk's
seal and signature. (Code 1961, § 3.003)
Sec. 2-69. Money collected.
The clerk shall turn over all money received on behalf of the village to the village treasurer promptly
upon receipt of the same; and with such money he shall give a statement as to the source thereof. (Code 1961,
§ 3.004)
Sec. 2-70. Reserved.
Sec. 2-71. Records.
The clerk shall keep a record of ordinances and such other records as may be required by the board.
(Code 1961, § 3.006)
Sec. 2-72. Seal.
The clerk shall be the custodian of the village seal, and shall affix its impression on documents
whenever this is required. (Code 1961, § 3.007)
Sec. 2-73. Documents.
The clerk shall be the custodian of all documents belonging to the village which are not assigned to the
custody of some other officer. (Code 1961, § 3.008)
Sec. 2-74. Same--Indices.
The clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and records kept, so that ready
access thereto may be had. (Code 1961, § 3.009)
Sec. 2-75. Additional duties.
In addition to the duties herein provided the clerk shall perform such other duties and functions which
may be required by this Code or ordinance. (Code 1961, § 3.010)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-13
Sec. 2-76. Vacancies.
In case the office of clerk shall become vacant for any reason, the Corporate Authorities shall appoint a
successor. (Code 1961, § 3.011)
Sec. 2-77. Deputy.
There is hereby created office of deputy clerk, to be appointed by the clerk.
The deputy clerk may perform any duty and exercise any power delegated to the clerk.
(Code 1961, § 3.012)
State law reference(s)--Appointment of deputy, 65ILCS5/3-6-3.
Secs. 2-78--2-90. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. MAYOR
-------------------------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-15-02 enacted January 28, 2002, replaced Article V in its entirety.
-------------------------
Sec. 2-91. Election and term of office.
The Mayor shall be elected for a term of four (4) years. (Code 1961, § 1.001)
On and after April 14, 1997, the Village President shall be the Mayor of the Village of Palatine.
The term "Village President" as used in any ordinance, resolution, motion or other action of the
corporate authorities shall mean "Mayor". (Ord. No. 0-190-96, §2, 10-14-96)
State law reference(s)--For provisions relating to election of the Mayor, see 65ILCS5/3-5-1.
Sec. 2-92. Duties.
Pursuant to the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-10 (2001)), the Mayor is recognized as the
chief executive officer. The Mayor shall be recognized as the presiding officer at all meetings of the Village
Council and on all ceremonial occasions. The Mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the village by
the courts for the purpose of serving process and by the governor for all legal purposes. The Mayor shall
perform all duties that may be required by statute, this Code or ordinance and shall have the power and
authority to inspect all books and records kept by any village officer or employee at any reasonable time. All
policies, directives and requests from the Mayor to any department director or employee shall be made or
transmitted through the manager. The Mayor shall execute all ordinances, resolutions and motions of the
Corporate Authorities, all contracts of the village and all licenses, permits and such and other documents that
require the Mayor's signature.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-14
Sec. 2-93. Designation of duties. [Intentionally Deleted]
Sec. 2-94. Bond; oath; salary.
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Mayor shall give a bond with sureties to be approved
by the Village Council and at the expense of the Village, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
Mayor's duties, in the sum of at least three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), or such higher sum as may be directed
by the Village Council. The Mayor shall take the following oath of office:
"I, ________, having been elected to the office of Mayor of the Village of Palatine in the
Village of Palatine, County of Cook aforesaid, do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution
of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the
duties of the office of Mayor according to the best of my ability."
and shall receive such compensation as may be set from time to time by the Village Council. (Code 1961, §
1.004)
Sec. 2-95. Mayor pro-tem.
During a temporary absence from the village, or disability of the Mayor, the Village Council shall at
the next meeting of the Village Council after the temporary absence or disability is known, elect one of its
members to act as Mayor pro-tem, who in the event of a temporary absence shall perform the duties and
possess the rights and powers pertaining to the office for the length of that meeting, and in the event of a longer
term disability or absence shall perform the duties and possess the rights and powers pertaining to the office for
the term specified by the Village Council, but for no longer than the length of the Mayor's disability or
absence.. (Code 1961, § 1.005)
Sec. 2-96. Mayor to preside; deciding vote.
The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Village Council. The Mayor shall not vote on any
ordinance, resolution or motion except:
(1) Where the vote of the Council Members has resulted in a tie; or
(2) Where one-half of the Council Members then holding office have voted in favor of
an ordinance, resolution or motion even though there is no tie vote; or
(3) Where a vote greater than a majority of the Corporate Authorities is required by this
Code to adopt an ordinance, resolution or motion.
In each instance specified, the Mayor shall vote.
Nothing in this section shall deprive a mayor pro-tem from voting in the capacity as a Council
Member, but the Council Member shall not be entitled to another vote in the capacity as mayor pro-tem. (Code
1961, § 2.110; Ord. No. O-42-81, § 1, 4-27-81)
Secs. 2-97--2-105. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-15
ARTICLE VI. VILLAGE MANAGER
-------------------------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-15-02 enacted January 28, 2002, replaced Article VI in its entirety.
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-16-09 enacted January 19, 2009, replaced several sections in Article VI.
-------------------------
Sec. 2-106. Creation of office.
The office of the Village Manager is hereby created. (Code 1961, § 4.101)
Sec. 2-107. Appointment.
The manager shall be appointed by the Mayor by and with the advice and consent of the Village
Council. The manager shall only be removed by a two thirds vote of the Corporate Authorities.
Neither the Mayor nor any Council Member of the village shall receive such appointment during the
term for which the Mayor or any Council Member has been elected. (Code 1961, §4.102)
This Section shall only be amended by a two thirds vote of the Corporate Authorities.
Sec. 2-108. Powers and duties.
The manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the village with full authority to carry out the
executive and ministerial functions of government. The manager shall be responsible to the Corporate
Authorities for the proper administration of all the affairs of the village and shall perform all duties that may be
required by statute, this Code or ordinance. The manager shall be empowered and required to:
(1) Enforce all laws and ordinances of the village.
(2) Attend all meetings of the Corporate Authorities. The manager shall have the right to take part
in the discussion of all matters coming before the Corporate Authorities but shall have no
right to vote. The manager shall be entitled to notice of all special and regular meetings of the
Corporate Authorities.
(3) Recommend to the Corporate Authorities adoption of such measures as the manager may
deem necessary or expedient.
(4) Appoint, suspend or remove all department directors and employees of the village, except the
village attorney, village prosecutor, village treasurer, members of any advisory bodies
appointed by the Corporate Authorities; and such appointments, suspensions or removals shall
be based upon the merit and fitness of such employee, without regard to political belief or
affiliation. The manager may authorize a department director to appoint, suspend or remove
subordinates in such department.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-16
(5) Whenever there is a question as to the respective duties or powers of any appointed officers of
the village in the first instance (subject to the Village Council's authority to settle any disputes
between the appointed officer and the manager), this shall be settled by the manager and the
manager shall have the power to delegate to any such officer any duty which is to be
performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform that duty.
(6) Exercise control and supervision over all department directors, appointed officers and
employees of the village.
(7) Make recommendations to the Corporate Authorities concerning compensation ranges for
each department director, appointed officer, and employee in the village service, including
minimum, intermediate and maximum rates.
(8) Recommend to the Corporate Authorities the creating, consolidating and combining of
offices, positions, departments or units of the village.
(9) Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the
government of the village and services maintained by the public utilities in the village and see
that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the village are faithfully observed.
(10) a. The Village Manager is hereby authorized to make expenditures of twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) or less for which funds were provided in the annual budget ordinance for all
items necessary for the running of the village.
b. For all materials, supplies, and equipment that for a purchase of more than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00), he shall solicit quotations and for all purchases of more than twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000.00) he shall be required to received sealed bids unless
quotations are deemed by the Manager to be more appropriate and present such bids or
quotations to the Corporate Authorities for approval or rejection.
c. When a purchase that is unbudgeted or exceeds $20,000 and is deemed by the Village
Manager to be an emergency, meaning an imminent threat to the public health, safety or
welfare of the general public, the Village Manager shall be authorized to make such
purchase and advise the Village Council of said purchase immediately. The Village
Council shall affirm said purchase at the next regularly scheduled meeting.
(Ord.No. 0-2-99,§1,1-11-99, Ord. No. 0-69-07, §1, 5/7/07)
(11) Prepare or cause to be prepared, on or before December 15 of each year, a report of estimated
funds necessary to defray the expenses of the village for the fiscal year; prepare, or cause to be
prepared the annual budget ordinance in time for consideration and enactment by the
Corporate Authorities during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year; and, prepare, or cause to be
prepared, the tax levy ordinance and upon enactment thereof file a certified copy with the
county clerk before the end of the fourth quarter.(Ord. No. 0-141-98, §2, 9-14-98)
(12) Submit to the Corporate Authorities, promptly following the end of the fiscal year, a complete
report on the finances and administrative activities of the village for said fiscal year.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-17
(13) Present to the Corporate Authorities each quarter a statement showing the exact financial
condition of the village as of the end of the preceding quarter and showing amounts
appropriated, amounts expended and unexpended balances in the several items of
appropriation.
(14) Keep a current inventory of all real and personal property of the village and the location of
such property. He shall be responsible for the care and custody of all village property which is
not by law assigned to some other officer or body for care and control.
(15) Devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties.
(16) Perform such other duties as may be required by resolution or ordinance of the Corporate
Authorities. (Code 1961, § 4.103; Ord. No. O-83-83, § 1, 12-12-83)
(17) Negotiate and execute all leases of Village owned property on behalf of the village. (Ord. No.
0-67-99, §1, 5-24-99)
(18) Waive or otherwise discount required fees associated with Village services and permits when
deemed by the Village Manager to be in the best interest of the Village or community.
Sec. 2-109. Bond.
The manager shall furnish a bond, if required by the Corporate Authorities and at the expense of the
village in such amount and with such surety as may be approved by the Village Council, said bond to be
conditioned on the faithful performance of the manager's duties. (Code 1961, § 4.104)
Sec. 2-110. Acting manager.
During an extended absence or extended disability of the manager the Corporate Authorities shall
appoint an acting manager, with all the powers and duties of that office. The acting manager shall perform all
the duties thereof without furnishing any additional bond, if such appointee shall already be under bond to the
village in any other capacity. If such appointment shall be of a person not already under bond to the village
such appointee shall furnish a bond, if required by the Corporate Authorities and at the expense of the village,
in such amount and with such surety as may be approved by the Village Council. During a temporary absence
or temporary disability, the manager may appoint an acting manager. (Code 1961, § 4.105)
Sec. 2-111. Settlement of Litigation
In the event there is litigation or potential litigation involving the Village of Palatine or Workers
Compensation claims, the Village Manager shall be authorized settlement authority on behalf of the Village
under the following limitations:
(1) Settlements of $20,000 or less – Authorized by the Village Manager
(2) Settlements between $20,001 and $50,000 – Village Manager shall advise the Corporate
Authorities of the proposed settlement and allow the Corporate Authorities the opportunity to
discuss the matter at the first regularly scheduled Council Meeting following such notice.
Should the Corporate Authorities not elect to discuss the matter and provide other direction,
then the Manager shall be authorized to settle.
(3) Settlements over $50,001 – Corporate Authority discussion and action will be required.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-18
As it relates to workers compensation claims, the above-guidelines would be for settlement purposes of
payments to employees. Medical related expenses and workers compensation wages are paid separately and
required under law.
Sec. 2-112. Disposal of Property
(1) Property Less Than $150 In Value.
Whenever the village owns any personal property which is determined by the Village Manager to
be no longer necessary or useful to, or for the best interest of the village and having an original value of
less than $150, the Village Manager, at his discretion, may authorize the disposal of said property, without
any further action of the corporate authorities.
(2) Property Between $150 And $5,000 In Value
Whenever the Village owns any personal property which is determined by the Village Manager, in
accordance with this section, to be no longer necessary or useful to, or for the best interest of the Village,
and said property originally having a value of $150 or more and currently having a value of less than
$5,000, the Village Manager shall be authorized to dispose of such personal property in accordance with
the following conditions and procedures:
(A) The Village Manager or his designee shall make a written determination that the property is no
longer needed by the village and shall set forth reasons therefor.
(B) The Village Manager or his designee shall set forth in writing, attaching such documentation as he
deems necessary, the basis for his determination when the property is of a value of $5,000 or less.
(C) The Village Manager shall solicit proposals for the purchase of such property, sell it at public
auction, scrap the property, or authorize a trade of it for the purchase of other property, whichever,
in his judgment, such activity will generate a greater return to the village. If the Village Manager
chooses to solicit proposals, he may do so by such means as he deems suited to generate the best
response. If the property cannot be disposed of through the preceding means, the Village Manager
shall at his discretion authorize disposal without any further action of the corporate authority.
(D) Following the sale or disposition of such property, the Village Manager shall prepare a written
report thereof and file the same with the Mayor and Village Council, on an annual basis.
(E) Disposal or sale of the property hereunder shall not be made to an officer or employee of the
village or to a person related by blood or marriage to an officer or employee of the village, except
items sold at public auction.
(3) Property Over $5,000 In Value; Having Title.
Whenever the village owns any personal property which is determined by the Village Manager to
be no longer necessary or useful to, or for the best interest of the village, and having a value of more than
$5,000, or consisting of an item having a title (i.e., vehicle), the items may only be disposed in accordance
with the Village Council action.
(Ord. No. O-85-86, § 1, 8-11-86; Ord. No. 0-69-07, §2, 5/7/07)
Secs. 2-113--2-120. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-19
ARTICLE VII. VILLAGE ATTORNEY*
----------
*State law reference(s)--Appointment of municipal attorney, 65ILCS5/3-7-1, 65ILCS5/3-7-3.
----------
-------------------------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-15-02 enacted January 28, 2002, replaced Article VII in its entirety.
-------------------------
Sec. 2-121. Employment; special counsel.
The village attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor by and with the advice and consent of the Village
Council. The village attorney shall represent or advise the village on legal matters; and he may likewise retain
special counsel to advise or represent the village on special matters or to assist the attorney for the village. The
village attorney may be removed by a majority vote of the Corporate Authorities.
(Code 1961, § 4.201)
Sec. 2-122. Suits and actions.
The attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the village
may be a party, or in which it may be interested, or which may be brought against or by, any officer of the
village on behalf of the village or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the village, except for suits
assigned to the village prosecutor. (Code 1961, § 4.202)
Sec. 2-123. Judgments.
It shall be the duty of the attorney to see to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees entered in
favor of the village, and of all similar interlocutory orders. (Code 1961, § 4.203)
Sec. 2-124. Advice.
The attorney shall be the legal adviser of the village and shall render advice on all legal questions
affecting it, whenever requested to do so by any village official. Upon request by the Mayor, the manager or a
Council Member, the attorney shall reduce any such opinion to writing. (Code 1961, § 4.204)
Sec. 2-125. Special assessments.
It shall be the duty of the attorney to see to the completion of all special assessment proceedings and
condemnation proceedings. (Code 1961, § 4.205)
Secs. 2-126--2-135. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-20
ARTICLE VIII. VILLAGE PROSECUTOR
-------------------------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-15-02 enacted January 28, 2002, replaced Article VIII in its entirety.
-------------------------
Sec. 2-136. Creation of office.
There is hereby created the office of village prosecutor. (Code 1961, § 4.901)
Sec. 2-137. Appointment and qualifications.
The village prosecutor shall be appointed by the Mayor by and with the advice and consent of the
Village Council. The village prosecutor may be removed by a majority vote of the Corporate Authorities. The
village prosecutor shall be an attorney, duly licensed to practice in the state. (Code 1961, § 4.902)
Sec. 2-138. Duties.
(a) The village prosecutor shall be responsible for the prosecution under this Code and all other village
ordinances, except those which may be from time to time, assigned to the village attorney for prosecution.
(b) The village prosecutor shall consult with the village attorney relative to practices and procedures
employed in the discharge of the duties as village prosecutor and shall make recommendations to the village
attorney, when deemed advisable or necessary, for improvements of the administration of justice in the area for
which the village prosecutor is responsible.
(c) The village prosecutor shall make such other and further reports as may be required by the
Corporate Authorities. (Code 1961, § 4.903)
Secs. 2-139--2-150. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. VILLAGE TREASURER*
*State law reference(s)--Duties of treasurer, 65ILCS5/3-10-1.
-------------------------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-15-02 enacted January 28, 2002, replaced Article IX in its entirety.
-------------------------
Sec. 2-151. Appointment.
There is hereby created the office of village treasurer. The village treasurer shall be appointed by
the Mayor by and with the advice and consent of the Village Council. The treasurer shall serve for one (1)
year. The village treasurer may be removed by a majority vote of the Corporate Authorities. (Code 1961,
§ 4.301)
State law reference(s)--Power to appoint treasurer, 65ILCS5/3-8-1.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-21
Sec. 2-151.1. Qualifications.
The village treasurer shall have competence, derived from a combination of education and employment
in one (1) or more of the following areas of financial and investment management:
(1) Certified public accountant.
(2) Registered security principal.
(3) Registered investment adviser.
(4) Certified financial planner.
(5) Public finance.
(Ord. No. O-43-90, § 1, 4-23-90)
Sec. 2-152. Ex-officio collector.
The village treasurer shall be ex-officio collector and shall perform all duties of the office. (Code
1961, § 4.302)
Sec. 2-153. Bond.
The village treasurer shall give the Village a bond, before entering upon the duties of the office, in the
sum required by the Corporate Authorities, and at the expense of the village, but such amount shall not be less
than that required by statute. This bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties by the
treasurer, and shall be conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss by reason of any neglect of duty or any
act of the treasurer. (Code 1961, § 4.303)
State law reference(s)--Bonding of officers, 65ILCS3/3-13-3.
Sec. 2-154. General duties.
The treasurer shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by ordinance. The treasurer shall receive
all money paid into the village whether directly from the person paying the money or from the hands of such
other officer or employee as may receive it, and he shall pay out money only on vouchers or orders properly
signed by the Mayor and attested to by the clerk. (Code 1961, § 4.304)
Sec. 2-155. Deposit of funds.
The treasurer shall deposit the village funds in such depositories, as may be selected from time to time
as provided by law; and shall keep the deposit of the village money separate and distinct from the treasurer's
own money, and shall not make private or personal use of any village money. (Code 1961, § 4.305)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-22
Sec. 2-156. Records.
The treasurer shall keep records showing all money received showing the source from which it is
received and the purpose for which it is paid and the disposition of it, and shall keep records at all times
showing the financial status of the village. (Code 1961, § 4.306)
Sec. 2-157. Accounting.
The treasurer shall keep such books and accounts as may be required by statute, this Code or
ordinance, and shall keep them in the manner required by the Corporate Authorities. (Code 1961, § 4.307)
Sec. 2-157.1 Publication of Annual Treasurer's Report.
The village clerk shall, within six months after the end of each fiscal year, and after having received a
copy of the annual treasurer's report, publish a notice in a newspaper advising of the availability of said annual
report and that the same may be inspected or copied at the office of the village clerk. (Ord. No. O-33-93,
4-12-93)
Sec. 2-158. Special assessment funds.
All moneys received on any special assessment shall be held by the treasurer as a special fund to be
applied only to the payment of the improvement, or bonds and vouchers issued therefor, together with interest
thereon, for which the assessment was made, and said money shall be used for no other purpose, unless to
reimburse the village for money expended for such improvement. Payments on bonds or vouchers shall be
made in accordance with the statutes and the law and the treasurer shall keep the books and accounts in such a
manner so that proper prorations in payments of principal and interest can be made and ascertained. (Code
1961, § 4.308)
Sec. 2-159. Warrants--Transfer of funds.
All warrants drawn on the treasurer must be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the clerk,
stating the particular fund or appropriation to which the same is chargeable, and no money shall be otherwise
paid except as may be provided by statute. Money shall not be transferred by the treasurer from one fund to
another, after it has been received, nor appropriated to any other purpose than that for which it has been
collected or paid, except as may be ordered by the Corporate Authorities. (Code 1961, § 4.309)
Secs. 2-160--2-170. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-23
ARTICLE X. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS*
----------
*Editor's note--Ord. No. O-100-77, § 1, enacted Sept. 12, 1977, repealed former Art. X, §§ 2-171--
2-177, relative to the director of public works, and enacted in lieu thereof a new Art. X, §§ 2.171--2-181, as
herein set out. Former Art. X was derived from Code 1961, §§ 4.401--4.407.
Subsequent to the above amendment, Ord. No. O-17-92, adopted Feb. 24, 1992, amended Art. X
to read as herein set out.
-----------------------------------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-15-02 enacted January 28, 2002, replaced Article X in its entirety.
-------------------------
Sec. 2-171. Department created; composition.
There is hereby created a department of public works which shall consist of the director of public
works and such other members as may be provided from time to time by the Corporate Authorities.
(Ord. No. O-100-77, § 1, 9-12-77; Ord. No. O-17-92, § 1, 2-24-92)
Sec. 2-172. Office of director of public works created; appointment.
There is hereby created the office of director of public works, an executive office of the village. The
director of public works shall be appointed by the manager. (Ord. No. O-100-77, § 1, 9-12-77; Ord. No.
O-17-92, § 1, 2-24-92)
Sec. 2-173. Duties and functions of department.
The department of public works shall be responsible for the repair and maintenance of all property,
facilities and improvements owned by or under the jurisdiction of the village. (Ord. No. O-100-77, § 1,
9-12-77; Ord. No. O-17-92, § 1, 2.24-92)
ARTICLE XI. DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT*
----------
*Editor's note--Ord. No. O-100-77, ? 1, enacted Sept. 12, 1977, repealed former Art. XI, ?? 2-191--2-
197, relative to the building and zoning administrator, and enacted in lieu thereof a new Art. XI, ?? 2-191--2-
196, as herein set out. Former Art. XI was derived from Code 1961, ?? 4.501--4.506, 4.508.
----------
Sec. 2-191. Department created; composition.
There is hereby created a department of community development which shall consist of the director of
community development and such other members as may be provided from time to time by the president and
board of trustees. (Ord. No. O-100-77, ? 1, 9-12-77)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-24
Sec. 2-192. Office of director of community development created; appointment.
There is hereby created the office of director of community development, an executive office of the
village. The director of community development shall be appointed by the village manager. (Ord. No. O-100-
77, ? 1, 9-12-77)
Cross reference(s)--Director of community development, ? 6-1.03.
Sec. 2-193. Duties and functions of director generally.
The director of community development shall be responsible for enforcement of all ordinance and
Code provisions relating to building and zoning, inspection of all buildings and structures being erected or
altered, as frequently as may be necessary to ensure compliance with village ordinances, the design,
construction and erection of all facilities, buildings, structures and improvements on village-owned property,
the landscaping and planting of all trees and shrubs on village property, the design and location of all trafficcontrol
devices, the planning, designing and construction of all public streets, alleys and driveways, sewers,
sewage disposal plants, street lighting systems, and water systems, and all planning, zoning and engineering
requirements of the village. The director of community development also shall have and perform the duties
assigned to him in the building code. (Ord. No. O-100-77, ? 1, 9-12-77)
Cross reference(s)--Building codes and building regulations generally, Ch. 6; qualifications and
duties of enforcement of community development director, ? 6-1.03; housing, Ch. 10; streets and sidewalks,
Ch. 16; trees and shrubs, ? 16-101 et seq.; traffic, Ch. 18; water and sewer services, Ch. 19; zoning, App. A;
subdivisions, App. B.
Sec. 2-194. Duty of director to act as electrical inspector.
The director of community development shall have the authority and be charged with the duty of
enforcing all ordinance provisions relating to electrical wiring and equipment. (Ord. No. O-100-77, ? 1, 9-12-
77)
Sec. 2-195. Duty of director to act as plumbing inspector.
The director of community development shall have the authority and be charged with the duty of
enforcing all ordinance provisions relating to the installation, care and standards of plumbing. (Ord. No. O-
100-77, ? 1, 9-12-77)
Sec. 2-196. Duty of director to forward copies of permits to assessor.
In addition to all other duties, the director of community development shall forward to the township
assessor and county assessor a copy of each building permit issued within fifteen (15) days of such issuance.
Each such copy shall show the legal description of the lot or area concerned, as required by statute. (Ord. No.
O-100-77, ? 1, 9-12-77)
Secs. 2-197--2-210. Reserved.
ARTICLE XII. PALATINE YOUTH COUNCIL
Sec. 2-211. General policy.
It shall be the purpose and general policy of the Palatine Youth Council to provide a forum for youth to
participate in and affect the policy and decision-making process of the president and board of trustees of the
Village of Palatine and other village boards and commissions. The Palatine Youth Council shall communicate
to the village government the ideas, concerns, suggestions and proposed solutions to problems confronting
youths. It shall seek effective youth participation within village government and promote a greater sense of
community pride and responsibility among the youth. (Ord. No. O-77-78, ? 1, 9-11-78)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-25
Sec. 2-212. Creation and membership.
(a) There is hereby created the Palatine Youth Council of the Village of Palatine (hereinafter referred
to as "council") which shall consist of three (3) members each from the student bodies of William Fremd
High School and Palatine High School (with their election supervised by, but not limited to, members of each
school's student council) and, upon compliance with section 2-213, one additional member from any organized
homeowner group, civic association, community group or other representative citizens group within the village.
(b) The members of the council shall be between the ages of twelve (12) and eighteen (18) years
inclusive when elected or reelected to the council.
(c) There shall be a chairman annually elected by the members at a duly constituted meeting of the
council.
(d) There shall be a vice-chairman for youth affairs annually elected by the members at a duly
constituted meeting of the council who may attend each scheduled meeting of the Palatine Advisory Board as a
representative of the council. (Ord. No. O-77-78, ? 1, 9-11-78; Ord. No. O-69-92, ? 1, 5-11-92)
Sec. 2-213. New members.
Any organized homeowner group, civic association, community group or other representative citizens
group, not holding membership on the council, may apply to the council by written request for membership
thereon. The chairman shall present the application to the council for a vote at the next regular scheduled
meeting following its receipt. If the council accepts the application, the applicant shall be entitled to immediate
membership on the council. If the council rejects the application, the applicant may petition the president and
board of trustees of the village in writing for a final determination.
The chairman shall forward promptly to the president and board of trustees of the village in writing the
names of all new members accepted by the council. (Ord. No. O-77-78, ? 1, 9-11-78)
Sec. 2-214. Special membership.
By approval of the council, any member who has graduated from high school during his or her term
may continue to be a member of the council for an additional consecutive term without sponsorship by the
group or school that designated him or her as its representative. By approval of the council, such special
membership may be renewed annually, subject to the residence and age limitations imposed by section 2-212.
Any school or organization whose representative becomes a special member pursuant to this section shall be
entitled to select an immediate successor to complete the remaining unexpired term. (Ord. No. O-77-78, ? 1, 9-
11-78)
Sec. 2-215. Terms of office.
All members of the council shall serve for a one-year term commencing the first day of October of
each year. Membership shall be renewed annually thereafter by those organizations and schools entitled to
representation on the council. There shall be no limit on the number of terms which a member may serve,
subject to the age limitations imposed by section 2-212. Vacancies on the council shall be filled in the same
manner as herein provided for the original election of members. Two (2) adult advisors shall be appointed by
the youth council. (Ord. No. O-77-78, ? 1, 9-11-78; Ord. No. O-69-92, ? 1, 5-11-92)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-26
Sec. 2-216. Duties.
The duties of the Palatine Youth Council shall be the following:
(1) To hold public meetings, receive communications from any school, group, council,
association or individual;
(2) To coordinate communications between the youth and the president and board of trustees of
the village and the citizenry of the village;
(3) To hold meetings and formulate recommendations for policies concerning specific topics
assigned to it by the president and board of trustees of the village, including but not limited to:
Vandalism, liquor and drug law enforcement, automobile and bicycle safety and family life
education;
(4) To foster and promote intergovernmental cooperation;
(5) To prepare annually and present to the village manager recommendations for budget
expenditures; and
(6) To define and study problems confronting youth in general and present to the president and
board of trustees of the village recommendations for their solution.
(Ord. No. O-77-78, ? 1, 9-11-78)
Sec. 2-217. Meetings.
The council shall meet each month on a day agreed upon, by the council, possibly changing each year.
The chairman may call a special meeting as required or change the date of the monthly meeting to
accommodate calendar conflicts. In addition to its regular monthly meeting, the council shall meet in December
and June of each year with the business and government relations committee of the village board of trustees.
The first priority of these meetings shall be to discuss particular topics currently before the council. The
chairman of the council and the business and government relations committee shall mutually agree upon the
date of such meetings. Subject to the voting requirements of section 2-218, there shall be no required number
of members present to constitute a quorum for any meeting.
(Ord. No. O-77-78, ? 1, 9-11-78; Ord. No. O-69-92, ? 1, 5-11-92)
Sec. 2-218. Voting.
A majority vote of those members present at a duly constituted meeting of the council shall be required
to take final action on any measure before the council; provided, however, that the following actions may be
taken only at meetings when not less than one-third (1/3) of the total members of the council are present:
(a) Election of a chairman, vice-chairman for youth affairs or any other officer;
(b) Acceptance of a membership application;
(c) Acceptance of a special membership application or special membership renewal;
(d) Any final recommendation to the village president and board of trustees.
Each member shall have one vote. The chairman shall vote on every final decision of the council.
(Ord. No. O-77-78, ? 1, 9-11-78)
Secs. 2-219--2-225. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-27
ARTICLE XIII. PEER JURY AND YOUTH OFFICER
[Editor’s Note: Ord. 0-110-11 enacted October 3, 2011 replaced Article XIII]
Sec. 2-226. Establishment.
A peer jury is hereby established for the Village of Palatine. The peer jury shall be operated and
conducted in accordance with the provisions of this article. The Palatine Police Department shall designate a
police department youth officer to have the duties and perform the functions described in this article. (Ord.
No. O-5- -14-80)
Sec. 2-227. General policy.
The peer jury shall provide a youth charged with an offense defined in section 2-229 and referred by
the youth officer an alternative to criminal prosecution by the Palatine village prosecutor or Cook County
States’ Attorney by appearing before the peer jury for sentencing to the following, but limited to: community
service hours, writing a letter of apology to the victim, writing a report that is related to the crime, attending
educational workshops and/or counseling, attending an adult bond hearing and, where applicable, making
restitution, if directed. It will be the function of the peer jury to conduct hearings, assign appropriate sentences
and where applicable, to direct restitution. (Ord. No. O-5- -14-80)
Sec. 2-228. Peer jury membership.
Membership on the peer jury shall be voluntary. The board shall be composed of 20 members. All
members shall be at least thirteen (13) years of age but less than nineteen (19) years of age at the time of
selection. Members shall be selected by the youth officer, youth unit supervisor, and peer jury moderator.
Members of the peer jury shall be residents of Palatine or attend a school in Palatine. Members shall be
selected for a term that will end upon graduation from high school, or when they turn 19 which ever comes
first or until they resign or are removed. There shall be no limit other than the age limitation provided herein on
the length of terms members may serve. (Ord. No. O-5-80, §1, 1-14-80; Ord. No. O-13- -9-81)
Sec. 2-229. Offenses.
Offenses for which the peer jury may be selected shall be violations of the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Palatine, including but not limited to, curfew violations, vandalism, theft, bicycle safety or
possession of alcohol or cannabis and minor crimes found in the Illinois Criminal Statutes. (Ord. No. O-5-80,
-14-80)
Sec. 2-230. Eligibility to appear before peer jury.
Any person under the age of eighteen (18) charged with an offense described in section 2-229, together
with his or her parents or legal guardian, may elect to have his or her case presented to the jury upon the
express approval of the youth officer in the manner described in section 2-231. (Ord. No. O-5-80, -14-
80)
Sec. 2-231. Procedure.
Upon being charged with an offense described in section 2-229, the youth officer shall determine
whether the accused is eligible to appear before the peer jury. Upon a determination that the case may be heard
by the peer jury, the youth officer will inform the parents or legal guardian of the accused of the peer jury
program and the possibility of having the case referred to the peer jury. If the accused and his or her parents or
legal guardian consent to having the accused appear before the peer jury, each of them shall sign a sworn
statement evidencing such consent and accepting the provisions of this article, in the following form:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-28
CONSENT TO APPEAR
BEFORE THE PALATINE PEER JURY
I, ________, "the accused" (a person under the age of eighteen (18) years) and ________ (parent(s) or
legal guardian) and each of us, do hereby consent to the appearance of the accused, ________, before the
Village of Palatine peer jury for sentencing to but not limited to: community service hours, writing a letter of
apology to the victim, writing a report that is related to the crime, attending educational workshops and/or
counseling, attending an adult bond hearing and, where applicable, to make restitution, if directed, in
accordance with Art. XIII of the Code of Ordinances of the Village of Palatine. We, and each of us, understand
and agree that in the event the accused, ________, does not satisfactorily complete the sentence and, where
applicable, make restitution, if directed, the Village of Palatine shall be free to prosecute the accused,
________, for the offense of ________ violation of the Code of Ordinances of the Village of Palatine, Sec.
________ or in violation of chapter_______ Illinois Criminal Statutes act_______/Section______; and each
of the undersigned having been fully informed of the rights of the accused, ________, to reject referral to the
peer jury nevertheless have freely and voluntarily consented to such referral.
The undersigned further consent to having the accused, ________, assume such reasonable risks as
may be involved in the performance of the assigned work project.
________________________
(Signature of Accused)
_________________________
(Signature of Parent or Guardian)
Upon proper completion and execution of the above consent form, a date shall be assigned for the
accused appearance before the peer jury.
The youth officer shall have complete discretion, even in the case of first offenders, in deciding
whether to refer a case to the peer jury. The peer jury may not hear a case without it first having been referred
by the youth officer.
On the date assigned, the accused shall appear before the peer jury, and the charges against the accused
shall be read to him or her. All sessions of the peer jury shall be closed to the public. The accused may offer an
explanation of his conduct with any mitigating or extenuating circumstances. The youth officer may also make
a statement to the jury. Members of the peer jury may question the accused. (and may hear testimony from
such other voluntary witnesses as they deem appropriate.- delete) Thereafter, the peer jury will adjourn to
private deliberation and members will determine an appropriate sentence) and restitution, if any, for the
accused. A sentence, shall be executed by the moderator of the peer jury and delivered to the youth officer. The
peer jury will then reconvene and the moderator shall read the sentence) in the presence of the accused.
The youth officer or a person assigned by the youth officer shall be responsible for enforcing the
sentence of the peer jury. Upon satisfactory completion of the sentence, the youth officer shall notify the peer
jury. If the sentence is not completed satisfactorily within the time period assigned, the youth officer shall
determine whether the matter shall be turned over to the Palatine village sentence or payment of restitution, if
any. (Ord. No. O-5- § 1, 1-14-80; Ord. No. O-33-80, § -14-80)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-29
Sec. 2-232. Rules, regulations and procedure.
The youth officer shall attend all meetings of the peer jury and shall prepare a docket) of the
proceedings. Under no circumstances shall the docket or the events of any proceeding before the peer jury be
part of any public record, or the name and address of the accused or his or her parents or legal guardian be
made available for public inspection. (Ord. No. O-5-80, § 1, 1-14-80)
Sec. 2-233. Peer Jury Moderator
All meetings of the peer jury shall be presided over by the moderator, who shall be selected by the
youth officer, youth unit supervisor and approved by the chief of police members of the peer review board.
The peer jury adult moderator will be a voluntary position and a resident of Palatine. The peer jury moderator
term will be indefinite. (Ord. No. O-5- 1, 1-14-80; Ord. No. O-13- -9-81)
Sec. 2-234. Schedule.
The peer jury shall meet monthly on a pre-established weekday evening at 7:00 p.m. and may adjourn
and reconvene from time to time as it sees fit. The youth officer may call an extraordinary meeting of the peer
jury in his discretion when the situation warrants. (Ord. No. O-5- § 1, 1-14-80)
Secs. 2-235--2-250. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIV. BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS*
----------
*State law reference(s)--Authority for board of local improvement, 65ILCS5/5-3-11.
----------
Sec. 2-251. Appointments.
There is hereby established the board of local improvements for the village, which shall consist of
the president and all members of the board of trustees. (Code 1961, ? 7.101)
Sec. 2-252. General duties.
The board of local improvements shall have the powers and perform the duties assigned to it by
statute or ordinance. (Code 1961, ? 7.102)
Sec. 2-253. Meetings.
Meetings of the board of local improvements may be called by the president or any three (3)
trustees in the manner provided for calling special meetings of the board of trustees. (Code 1961, ? 7.103)
Secs. 2-254--2-270. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-30
ARTICLE XV. DISTRICT CITIZEN ADVISORY COUNCILS*
----------
*Editor's note--Ord. No. O-79-83, ? 1, adopted Nov. 14, 1983, repealed former Art. XV, ?? 2-271--2-
280, "Palatine Advisory Board," and enacted a new Art. XV, ?? 2-271--2-278, as set out herein. The repealed
sections derived from Ord. No. O-86-74, adopted Oct. 28, 1974, and Ord. No. O-56-78, adopted July 10, 1978.
----------
Sec. 2-271. General policy.
The purpose of the district citizen advisory councils is to provide forums for all citizens of the village
to participate in and affect the policy and decision-making process of the village board of trustees. In order to
foster widespread participation by all areas of the village, one such council shall exist for each trustee district.
The district citizen advisory councils shall communicate the ideas, concerns, suggestions, and proposed
solutions to problems of the citizens of their district to their trustee and local government. The citizen advisory
councils shall seek to increase citizen and community participation and influence upon its local government,
and to foster and promote a sense of community pride and responsibility. (Ord. No. O-79-83, § 1, 11-14-83)
Sec. 2-272. Membership.
The intention of the district citizen advisory councils is to provide a forum for community leaders;
homeowner, condominium owner and apartment-dweller associations; business and religious groups; civic
groups; community groups; and concerned citizens to provide advice and recommendations to their local
government officials.
A minimum of five (5) district citizen advisory council members shall be appointed by the respective
district village trustees for one year terms. The trustee shall appoint one member as chairperson. A list of
membership must be filed with the village clerk annually.
In addition, formal homeowner, condominium-owner or apartment-dweller organizations which exceed
twenty (20) dwelling units in membership and whose majority of membership lives within the district may
annually nominate their own delegate to a district citizen advisory council through a written notification to the
district's trustee by the organization's president.
Any such organization seeking membership shall provide the district trustee a nominee and one
alternate nominee. The trustee shall choose as the representative the nominee.
In addition, the village clerk shall be provided annually a membership list of residents of at least
twenty (20) dwelling units of the organization. The village clerk shall certify to the appropriate district trustee
that the organization and nominee meet the requirements of the article:
(1) All members of the district citizens' advisory council must live within the district of the
council of which they have been appointed, except business and church representatives.
(2) The district trustee shall serve as an ad hoc, nonvoting member of each district council to
foster communication with the village board of trustees.
(Ord. No. O-79-83, ? 1, 11-14-83)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-31
Sec. 2-273. Quorum.
A majority of the members of each district citizen advisory council shall constitute a quorum and no
final action shall be taken on any measure before each district council except with concurrence of the majority
of those members present. The chair-person shall vote on all questions that come before the council. (Ord. No.
O-79-83, ? 1, 11-14-83)
Sec. 2-274. Terms of office.
All members of the district citizens' advisory council shall serve for a term of one year. There shall be
no limit to the number of terms which a member can serve. The terms shall run from May 1st to April 30th of
each year, except for the first year of this article, in which year the member shall serve until April 30, 1984.
Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments. (Ord. No. O-79-83, ? 1, 11-14-83)
Sec. 2-275. Meetings.
The district citizen advisory councils shall meet at the call of the chairperson. A minimum of two (2)
meetings a year is required; quarterly or more frequent meetings are encouraged. Special meetings may be
called by the majority of the district citizens' advisory council's membership or by the district's village trustee.
Five (5) days' advance written notice of each regular or special meeting shall be mailed or personally delivered
to each member of the council by the chairperson or his delegate. Notice shall also be filed with the village
manager, the village clerk, and the village president and board of trustees. (Ord. No. O-79-83, § 1, 11-14-83)
Sec. 2-276. Standing responsibilities.
In addition to the subject and issues determined by the individual district citizen advisory councils to
be appropriate for its consideration, traffic problems, community crime prevention and public safety matters
shall be considered standing areas of responsibilities. (Ord. No. O-79-83, § 1, 11-14-83)
Sec. 2-277. Duties.
The duties of the district citizen advisory councils shall be the following:
(1) To coordinate communications among various citizen groups and councils to the village board
and to the citizenry of the village.
(2) To respond to requests from the village board to hold hearings on and to develop
recommendations for policies concerning problems assigned to it.
(3) To promote fair and equal treatment under the law to all persons.
(4) To study and survey areas of need and make recommendations for improvement.
(5) To work towards the lessening of tensions and improvement of understanding within the
community.
(6) To cooperate with local, state and federal agencies and groups whenever it deems such action
appropriate.
(Ord. No. O-79-83, § 1, 11.14-83)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-32
Sec. 2-278. Staff support.
The village manager shall provide such staff support as he determines appropriate to assist the
activities of the citizens' advisory council. He shall meet with the chairpersons of the citizen advisory councils
quarterly to review staff assistance, coordination of activities and other matters of general concern.
(Ord. No. O-79-83, § 1, 11-14-83)
Secs. 2-279--2-290. Reserved.
ARTICLE XVI. ELECTRICAL COMMISSION
Sec. 2-291. Created.
The electrical commission shall consist of six (6) members as provided by 65ILCS5/11-37-2, and
shall be appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the board.
Sec. 2-292. Functions.
The electrical commission shall recommend safe and practical standards and specifications for the
installations, alteration and use of electrical equipment designed to meet the necessities and conditions that
prevail in this village, shall recommend reasonable rules and regulations governing the issuance of permits of
and for electrical installations and shall recommend reasonable fees to be paid therefor and for inspections;
provided that such standards and rules and regulations shall not be effective unless the same have been adopted
by ordinance. (Code 1961, ? 7.802)
Sec. 2-293. Permits.
Upon the adoption by ordinance of such standards, specifications, rules and regulations the same shall
at once become operative and no electrical equipment shall be installed or altered except upon a permit first
being issued. (Code 1961, ? 7.803)
Secs. 2-294--2-305. Reserved.
ARTICLE XVII. ENVIRONMENTAL COMMITTEES*
----------
*Editor's note--Section 1 of Ord. No. O-131-89, adopted Sept. 25, 1989, deleted provisions formerly
codified as Art. XVII, ?? 2-306--2-310, of Ch. 2 in their entirety, such provisions pertaining to the Palatine
Environmental Coordinating Council and derived from Ord. No. O-7-78, ? 1, adopted Feb. 13, 1978; Ord. No.
O-60-78, ? 1, adopted July 24, 1978; and Ord. No. O-46-82, ? 1, adopted May 24, 1982. In addition, Ord. No.
O-131-89 substituted provisions set out as a new Art. XVII.
----------
Sec. 2-306. Palatine Beautification Commission.
There is hereby created a committee of the Village of Palatine to be named the Palatine Beautification
Commission, which shall consist of nine (9) members appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Village
Council. The Mayor shall designate one (1) member to act as chair of the commission. Commission members
shall be either village residents or individuals operating businesses physically located within the Village of
Palatine. (Ord. No. O-131-89, §1, 9/25/89; Ord. No. 0-46-06, §1, 3/6/06; Ord. No. 0-101-11, §§1 & 2, 9/6/11;
Ord. No. 0-54-14, §1, 5/5/14)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-33
Sec. 2-307. Terms of office.
The term of office shall be for two (2) years coinciding with the village fiscal year commencing May 1,
1989. The president may, with the consent of the board of trustees, fill vacancies that may from time to time
occur. (Ord. No. O-131-89, ? 1, 9-25.89)
Sec. 2-308. Compensation and meetings.
Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. A meeting schedule shall be
established by the commission and filed with the village clerk. The village manager, or his designee, shall serve
as executive secretary of the commission and shall provide such staff as he deems appropriate to assist the
commission. (Ord. No. O-131-89, ? 1, 9-25-89)
Sec. 2-309. Duties.
The duties of the beautification commission are:
(1) To define beautification objectives and recommend a beautification plan to the village board.
(2) To encourage civic awareness in beautification efforts and foster increased awareness in
beautification.
(3) To encourage improvement of commercial property by establishing a recognition program.
(4) To influence quality of new development and improvement of existing properties by
reviewing existing ordinances and petitioning for modification as appropriate.
(5) To review and recommend specific beautification projects and programs to the village
manager and/or village board as may be appropriate.
(6) To encourage and coordinate volunteer efforts to instill or maintain plantings or other
beautification projects on public rights of way.
(Ord. No. O-131-89, ? 1, 9-25-89)
Secs. 2-310--2-314. Reserved.
Sec. 2-315. Palatine Recycling Committee.
There is hereby created a committee of the Village of Palatine to be named the Palatine Recycling
Committee, which shall consist of five (5) members, each of whom shall be appointed by the president with the
consent of the board of trustees. The president shall appoint one (1) member as chairman, with subsequent
approval of the board of trustees. The chairman shall serve for the term of his appointment or until his
successor is appointed and qualified. Membership in the committee shall be open to all interested residents of
the village. (Ord. No. O-131-89, ? 1, 9-25-89)
Sec. 2-316. Terms of office.
Except as hereinafter provided for original appointees, each member of the recycling committee shall
be appointed for a term of two (2) years and shall serve for such period or until their respective successors are
appointed. Vacancies on the committee for any unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner as herein
provided for the original appointment of members. (Ord. No. O-131-89, ? 1, 9-25-89)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-34
Sec. 2-317. Compensation and meetings.
Members of the committee shall serve without compensation. A meeting schedule shall be established
by the committee and shall be filed with the village clerk. The village manager, or his designee, shall serve as
executive secretary of the committee and shall provide such staff as he deems appropriate to assist the
committee. (Ord. No. O-131-89, ? 1, 9-25-89)
Sec. 2-318. Duties.
The duties of the recycling committee are:
(1) To supervise the operation of the Palatine Recycling Center.
(2) To evaluate and review the operations of the village wide recycling program.
(3) To promote community awareness of solid waste recycling programs.
(4) To make recommendations to the village manager or village board, as appropriate, on
improvements to the village recycling programs.
(Ord. No. O-131-89, ? 1, 9-25-89)
Secs. 2-319--2-325. Reserved.
ARTICLE XVIII. DIRECTOR OF ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
Sec. 2-326. Office created.
There is hereby created the office of director of environmental health, who shall be appointed by
the manager. (Code 1961, ? 4.1001)
Sec. 2-327. Duties.
(a) The director of environmental health hereby is designated the village health officer.
(b) The director of environmental health hereby is designated as the village law enforcement officer
and his duly authorized agent(s) are charged with enforcement responsibilities under the Illinois Environmental
Protection Act (415ILCS5/1). As such he shall file complaints and may cite violations or seek other authorized
remedies. The director of environmental health shall receive and investigate complaints or violations of the act
and regulations thereunder or any rules, regulations and orders of the Illinois Department of Public Health,
Cook County Department of Public Health or any ordinances relating to Environmental Health, Public Health
and Sanitation, subject to the supervision of the manager and the president and board.
(c) The director of environmental health shall:
(1) Execute and enforce all ordinances of the village relating to public health and sanitation.
(2) Issue such orders as may be necessary to carry out the rules proposed by the board of health
and approved by the president and board.
(3) Execute and enforce all provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the village relating to
the health standards maintained in every place of business in the village where services of a
personal nature are furnished to the public or where foods, food products, milk, milk products
and beverages of every nature and description whatsoever are either handled, sold, given
away, stored, manufactured or processed.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-35
(4) Investigate the existence of any contagious disease within the village and report the same to
the village board of health and to the county board of health, and act without delay in carrying
out such measures for controlling the progress of the same as the county board of health shall
propose.
(5) Make all necessary sanitation and health investigations and inspections and cause all
nuisances, whether public or private, affecting the health of persons in private employment
and the public generally, to be abated with reasonable promptness.
(6) Initiate plans for dealing with public health problems not included in the public health
program.
(7) Perform such other duties relating to health and sanitation as the manager shall direct.
(8) Request the police department and such other state or municipal authorities to provide such
assistance as he may deem necessary in the performance of the duties of his office and cause
the arrest of offenders violating any of this Code and other, village ordinances relating to
public or private nuisances, public health and sanitation.
(d) The director of environmental health shall assist all duly constituted authorities, and other
municipal organizations within and without the village, to promote and protect the public health, safety,
comfort and general welfare of the people with respect to air, sound, water, and land resources of the village.
(e) The director of environmental health shall establish and maintain liaison as necessary, with the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Illinois Attorney General, States Attorney of Cook County, Illinois
Department of Public Health, Cook County Department of Public Health, and other branches of state and local
government in order to assist and cooperate with them in matters of environmental health law enforcement.
(f) The director of environmental health shall investigate any complaint or other matter directed by the
environmental control board or board of health and report his findings to the respective board. His
responsibilities to and for the environmental control board and board of health shall be:
(1) To maintain liaison between the board of health and the environmental control board.
(2) To investigate any and all appropriate complaints.
(3) To report findings of these complaints to the environmental control board, the board of health
and appropriate village authorities.
(4) To attend, at the request of the appropriate chairman, all regularly scheduled meetings.
(5) To act, advise and consult with the environmental control board and the board of health in
environmental and public health problems of special interest and significance.
(6) To serve as an ex-officio non-voting member of the environmental control board and the
board of health.
(7) To call emergency meetings of the environmental control board or the board of health, should
he deem them necessary.
(Code 1961, ? 4.1002)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-36
Sec. 2-328. Entry powers.
The director of environmental health shall have authority to enter at all reasonable times upon any
private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating to ascertain possible violations of the
act or of regulations thereunder or of this Code or other village ordinances and regulations concerning
environmental health in accordance with constitutional limitations. (Code 1961, ? 4.1003)
Sec. 2-329. Reports.
The director of environmental health shall make monthly reports to the environmental control board,
the board of health, the board of trustees and to the manager or as the board of trustees or the manager may
request. He may initiate recommendations through the manager to the board of trustees for ordinances or
resolutions concerning public health or the environmental and he will prepare and submit such
recommendations when directed to do so by the manager or the board of trustees. (Code 1961, ? 4.1004)
Secs. 2-330--2-340. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIX. BOARD OF HEALTH*
----------
*State law reference(s)--Power to establish a board of health, 65ILCS5/11-16-1.
----------
-----------
Editor’s Note: Article XIX was replaced in its entirety by Ordinance 0-15-08, passed on January 21, 2008
-----------
Sec. 2-341. Creation; appointment.
There is hereby created the board of health for the Village which shall consist of seven (7) members
each of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the village council. The village health
officer will be an ex officio member of the board and shall attend board meetings. The Mayor shall designate
one (1) member as chairman of the board. No person shall be appointed to or serve on the Board of Health who
receives compensation for employment with the village.
(Code 1961, §7.1101; Ord. No. O-50-78, §1, 6-22-78; Ord. No. 0-133-08, §1, 9/15/08, Ord. 0-82-09, §1,
7/6/09; Ord. No. 0-14-11, §1, 2/14/11; Ord. No. 0-26-13, §1, 4/1/13)
Sec. 2-342. Terms of office.
Except as hereinafter provided each member of the board of health shall be appointed for a term of
three (3) years on a staggered basis and shall serve for such period or until their respective successors are
appointed. Whenever four or more appointees are filled at the same time, the appointees’ terms shall be
staggered to include four-year terms, three-year terms, and two-year terms. All subsequent terms shall be
for 3 year periods. (Code 1961, §7.1102; Ord. No. O-50-78, §2, 6-22-78; Ord. 0-46-06, §2, 3/6/06)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-37
Sec. 2-343. Qualifications of members.
A member of the board of health shall be a resident of the village or shall be employed for at least one
year prior to the appointment for a business located within the corporate limits of the village. A member of the
board of health shall be a person whose education, employment or interests provide them with some
competence in the public health or medical fields. However, if none is available, a competent and interested
person of the community shall be appointed.
Absence from one-third of the regularly scheduled meetings within a twelve-month period shall be
grounds for dismissal upon majority vote of the remaining board members, subject to the approval of the
Mayor. (Code 1961, ? 7.1103; Ord. No. O-17-93, ? 1, 2-23-93)
Sec. 2-344. Compensation and meetings.
The members of the board shall serve without compensation. The board of health shall meet regularly
not less than once every two (2) months except for special or emergency meetings. Such special or emergency
meetings may be called by the chairperson or the village health officer. -
50- -22-78)
Sec. 2-345. Quorum.
A majority of the members of the board of health assembled shall constitute a quorum and no final
action shall be taken on any measure before the board except with the concurrence of a majority of such
quorum. The chairman shall vote on all matters which come before the board. In the event the chairman of the
board is absent or unable to act for any reason, the board shall elect a chairman pro-tem to perform the
functions hereinafter designated for the chairman. (Code 1961, ? 7.1105)
Sec. 2-346. Powers and duties of the board of health.
The board of health shall have general supervision concerning the interests of the health of the people
of the village. The board shall cooperate with the state of Illinois Department of Public Health in enforcing the
rules and regulations promulgated by the department for the control of communicable diseases, and such other
rules and regulations of the state, county, and village as may be related to the sanitation and health of the
village. The board of health of the village shall have authority to make recommendations to the Mayor and
village council for the passage of ordinances pertaining to reasonable rules, regulations and orders, as they may
from time to time deem necessary for the preservation and improvement of the public health and for the
suppression of disease. The board of health shall also give to the village authorities such professional advice
and information as may be required or requested to preserve the public health. (Code 1961, ? 7.1106)
Sec. 2-347. Hearings.
In the performance of its duties assigned hereunder, the board of health may conduct hearings at
reasonable times upon notice as provided for under this Code or other village ordinances, and where not so
provided for, upon not less than ten (10) days prior public notice published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the village. Rules and regulations governing the conduct of such hearings may be
promulgated by the board. (Code 1961, ? 7.1107)
Secs. 2-348--2-360. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-38
ARTICLE XX. FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSION*
----------
*Editor's note--Ord. No. O-106-76, ? 1, enacted Dec. 13, 1976, repealed former Art. XX; relative to
the police and fire commission, and enacted in lieu thereof a new Art. XX pertaining to the same subject
matter. Former Art. XX was derived from Code 1961, ?? 7.501, 7.502, 7.505, and Ord. No. O-19-75, ? 2,
adopted Feb. 10, 1975. - Ord. No. 0-68-98 ?1, enacted May 26, 1998, repealed former Art. XX; and enacted a
new Art.XX.
Cross reference(s)--Police pension board, Ch. 2, Art. XXI; firemen's pension fund, Ch. 2, Art. XXII;
fire department, Ch. 7, Art. II; police department, Ch. 13; appointments to police department, ? 13-2.
Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 0-101-12, enacted July 9, 2012 replaced Article XX Fire & Police
Commission
----------
Sec. 2-361. Creation; composition; term of members.
This Article XX is expressly created and shall be administered pursuant to the home rule powers of the
Village of Palatine unless otherwise pre-empted by state statute. There is hereby created a Fire and Police
Commission consisting of five (5) members whose terms of office shall be three (3) years and shall continue
until their respective successors are appointed and have qualified.
Sec. 2-362. Appointment, qualifications, oath, and removal of members.
The Mayor, with the consent of the Village Council, shall appoint members of the Fire and Police
commission. The members shall be considered officers of the Village and shall file an oath. No person shall
be appointed a member who is related either by blood or marriage, up to the degree of first cousin, to any
elected official of the Village. Members shall not be considered subject to removal except for cause upon
written charges, and after an opportunity to be heard within thirty (30) days in his or their own defense, before
a regular meeting of the Village Council. A majority vote of the elected members shall be required to remove
any such member from office.
Sec. 2-363. Officers.
The Fire & Police commission will elect one of its own members to act as Chair and another to act as
Secretary. The Village Administration shall provide staff support to the Commission and will have the
responsibility for the keeping of minutes of the proceedings of the Fire and Police Commission, shall be
custodian of all papers pertaining to the business of the Commission, shall keep a record of all examinations
held, shall provide all official notices in compliance with State Statute and shall perform or cause to be
performed such other duties as the Fire and Police Commission shall prescribe.
Sec. 2-364. Meeting and quorum.
The Fire and Police Commission shall meet at such time and place as shall be specified by the call of
the Chair, by three (3) other members acting jointly, or by the Village Manager. Meetings also may be called
by the Chair or by the other three (3) members acting jointly upon the request of the Fire Chief or the Police
Chief. Meetings shall be held on an as-needed basis. The Village Administration shall give written notice of
all meetings to each member and notify the public in accordance with the necessary posting requirements.
Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-39
Sec. 365. Duty to make and/or change rules to establish system of personnel administration for fire and
police departments.
The Fire and Police Commission shall make (and have the power to as necessary recommend changes
to) rules to establish a system of personnel administration based on merit principles governing the appointment,
promotion, dismissal, suspension, demotion and discipline of certified employees of the fire and police
departments, all pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-5 through 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-6.3 inclusive. Changes to the rules
shall be approved by the Village Council and shall go into effect ten (10) calendar days subsequent to their
publication on the Village’s website.
Sec. 2-366. Attorney for Commission.
The Fire Chief or the Police Chief may retain Council to prosecute charges brought before the
Commission with prior approval of the Village Manager. The Commission will be represented by an attorney
approved by the Village Manager.
Sec. 2-367 – 2-380 Reserved.
ARTICLE XXI. POLICE PENSION BOARD*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Police and fire commission, Ch. 2, Art. XX; police department, Ch. 13.
----------
Sec. 2-381. Creation.
There is hereby created a police pension board as provided by statute. (Code 1961, ? 7.601)
Sec. 2-382. Members.
The board shall consist of five (5) members; two (2) of whom shall be appointed by the president
and two, (2) of whom shall be elected from the regular police force and one (1) from the beneficiaries
under the Police Pension Fund Act as created by statute; the term of such members shall be two (2) years
as is provided by statute. (Code 1961, ? 7.602)
State law reference(s)--Similar provisions, 40ILCS5/3-128.
Sec. 2-383. Duties.
The police pension board shall have the powers and duties delegated to it by statute. (Code 1961,
? 7.603)
State law reference(s)--Similar provisions, 40ILCS5/4-122.
Secs. 2-384--2-400. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-40
ARTICLE XXII. FIREMEN'S PENSION FUND*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Police and fire commission, Ch. 2, Art. XV; fire department, Ch. 7, Art. II.
----------
Sec. 2-401. Established.
There is hereby created and established a firemen's pension fund in and for the village, in
accordance with 40ILCS5/4-101 et. seq. (Code 1961, ? 7.1001)
Sec. 2-402. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article the term fireman or firemen and board or board of trustees are defined,
respectively, as: full-time fireman or full-time firemen entitled to participate in the benefits of said pension
fund as provided by said article 4 of said statute and the board of trustees of said pension fund. (Code 1961, ?
7.1002)
Sec. 2-403. Segregation of funds required.
There shall be set apart by the village and the treasurer thereof beginning as of August 1, 1971, the
following moneys to constitute said firemen's pension fund:
(1) All moneys derived from the taxes levied for the purposes of the fund.
(2) All fines imposed for the violation of fire ordinances, the enforcement or collection of which
may be charged to and be under the supervision of the chief officer or subordinate officers of
the fire department.
(3) All rewards in moneys, fees, gifts and emoluments that may be paid or given to the village or
the fire department for or on account of extraordinary services by the fire department or any
member thereof (except when allowed to be retained by competitive awards).
(4) All gifts, grants, transfers, devices or bequests of money, real estate, or personal property of
any description received by the board of trustees of the pension fund and also all fines and
penalties imposed upon firemen.
(5) Five per cent (5%) of the salary of each full-time fireman of the village which shall be
deducted and withheld from each payment of salary of such firemen and placed by the village
treasurer to the credit of the pension fund. (Code 1961, ? 7.1003)
Sec. 2-404. Levy of tax.
There shall be levied annually a tax upon all the taxable property of the village at the rate on the dollar
which will produce an amount, which, when added to the deductions from the salaries or wages of firemen and
recipients available from all other sources herein referred to, will equal a sum sufficient to:
(1) Meet the annual requirements of the fund as computed by the department of insurance of the
state;
(2) Provide actuarial reserves for the annuities and benefits to be earned by the firemen during the
year, and said actuarial reserve requirements shall be computed at a rate of not less than
seventeen and five-tenths (17.5) per cent of the salaries and wages to be paid to the firemen
for the ensuing year; and
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-41
(3) Provide for the amortization of the unfunded accrued liabilities, including liabilities on
account of pensions and benefits in force, in the manner provided by law. (Code 1961, ?
7.1004)
State law reference(s)--For provisions relating to levy of taxes see 40ILCS5/4-134.
Sec. 2-405. Reserve fund established; amount.
A reserve fund to insure the payment of all obligations of the pension fund shall be established and
maintained. The reserve shall be not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each one thousand (1,000)
inhabitants of the village. (Code 1961, §7.1005)
Sec. 2-406. Board of trustees--Established; composition.
A board of trustees of the firemen's pension fund is hereby created for the administration of said fund.
Beginning on the 3rd Monday (17th) in April, 2006, the board shall consist of 5 members. Two (2) members of
the board shall be appointed by the Mayor. Two (2) members of the board shall be active participants of the
pension fund who are elected from the active participants of the fund. One (1) member of the board shall be a
person who is retired under the Firemen’s Pension Fund Act of 1919 or this Article who is elected from
persons retired under th -
117-07, §1, 7/9/07) State law reference(s)-- 40ILCS5/4-121.
Sec. 2-407. Same--Rights, powers, duties.
The rights, powers, duties and functions of the board and the members thereof, as such, and the rights
and benefits of the various beneficiaries of the pension fund shall be as set forth by law and particularly article
4 of chapter 108 1/2 of the Illinois Revised Statutes and all amendments thereof. (Code 1961, § 7.1007)
Sec. 2-408. Village treasurer to be fund treasurer.
The village treasurer shall be ex-officio treasurer and custodian of the pension fund. (Code 1961, §
7.1008)
State law reference(s)--Similar provisions, 40ILCS5/4-130.
Secs. 2-409--2-420. Reserved.
ARTICLE XXIII. PLAN COMMISSION*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Department of community development, §2.191 et seq.; board of zoning
appeals, §2-431 et seq; zoning ordinances, App. A; subdivision regulations, App. B.
----------
Sec. 2-421. Creation; composition; term; compensation.
There is hereby created a plan commission for the village which shall consist of nine (9) members,
all of whom shall be Village residents, to be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Village
Council and whose terms of office shall be three (3) years and until their respective successors are
appointed. The Mayor shall designate the chairman of the commission. No person shall be appointed to or
serve on the plan commission who receives compensation for employment with the village. (Ord. No. O-
95-74, §1, 12-9-74; Ord. No. O-56-87, §1, 5-26-87; Ord. No. 0-101-11, §§3 & 4, 9/6/11)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-42
Sec. 2-422. Quorum.
A majority of the plan commission shall constitute a quorum, but no final action shall be taken on any
measure before it except with the concurrence of a majority of those members present. The chairman shall vote
with the other members of the commission. (Code 1961,§ 7.402; Ord. No. O-92-80, §1, 11-24-80; Ord. No.
O-56-87, §2, 5-26-87; Ord. No. 0-101-11, §5, 9/6/11)
Sec. 2-423. Meetings.
The plan commission shall meet at such times as it may determine. Special meetings may be called by
the president, the chairman, or by two (2) members of the commission. (Code 1961, §7.403)
Sec. 2-424. Powers.
The plan commission shall have power:
(1) To prepare and recommend to the village board a comprehensive plan of public improvements
looking to the present and future development of the village, and to provide reasonable
requirements in reference to streets, alleys, and public grounds in unsubdivided lands within
the corporate limits and in contiguous territory outside and distant not more than one and onehalf
(1 1/2) miles from the corporate limits of the village, insofar as the same are not included
in any city, village, or incorporated towns. After its adoption by the village board, this shall be
known as the "official plan."
(2) To recommend from time to time changes in the official plan adopted by the village hoard.
(3) To analyze and make recommendations upon housing, commercial and industrial plans.
(4) To prepare and recommend to the village board from time to time plans for specific
improvements in pursuance of such official plan or with respect to other matters referred to it
by the village board.
(5) To exercise such other powers as may be provided by statute, this Code, or ordinance.
(Code 1961, §7.404; Ord. No. O-82-86, §1, 8-11-86)
Sec. 2-425. Rules.
The plan commission may adopt rules regulating the procedure of all meetings of the plan commission.
Such rules shall be filed in the office of the clerk and may be amended at any meetings, such rules to be
effective upon filing in the office of the clerk. (Code 1961, §7.405)
Secs. 2-426--2-430. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-43
ARTICLE XXIV. BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Department of community development, §2-191 et seq.; plan commission, §2-
421 et seq.; zoning ordinance, App. A; subdivision regulations, App. B.
State law reference(s)--For provisions relating to the zoning board of appeals see 65ILCS5/11-13-3.
----------
Sec. 2-431. Created; composition; appointment; employment by village prohibited.
There is hereby created a board of zoning appeals for zoning matters which shall consist of nine (9)
members, all of whom shall be village residents, to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the village council. One (1) member of this board shall be designated as chairman. No person shall be
appointed to or serve on the zoning board who receives compensation for employment with the village. (Ord.
No. O-95-74, §3, 12-9-74; Ord. No. O-75-87, §1, 5-26-87; Ord.No.0-192-98, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 0-14-11, §2,
2/14/11)
Sec. 2-432. Reserved.
Sec. 2-433. Term.
Each regular member of the board shall serve for three (3) years provided however that the terms of the
members shall be staggered as provided by statute.. (Code 1961, §7.702; Ord. No. O-57-87, §2, 5-26-87; Ord.
No. 0-14-11, §3, 2/14/11; Ord. No. 0-17-13 §1, 4/1/13)
Sec. 2-434. Duties; meetings.
The board of appeals shall pass upon all appeals from the manager on questions of zoning and shall
have such other powers and duties as may be delegated to it by statute or ordinance. The board of zoning
appeals shall meet at such times as it may determine upon call of the chairman; and it shall keep records of its
official actions. (Code 1961, §7.703; Ord. No. O-91-80, §1, 11-24-80)
Sec. 2-435. Quorum.
A majority of the board of zoning appeals shall constitute a quorum, and no final action shall be taken
on any findings of fact or recommendations of the board except with the concurrence of a majority of those
members present; provided, however, that a concurring vote of four (4) members as required by statute shall be
necessary to reverse any decision of the manager.. (Ord. No. O-91-80, §1, 11-24-80; Ord. No. O-57-87, §3, 5-
26-87; Ord. No. 0-14-11, §4. 2/14/11; Ord. No. 0-101-11, §6, 9/6/11)
Secs. 2-436--2-440. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-44
ARTICLE XXV. CODE OF ETHICS
-------------------------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-15-02 enacted January 28, 2002, replaced Article XXV in its entirety.
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-232-03 enacted October 20, 2003 replaced Article XXV in its entirety.
-------------------------
Sec. 2-441. Definitions.
Unless the contrary is stated, or clearly appears from the context, when used in this Article, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated, and where there may be any variation in interpretation
between or among such phrases or terms in this Article, the more restrictive shall apply: (Ord.No.0-87-04, §1,
5-10-04)
Business entity means any organization or enterprise operated for profit, including, but not limited to a
proprietorship, partnership, firm, business trust, joint venture, syndicate, corporation or association.
Campaign for elective office means any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection,
nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, State, or local public office or office in a
political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of Presidential or Vice-Presidential electors, but
does not include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or
administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the
person’s official duties. (Ord.No.0-87-04, §2, 5-10-04)
Candidate means a person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an
elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for
placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/1-3).
(Ord.No.0-87-04, §2, 5-10-04)
Collective bargaining has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 3 of the Illinois Public Labor
Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/3). (Ord.No.0-87-04, §2, 5-10-04)
Compensated time means, with respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee that
counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for
purposes of this Ordinance, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time,
compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or
employees whose hours are not fixed, “compensated time” includes any period of time when the officer is on
premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is executing his or
her official duties, regardless of location. (Ord.No.0-87-04, §2, 5-10-04)
Compensatory time off means authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate in
whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition
of his or her employment. (Ord.No.0-87-04, §2, 5-10-04)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-45
Consultant means the village attorney, the village planner, the village engineer and any person with
professional or technical expertise retained by the village to provide professional or technical advice to the
village.
Contribution has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-
1.4). (Ord.No.0-87-04, §3, 5-10-04)
Employee means a person employed by the Village of Palatine, whether on a fulltime or part-time basis or
pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to the
material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
(Ord.No.0-87-04, §3, 5-10-04)
Employer means the Village of Palatine. (Ord.No.0-87-04, §3, 5-10-04)
Gift means any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible
item having monetary value including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking
engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an officer or
employee. Gifts of informational material such as books, pamphlets, reports, calendars, or periodicals shall not
be considered gifts for the purposes of this definition. (Ord.No.0-87-04, §4, 5-10-04)
Immediate family means an individual's spouse, dependent children, or others claimed by the individual as
dependents for Federal income tax purposes.
Income means salary, wage, advance, payment, fee, honorarium or any other consideration for personal,
professional, or commercial services, rent, dividends, interest, capital gains received from the sale of real or
personal property, stocks or bonds, return of capital, forgiveness or payment of indebtedness, discount in the
price of anything of value unless the discount is available to members of the public without regard to official
status, rebate, reimbursement for expenses, contribution to an insurance or pension program paid by any person
other than all employer. Income also includes a pro rata share of any income of any business entity or trust in
which the individual or spouse owns directly, indirectly or beneficially, a five percent or greater interest.
Interest in real property includes, but is not limited to the following: legal or equitable title; a
beneficial interest in any trust (including a land trust); any assignment of any interest from a beneficiary or any
other party of an interest; a power to direct conveyance; a right to receive rents or proceeds from the property; a
lien; a tax sale certificate; an option; or any other financial interest, real or personal, direct or indirect in such
property including status as a nominee or undisclosed principal.
Leave of absence means any period during which an employee does not receive (i) compensation for
employment, (ii) service credit towards pension benefits, and (iii) health insurance benefits paid for by the
employer. (Ord.No.0-87-04, §5, 5-10-04)
Liquor licensed premises owner means the owner or owners of the legal or beneficial interest in the ideal
property for which any liquor license application is filed with the village.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-46
Officer means a person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or ordinance,
regardless of whether the officer is compensated for service in his or her official capacity. (Ord.No.0-87-04,
§6, 5-10-04)
Payment means a payment, distribution, transfer, loan, advance, deposit, gift or other rendering of money,
property, services or anything else of value, whether tangible or intangible.
Person means an individual, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust,
company, corporation, association, committee, and any other organization or group of persons acting in
concert.
Political activity means any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any
political organization, but does not include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in
furtherance of the person’s official duties. (Ord.No.0-87-04, §7, 5-10-04)
Political organization means a party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not
incorporated) that is required to file a statement of organization with the State Board of Elections or a county
clerk under Section 9-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with regard to those activities that
require filing with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk. (Ord.No.0-87-04, §7, 5-10-04)
Prohibited political activity means:
1. Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political
demonstration, or other political event.
2. Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase of, selling, distributing, or
receiving payment for tickets for any political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political
event.
3. Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of
value intended as a campaign contribution.
4. Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for
elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any
referendum question.
5. Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine
probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a
political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
6. Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for
elective office or for or against any referendum question.
7. Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or
against any referendum question or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls.
8. Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
9. Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in
connection with a campaign for elective office.
10. Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
11. Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other
campaign material on behalf of any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-47
12. Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question.
13. Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
14. Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention.
15. Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election.
(Ord.No.0-87-04, §7, 5-10-04)
Prohibited source means any person or entity who:
1. is seeking official action (i) by an officer or (ii) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee
directing that employee;
2. does business or seeks to do business (i) with the officer or (ii) with an employee, or with the officer or
another employee directing that employee;
3. conducts activities regulated (i) by the officer or (ii) by an employee, or by the officer or another
employee directing that employee; or
4. has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or non-performance of the official
duties of the officer or employee. (Ord.No.0-87-04, §7, 5-10-04)
Public official means any person who seeks to be elected or is elected to any public office in the village, the
village treasurer, all members of the zoning board of appeals and plan commission of the village, the village
manager and his assistant or assistants, the heads of the various departments within the village and the deputy
village clerk.
Purchase transaction means a purchase, or a contract to purchase goods or services of any kind.
Sole supplier means any person or business entity which is the only available supplier to the village of a
product or service required by the village. Examples of "sole supplier" are such entities as electric, gas and
telephone companies.
Supplier means any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, joint venture, sole proprietor, or
other business entity which enters into a "purchase transaction" with the village. (Ord. No. O-96-74, § 1 (A),
12-9-74; Ord. No. O-31-75, § 1, 4-28-75; Ord. No. O-1-79, § 1, 1-8-79; Ord. No. O-92-79, §§ 1, 7-9-79)
Village shall mean Village of Palatine. (Ord.No.0-87-04, §8, 5-10-04)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-48
Sec. 2-442. Economic Interest Statements and Ethics Acknowledgement Form
(A) Statement of Economic Interest . All public officials shall file, with the County clerk and with the village
clerk, a verified Statement of Economic Interest responding in detail to the following questions:
1.List the name and instrument of ownership in any entity doing business with the unit of local government in
relation to which the person is required to file, in which the ownership interest held by the person at the date of
filing is in excess of $5,000 fair market value or from which dividends in excess of $1,200 were received
during the preceding calendar year. (In the case of real estate, location thereof shall be listed by street address,
or if none, then by legal description.) No time or demand deposit in a financial institution, nor any debt
instrument shall be listed.
Business Entity Instrument of Ownership
_______________________________________ _______________________________
_______________________________________ _______________________________
2. List the name, address and type of practice of any professional organization in which the person making the
statement was an officer, director, associate, partner or proprietor or served in any advisory capacity, from
which income in excess of $1,200 was derived during the preceding calendar year.
Name Address Type of Practice
___________________ _________________________ ________________________
___________________ _________________________ ________________________
3. List the nature of professional services rendered (other than to the unit of government in relation to which
the person is required to file) and the nature of the entity to which they were rendered if fees exceeding $5,000
were received during the preceding calendar year from the entity for professional services rendered by the
person making the statement. (“Professional services” means services rendered in the practice of law,
accounting, engineering, medicine, architecture, dentistry or clinical psychology.)
4. List the identity (including the address or legal description of real estate) of any capital asset from which a
capital gain of $5,000 or more was realized during the preceding calendar year.
5. List the name of any entity and the nature of the governmental action requested by any entity which has
applied to the unit of local government in relation to which the person must file for any license, franchise or
permit for annexation, zoning or rezoning of real estate during the preceding calendar year if the ownership
interest of the person filing is in excess of $5,000 fair market value at the time of filing or if income or
dividends in excess of $1,200 were received by the person filing from the entity during the preceding calendar
year.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-49
6. List the name of any entity doing business with the unit of local government in relation to which the person
is required to file from which income in excess of $1,200 was derived during the preceding calendar year other
than for professional services and the title or description of any position held in that entity. No time or demand
deposit in a financial institution nor any debt instrument need be listed.
7. List the name of any unit of government which employed the person making the statement during the
preceding calendar year other than the unit of government in relation to which the person is required to file.
8. List the name of any entity from which a gift or gifts, or honorarium or honoraria, valued singly or in the
aggregate in excess of $500, was received during the preceding calendar year.
VERIFICATION
I declare that this statement of economic interests (including any accompanying schedules and statements) has
been examined by me and to the best of my knowledge and belief is a true, correct and complete statement of
any economic interests as required by the Illinois Governmental Ethics Act. I understand that the penalty for
willfully filing a false or incomplete statement shall be a fine not to exceed $750.
___________________________________________________
Signature of person making the statement Date
(B) Prohibited Interests In Contracts. The following interests by an elected or appointed officer in a contract
are hereby prohibited as a matter of law (50 ILCS 105/3, 2001)
(1) No person holding any office, either by election or appointment under the laws or Constitution of this
State, may be in any manner financially interested directly in his own name or indirectly in the name of any
other person, association, trust or corporation in any contract or the performance of any work in the making or
letter of which such officer may be called upon to act or vote. No such officer may represent, either as agent or
otherwise, any person, association, trust or corporation, with respect to any application or bid for any contract
or work in regard to which such officer may be called upon to vote. Nor may any such officer take or receive,
or offer to take or receive, either directly or indirectly, any money or other thing of value as a gift or bribe or
means of influencing his vote or action in his official character. Any contract made and procured in violation
hereof is void. This Section shall not apply to any person serving on an advisory panel or commission or to
any director serving on a hospital district board as provided under subsection (a-5) of Section 13 of the
Hospital District Law.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-50
(2) However, any elected or appointed member of the governing body may provide materials, merchandise,
property, services, or labor, subject to the following provisions under either subparagraph (a) or (b):
(a) If:
i. the contract is with a person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or cooperative association in which
such interested member of the governing body of the municipality has less than a 7.5% share in the ownership;
and
ii. such interested member publicly discloses the nature and extent of his interest prior to or during
deliberations concerning the proposed award of the contract; and
iii. such interested member abstains from voting on the award of the contract, though he shall be considered
present for the purposes of establishing a quorum; and
iv. such contract is approved by a majority vote of those members presently holding office; and
v. the contract is awarded after sealed bids to the lowest responsible bidder if the amount of the contract
exceeds $1,500, or awarded without bidding if the amount of the contract is less than $1,500; and
vi. the award of the contract would not cause the aggregate amount of all such contracts so awarded to the
same person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to
exceed $25,000.
(b) If:
i. the award of the contract is approved by a majority vote of the governing body of the municipality provided
that any such interested member shall abstain from voting; and
ii. the amount of the contract does not exceed $2,000; and
iii. the award of the contract would not cause the aggregate amount of all such contracts so awarded to the
same person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to
exceed $4,000; and
iv. such interested member publicly discloses the nature and extent of his interest prior to or during
deliberations concerning the proposed award of the contract; and
v. such interested member abstains from voting on the award of the contract, though he shall be considered
present for the purposes of establishing a quorum.
(c) In addition to the above exemptions, any elected or appointed member of the governing body may provide
materials, merchandise, property, services, or labor if:
i. the contract is with a person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or cooperative association in which
the interested member of the governing body of the municipality, advisory panel, or commission has less than a
1 percent share in the ownership; and
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-51
ii. the award of the contract is approved by a majority vote of the governing body of the municipality provided
that any such interested member shall abstain from voting; and
iii. such interested member publicly discloses the nature and extent of his interest before or during
deliberations concerning the proposed award of the contract; and
iv. such interested member abstains from voting on the award of the contract, though he shall be considered
present for the purposes of establishing a quorum.
(3) For the purposes of this Section only, a municipal officer shall not be deemed interested if the officer is an
employee of a company or owns or holds an interest of 1 percent or less in the municipal officer’s individual
name in a company, or both, that company is involved in the transaction of business with the municipality, and
that company’s stock is traded on a national recognized securities market, provided the interested member:
(i) publicly discloses the fact that he or she is an employee or holds an interest of 1 percent or less in a
company before deliberation of the proposed award of the contract; (ii) refrains from evaluating,
recommending, approving, deliberating, or otherwise participating in negotiation, approval, or both, of the
contract, work, or business; (iii) abstains from voting on the award of the contract though he or she shall be
considered present for purposes of establishing a quorum; and (iv) the contract is approved by a majority vote
of those members currently holding office.
(4) A municipal officer shall not be deemed interested if the officer owns or holds an interest of 1 percent
or less, not in the officer’s individual name but through a mutual fund, in a company, that company is involved
in the transaction of business with the municipality, and that company’s stock is traded on a nationally
recognized securities market.
(C) Pecuniary Interest Allowed in Contracts of Deposit and Financial Service with local Banks and Savings
and Loan Associations. Pursuant to state law (50 ILCS 104/3.2, 2001) pecuniary interests by an elected or
appointed office holder are permitted, subject to the following conditions. Nothing in this Code, including the
restrictions set forth in subparagraphs (B) (2) and (3) shall preclude a contract of deposit of monies, loans, or
other financial services by a unit of local government or a police or firefighter’s pension fund established under
Article 3 or 4 of the Illinois Pension Code with a local bank or local savings and loan association, regardless of
whether a member or members of the governing body of the unit are interested in the bank or savings and loan
association as a director, an officer, employee, or holder of less than 7.5 percent of the total ownership interest.
A member or members holding such an interest in such a contract shall not be deemed to be holding a
prohibited interest for purposes of this Act. The interested member or members of the governing body must
publicly state the nature and extent of their interest during deliberations concerning the proposed award of such
a contract, but shall not participate in any further deliberations concerning the proposed award. The interested
member or members shall not vote on such a proposed award and voting under this Section may be considered
present for purposes of establishing a quorum. Award of such a contract shall require approval by a majority
vote of those members presently holding office. Consideration and award of any such contract in which a
member or members are interested may only be made at a regularly scheduled public meeting of the governing
body of the unit or district.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-52
D. Ethics Acknowledgement. All public officials and consultants shall file with the village clerk a verified
ethics acknowledgement form in substantially the following form:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF COOK )
TO: The Mayor and Village Council of the Village of Palatine, Illinois
ETHICS ACKNOWLEDGEMENT FORM
I, ______________________________, being first duly sworn, upon my oath, state as
follows:
(1) I have been (please circle one: elected, or appointed or hired or I intend to run for
election) as the ___________________________________ of the Village of
Palatine.
(2) I have read and acknowledged the requirements in 50 ILCS 105/3 (the Prohibited
Interests and Contracts Act), as fully set forth in Paragraph B above. I understand
that I must abide by its terms.
(3) I have read and acknowledge the requirements of 5 ILCS 425/1, et seq, 2001, (the State
Gift Ban Act). I understand that I must abide by its terms.
(4) I have read and acknowledge the requirements in 50 ILCS 105/3.2, 2001 (Pecuniary
Interests and Contracts requirement), as fully set forth in paragraph C above. I
understand that I must abide by its terms.
I, ____________________, declare that the foregoing statements have been
examined by me and are, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, correct and accurate. I
have received from the village clerk copies of Article XXV, Chapter 2 of the Municipal
Code of the Village of Palatine (Code of Ethics) and statutes of the State of Illinois pertaining
to conflicts of interest, income disclosure and misconduct by public office holders (including
the State Gift Ban Act, 5 ILCS 425/1, et seq and the Prohibited Interests and Contract Act, 50
ILCS 105/3, 2001). I understand that the penalty for willfully attesting to a false disclaimer is
a fine not to exceed seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00).
Dated:_____________ _______________________________________
Signature
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-53
(E) Future Amendments or Declaration of Unconstitutionality of Prohibited Interests in Contracts Act (50
ILCS 105/3, 2001) and State Gift Ban Act (5 ILCS 425/1 et seq, 2001)
(a) Any amendment to the Prohibited Interests in Contracts Act (50 ILCS 105/3 et seq, 2001 or to the State
Gift Ban Act (5 ILCS 425/1 et seq. 2001, that becomes effective after the passage of this ordinance, shall be
incorporated into this Ordinance by reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation and acceptance of gifts.
However, any language that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this Section by reference without formal action by the Corporate Authorities of the Village.
(b) If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Prohibited Interests in Contracts Act (50 ILCS 105/3, et seq.,
2001) or the State Gift Ban Act (5 ILCS 425/1 et. seq., 2001), unconstitutional in its entirety, then this Section
shall be repealed as of the date that the Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not subject to any further
appeals or re-hearings.
(c) If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part(s) of the Prohibited Interests in Contracts Act (50 ILCS 105/3,
et seq., 2001 or the State Gift Ban Act (5 ILCS 425/1 et. seq., 2001), unconstitutional but upholds the
constitutionality of the remainder of these Acts or does not address the remainder of these Acts, then the
remainder of these Acts as adopted by this Section, shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of
this Section relating to the part of the Acts found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further
action by the Corporate Authorities of the village.
(F) Filing schedule. The Economic Interest Statements and Ethics Acknowledgement Form required above
shall be completed on forms approved by the Corporate Authorities and provided by the village clerk.
Economic Interest Statements and/or Ethics Acknowledgement Form shall be filed pursuant to the following
schedule:
(1) All public officials and consultants shall file their disclosure statements and/or Ethics
Acknowledgement Form annually within thirty (30) days after May 1st.
2) Any candidate for elective public office within the village shall file within fifteen (15) days after his
nominating petitions are filed.
(3) Any person appointed as a public official, retained as a consultant or hired as an employee shall, if
required to do so by this article, file an Economic Interest Statement and Ethics Acknowledgement Form
within thirty (30) days of his appointment, retention or hiring.
(4) Any person elected to public office within the village shall file within thirty (30) days of his
election.
(5) Revised Economic Interest Statement and Ethics Acknowledgement Form shall be filed within thirty
(30) days following any event which would require a change in any information or disclaimers contained in the
statement or disclaimer on file with the village clerk.
Not less than fifteen (15) days before the filing dates specified above, except the filing date specified in
subparagraph (5), the village clerk shall, by first class mail or personal delivery, notify the persons required to
file Economic Interest Statements and Ethics Acknowledgement Form of their obligation to file. The village
clerk shall provide each person filing such statements with a written receipt indicating the date on which the
filing took place. In addition, the village clerk shall, at least fourteen (14) days prior to the filing dates specified
above, provide each person required to file a an Economic Interest Statement and Ethics Acknowledgement
Form with a copy of this article and those portions of the statutes of the State of Illinois deemed relevant to
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-54
governmental ethics by the village council. (Ord. #0-16-09, §4, 1/19/09)
(G) Public access. All statements and disclosures filed under this section shall be available for examination
and copying by the public at all reasonable times. Each person examining a statement and disclosure must first
fill out a form prepared by the village clerk identifying the examiner by name, occupation, address and
telephone number, and listing the date of examination and reason for such examination. The village clerk shall
promptly notify each person required to file a statement and disclosure under this article of each instance of an
examination of his statement by sending him a duplicate original of the identification form filled out by the
person examining his statement.
H . Any person required to file the statement provided for in this section who knowingly fails to so file, or
knowingly files a false or incomplete statement shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. No. O-96-74, § 1(B)--(F), 12-9-74; Ord. No. O-31-75, § 3,
4-28-75; Ord. No. O-37-75, § 1, 5-26-75; Ord. No. O-109-77, § 1, 10-10-77; Ord. No. O-1-79, § 2, 1-8-79;
Ord. No. O-92-79, §§ 2, 3, 7-9-79; Ord.No.0-5-98§2,1-26-98)
Sec. 2-443. Supplier's statement.
All bidding forms and purchase orders for purchase transactions between the village and a supplier shall
contain the following provision as one of the terms and conditions of such purchase orders:
The undersigned supplier hereby represents and warrants to the Village of Palatine as a term and condition of
acceptance of this (bid or purchase order) that none of the following Village officials is either an officer or
director of supplier or owns five per cent (5%) or more of supplier: The Mayor; the members of the Village
Council; the Village Clerk; the Village Treasurer; the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals and the Plan
Commission; the Village Manager and his assistant or assistants; the heads of the various departments within
the Village. If the foregoing representation and warranty is inaccurate, state the name of the Village official
who either is officer or director of your business entity or owns five per cent (5%) or more thereof.
The village clerk shall promptly notify the village council of any person named by suppliers in response to the
foregoing inquiry.
Any person who executes a purchase order knowing that the statement set out above or any part thereof is false
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord.
No. O-96-74, § 1 (G), 12-9-74; Ord.No.0-5-98§2,1-26-98)
Sec. 2-444. Use of public property for personal convenience or profit prohibited.
No public official shall request or permit the use of village-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property
for personal convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the public generally. Public
officials may use village-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property only in the conduct of official
business, when consistent with village policy. (Ord. No. O-109-77, § 2, 10-10-77)
[Editor’s Note: New Sections. 2-445—2-448 were added pursuant to Ord. 0-87-04, passed on May 10, 2004]
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-55
Sec. 2-445 Prohibited Political Activities
Sec 2-445.1. Prohibited political activities.
(a) No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any
compensated time, as defined herein. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources
of the Village of Palatine in connection with any prohibited political activity.
(b) At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to
perform any prohibited political activity (i) as part of that officer or employee’s duties, (ii) as a condition of
employment, or (iii) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off).
(c) No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political
activity in consideration for that officer or employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit,
whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or otherwise,
nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or
her participation in any prohibited political activity.
(d) Nothing in this Section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage
in as part of his or her official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary
basis which are not prohibited by this Ordinance.
(e) No person either (i) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment
or (ii) in a position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the
Federal Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable to giant-in-aid programs, shall be
denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political
committee, of a political party, or of a political organization or club.
Sec. 2-446 Gift Ban
Sec. 2-446.1. Gift ban. Except as permitted by this Article, no officer or employee, and no spouse of or
immediate family member living with any officer or employee (collectively referred to herein as “recipients”),
shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source, as defined herein, or which is otherwise
prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this
Section.
Sec. 2-446.2. Exceptions. Section 2-446.1 is not applicable to the following:
1) Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public.
2) Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or immediate family member, pays
the fair market value.
3) Any (i) contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code or (ii) activities associated with a
fundraising event in support of a political organization or candidate.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-56
4) Educational materials and missions.
5) Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
6) A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter,
brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter,
stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or
grandmother of the individual’s spouse and the individual’s fiancé or fiancée.
7) Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has
reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position
or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and not because of
the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship,
the recipient shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: (i) the history
of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any
previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; (ii) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or
business reimbursement for the gift; and (iii) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the
individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or
employees, or their spouses or immediate family members.
8) Food or refreshments not exceeding $75.00 per person in value on a single calendar day; provided that
the food or refreshments are (i) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared or (ii) catered. For the purposes of this Section, “catered” means food or refreshments that
are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means.
9) Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from outside business or
employment activities (or outside activities that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or
employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or
employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar
circumstances.
10) Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For the purpose of this Act, “intragovernmental gift”
means any gift given to an officer or employee from another officer or employee, and “intergovernmental
gift” means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of
another governmental entity.
11) Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
12) Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative total
value of less than $100.
Each of the exceptions listed in this Section is mutually exclusive and independent of every other.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-57
Sec. 2-446.3. Disposition of gifts.
An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living with the officer or
employee, does not violate this Ordinance if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from
a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is
exempt from income taxation under Section 501 (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or
hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded.
Sec. 2-447 Ethics Commission
Sec. 2-447.1. There is hereby created a commission to be known as the “Ethics Commission of the
Village of Palatine” (“Commission”). The Commission shall be comprised of the Mayor, the Village Clerk,
and the senior Village Council Member. If any member of the Commission is the subject of a complaint filed
under this Ordinance, for that complaint only, the next senior Village Council Member shall serve on the
Commission.
Sec. 2-447.2. At the first meeting of the Commission, the commissioners shall choose a chairperson
from their number. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson or any 2 Commissioners. A quorum
shall consist of two Commissioners, and official action by the Commission shall require the affirmative vote of
two members.
Sec. 2-447.3. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Village Board, may remove a
Commissioner in case of incompetency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office after service on the
Commissioner by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a copy of the written charges against the
Commissioner and after providing an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel upon not less than 10
days’ notice. Any vacancy shall be filled by appointment of the next most senior Village Council Member. If
in filling any vacancy it is determined that there is more than one Council Member with the same level of
highest seniority, then the Commission chair shall decide who is then to be appointed.
Sec. 2-447.4. The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
1) To meet periodically, if necessary, to promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of
its duties and the exercise of its powers.
2) Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to investigate, conduct
3) hearings and deliberations, issue recommendations for disciplinary actions, impose fines in accordance
with Section 2-448.1(c) of this Ordinance and refer violations of Section 2-445 or Section 2-446 of
this Ordinance to the appropriate attorney for prosecution. The Commission shall, however, act only
upon the receipt of a written complaint alleging a violation of this Ordinance and not upon its own
prerogative.
4) To receive information from the public pertaining to its investigations and to require additional
information and documents from persons who may have violated the provisions of this Ordinance.
5) To compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena and to compel the production of books and papers
pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all officers and employees of the Village to
cooperate with the Commission during the course of its investigations. Failure or refusal to cooperate
with requests by the Commission shall constitute grounds for discipline or discharge.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-58
6) The powers and duties of the Commission are limited to matters clearly within the purview of this
Ordinance.
Sec. 2-447.5.
(a) Complaints alleging a violation of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Ethics Commission.
(b) Within three business days after the receipt of a complaint, the Commission shall send by certified
mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and
a copy of the complaint. The Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a confirmation
of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant within three business days after receipt by the commission.
The notices to the respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time, and place of the
meeting to determine the sufficiency of the complaint and to establish whether probable cause exists to
proceed.
(c) Upon not less than 48 hours public notice, the Commission shall meet to review the sufficiency of
the complaint and, if the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this Ordinance, to determine
whether there is probable cause, based on the evidence presented by the complainant, to proceed. The meeting
may be closed to the public to the extent authorized by the Open Meetings Act. The Commission shall issue
notice to the complainant and the respondent of the Commission’s ruling on the sufficiency of the complaint
and, if necessary, on probable cause to proceed within seven business days after receiving the complaint.
If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of Section 2-446 of this Ordinance and there
is a determination of probable cause, then the Commission’s notice to the parties shall include a hearing date
scheduled within four weeks after the complaint’s receipt. Alternatively, the Commission may elect to notify in
writing the attorney designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute such actions and request that the
complaint be adjudicated judicially. If the complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege a violation or if there is
no determination of probable cause, then the Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested,
a notice to the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint, and that notice shall be made public.
If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of Section 2-445 of this Ordinance, then the
Commission shall notify in writing the attorney designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute such
actions and shall transmit to the attorney the complaint and all additional documents in the custody of the
Commission concerning the alleged violation.
(d) On the scheduled date and upon at least 48 hours public notice of the meeting, the Commission
shall conduct a hearing on the complaint and shall allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and
evidence. The hearing may be closed to the public only if authorized by the Open Meetings Act.
(e) Within 30 days after the date the hearing or any recessed hearing is concluded, the Commission
shall either (i) dismiss the complaint or (ii) issue a recommendation for discipline of the alleged violator and to
the Mayor, Village Board, and Village Manager, and in the instance where the Village Manager is the subject
of the complaint, then such recommendation to the Mayor and the Assistant Village Manager , or impose a fine
upon the violator, or both. The particular findings in the case, any recommendation for discipline, and any fine
imposed shall be a matter of public information.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-59
(f) If the hearing was closed to the public, the respondent may file a written demand for a public
hearing on the complaint within seven business days after the issuance of the recommendation for discipline or
imposition of a fine, or both. The filing of the demand shall stay the enforcement of the recommendation or
fine. Within fourteen days after receiving the demand, the Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the
complaint upon at least 48 hours public notice of the hearing and allow both parties the opportunity to present
testimony and evidence. Within seven days thereafter, the Commission shall publicly issue a final
recommendation to the alleged violator and to the Mayor, Village Board, and Village Manager or impose a fine
upon the violator, or both.
(g) If a complaint is filed during the sixty days preceding the date of any election at which the
respondent is a candidate, the Commission shall render its decision as required under subsection (e) within
seven days after the complaint is filed, and during the seven days preceding that election, the Commission shall
render such decision before the date of that election, if possible.
(h) The Commission may fine any person who intentionally violates any provision of Section 2-446 of
this Ordinance in an amount of not less than $1,001 and not more than $5,000. The Commission may fine any
person who knowingly files a frivolous complaint alleging a violation of this Ordinance in an amount of not
less than $1,001 and not more than $5,000. The Commission may recommend any appropriate discipline up to
and including discharge.
(i) A complaint alleging the violation of this Act must be filed within one year after the alleged
violation.
Sec. 2-448 Penalties
Sec. 2-448.1. Penalties.
(a) A person who intentionally violates any provision of Section 2-445 of this Ordinance may be
punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than
364 days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.
(b) A person who intentionally violates any provision of Section 2-446 of this Ordinance is subject to a
fine in an amount of not less than $1,001 and not more than $5,000.
(c) Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this
Ordinance to the local enforcement authorities, the State’s Attorney or any other law enforcement official may
be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more
than 364 days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.
(d) A violation of Section 2-445 of this Ordinance shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by the
Village attorney by filing in the circuit court an information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The
prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the
establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
1. A violation of Section 2-446 of this Ordinance may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by the
Village attorney, or by the Ethics Commission through the designated administrative procedure.
(e) In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether criminal or civil, an officer or
employee who intentionally violates any provision of Section 2-445 or Section 2-446 of this Ordinance is
subject to discipline or discharge.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-60
Sec. 2-449. Use or disclosure of confidential information.
No current or former official or employee shall use or disclose, other than in the performance of
his official duties and responsibilities, or as may be required by law, confidential information gained in the
course of or by reason of his position or employment. For purposes of this section, "confidential
information" means any information that may not be obtained pursuant to the Illinois Freedom of
Information Act, as amended. (Ord. 0-51-05, §1, 3/14/05)
Sec. 2-450. Post-employment restrictions.
(a) No former official or employee shall assist or represent any person or entity other than the
village in any judicial or administrative proceeding involving the village if the official or employee
participated personally and substantively in the proceeding during his term of office or employment.
(b) No former official or employee shall, for a period of one year after the termination of the
official's or employee's term of office or employment, be involved in, or assist or represent any person or
entity in any business or land use transaction involving the village . This shall not preclude a former
official or employee from representing himself or herself or representing any business owned by the former
official or employee, regarding any matter or transaction involving the village. (Ord. 0-51-05, §1,
3/14/05)
Secs. 2-451--2-458. Reserved.
ARTICLE XXVI. FINANCE
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-459. Office of Director of Finance and Operations.
There is hereby created the office of director of finance and operations, an executive office of the
village. The director of finance shall be appointed by the village manager.
Sec. 2-460. Duties and functions, generally.
The director of finance and operations shall be responsible for the oversight and management of all
financial operations of the Village. The director shall be responsible for the supervision and direction of the
department of finance and operations under the general direction of the village manager. The director shall
advise the village manager on all financial needs of the village. (Ord. No. O-45-93 ? 1 4-26-93)
Sec. 2-461. Budget.
Before the beginning of each fiscal year, the board shall enact a budget ordinance in which shall be
itemized all estimated revenues and recommended expenditures to be met during such fiscal year. (Code 1961,
? 8.201)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-61
Sec. 2-462. Tax levy.
A tax levy ordinance shall be enacted, as required by law, levying such taxes as may be needed to meet
the anticipated expenses of the coming year, together with such taxes as may be required to meet outstanding
bond issues, or for purposes payable from special taxes properly authorized.
A certified copy of the tax levy ordinance shall be filed with the county clerk not later than the fourth
Tuesday in December. Such ordinance shall show the total appropriated for each item, and the amount of tax
levied therefor. (Code 1961, ? 8.202; Ord.No.0-141-98, ?1, 9-14-98)
Sec. 2-463. Indebtedness.
Except as provided in section 2-490, no indebtedness shall be incurred, excepting such indebtedness as
may be payable solely from the proceeds of a duly authorized bond issue or from a designated specified source,
unless there is a prior appropriation out of which such indebtedness could be paid, as provided by statute.
Provided that during the first quarter of any fiscal year, before the enactment of the current appropriation ordinance,
the village may operate under the appropriation ordinance of the preceding year.
(Code 1961, ? 8.203; Ord. No. O-127-79, ? 1, 11-13-79)
Sec. 2-464. Contracts.
The president, or any other person designated by the board, may sign on behalf of the village any
contract authorized by the village board. No contract may be entered into without the authority of the board.
(Code 1961, ? 8.204)
Sec. 2-465. Bills; payroll.
All bills payable by the village, other than for the payment of salaries established by the board, shall be
submitted to the board for approval before payment. (Code 1961, ? 8.205)
Sec. 2-466. Payment by treasurer.
The treasurer shall pay out money in payment of all bills, or for salaries, or for any other purpose other
than the retirement of principal or interest on bonds or tax anticipation warrants only upon warrant signed by
the president and clerk as provided by statute. Such warrants shall designate the items to be paid and the funds
from which they are to be paid. (Code 1961, ? 8.206)
Sec. 2-467. Audit.
As soon as practicable at the close of each fiscal year, and no later than six (6) months thereafter, there
shall be an audit of all accounts of the village made by a competent person authorized to act as an auditor under
the laws of this state, to be designated by the village board. Copies of such audit report shall be filed with the
clerk and with the director of the state department of revenue and in such other places as may be required by
law. (Code 1961, ? 8.207)
Sec. 2-468. Contracts for supplies, work or other public improvements.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any supplies, work or other public improvements which are not
to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation, when the expense thereof will
exceed those limits as set out in section 2-108(9), shall be purchased either:
(1) By a contract let to the lowest responsible, compliant bidder after advertising for bids, in the
manner prescribed in section 2-469, except that any such contract may be entered into by the
proper officers without advertising for bids, if authorized by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all
trustees then holding office; or
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-62
(2) In the following manner, if authorized by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all trustees then holding
office, to wit: The village manager or other proper person to be designated by him, shall
superintend and cause to be carried out the construction of the work or other public
improvement and shall employ exclusively for the performance of all manual labor thereon,
laborers and artisans whom the village shall pay by the day or hour; and all material used in
the construction of the work or other public improvement shall be purchased by contract in
the manner prescribed in section 2-108(9).
However, nothing in this section shall apply to any contract by this village with the federal government or any
agency thereof. (Ord. No. O-89-77, ? 1, 8-22-77; Ord. No. O-88-87, ? 1, 8-10-87)
Sec. 2-469. Advertisement for bids; deposits.
All proposals to award purchase orders or contracts as designated in section 2-108(9) shall be
published at least ten (10) days in advance of the date announced for the receiving of bids, in a newspaper of
general circulation within the village and shall be readily accessible in the office of the village manager.
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the village manager from placing additional
announcement in recognized trade journals. In addition, the village manager, in his discretion, may seek bids
from any reputable firms by written solicitation to such firms. Such written solicitations shall be on an
impartial basis and shall be made to such firms as the village manager in his sole discretion shall deem
appropriate.
Advertisements for bids shall describe the character of the proposed contract or agreement in sufficient
detail to enable the bidders thereon to know what their obligations will be, either in the advertisement itself, or
by reference to detailed plans and specifications on file at the time of the publication of the first announcement.
Such advertisements shall also state the date, time, and place assigned for the opening of bids, and no bids shall
be received at any time subsequent to the time indicated in the announcement. However, an extension of time
may be granted for the opening of such bids upon publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
village of the date to which the bid opening has been extended. The time of the bid extension opening shall not
be less than five days after the publication thereof, Sundays and legal holidays excluded.
Bid bond, cash, cashier's check, a certified check or a comptroller's certificate of moneys owed the
particular vendor, as a deposit of good faith, in a reasonable amount but not in excess of ten (10) per cent of the
contract amount may be required of each bidder by the village manager on all bids involving amounts in excess
of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and, if so required, the advertisements for bids shall so specify.
(Ord. No. O-89-77, ? 1, 8-22-77; Ord. No. O-88-87, ? 2, 8-10-87)
Sec. 2-470. Awarding of contracts; public inspection.
All bids shall be opened in public at the specified time and place designated in the Legal Notice.
Recommendation for award shall be reviewed by the Village Manager and forwarded to the appropriate
Standing Committee or directly to the Village Council.
The award of any contract shall be made to the lowest responsible bidder as provided in section 2-468.
Every contract shall be signed by the Mayor or his duly designated agent and by the Village Clerk,
respectively, of the Village. Each bid, with the name of the bidder, shall be entered on a record which record
with the name of the successful bidder indicated thereon, shall, after award of contract, be open to public
inspection in the office of the Village Manager.
An official copy of each awarded purchase order or contract together with all necessary attachments thereto,
including assignments and written consents, shall be retained by the Village Manager in an appropriate file
open to the public for such period of time after termination of the contract during which action against the
Village might ensue applicable laws of limitation. After such period such purchase orders, contracts and
attachments may be destroyed by direction of the Village Manager. (Ord. No. O-89-77, ? 1, 8-22-77, Ord. No.
0-28-04, ?1, 2-17-04)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-63
Sec. 2-471. Indexing of municipal fees.
Village fees, as set out in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances, shall be adjusted to
reflect the percentage change in the Municipal Cost Index published in the September issue of the
American City and County Magazine, with the following exceptions: (Ord.No.0-106-98, §4,5,9-14-98;
Ord. No. 0-180-06, §1, 10/16/06)
(1) Chapter 7, Ambulance Service Fees, which are indexed to the Medicare Rate established by the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS);
(2) Chapter 8, Garbage and Refuse Fees, and Chapter 19, Water and Sewer Consumption Fees, which are
adjusted each year based upon a financial review of the cost of service and contractual obligations.
The Village Manager is hereby authorized to update the fees as in accordance with the above on an annual
basis, rounding to the nearest one- dollar. The Village Manager shall cause a schedule of such fees as amended,
in accordance with this section, to be prepared, filed with the Mayor and Village Council and made available
for public inspection no later than the adoption of the annual operating budget. The new fee schedule shall take
effect on the first day of the new budget year; provided, however, that the Mayor and Village Council may
modify any fees and cause an amended Fee Schedule Supplement to be published at any time during the year,
as they deem necessary. (Ord. No. O-48-82, §1, 5-24-82; Ord. No. O-47-83, -8-83, Ord. No. 0-145-00,
§1, 11-13-00; Ord. No. 0-163-12, §1 12-10-12)
Secs. 2-472--2-480. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. ISSUANCE OF BONDS*
----------
*State law reference(s)--For provisions controlling municipal bonds see 65ILCS5/8-1-1 et seq.
----------
Sec. 2-481. Authority.
(a) The village, acting by its president and board, by vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the corporate
authorities then holding office, may from time to time borrow money for proper public purposes and in
evidence of such borrowing issue its full faith and credit bonds (general obligation) payable from ad valorem
taxes to be levied without limitation as to rate or amount against all taxable property situated within the village,
exclusive of any bonds issued after submitting the question of their issuance to the electors of the village for
their approval, in an amount which, when added to the aggregate principal amount of all then outstanding
general obligation bonds so issued without referendum, does not exceed an amount equal to three (3) per cent
of the most recent equalized assessed valuation of all of the taxable property in the village. Such bonds may be
issued without the submission of the question of their issuance to the electors of the village for their approval.
Bonds issued pursuant to paragraph (d) of this section (and bonds which are listed in that paragraph as issued
prior to January 1, 1985) and bonds issued pursuant to paragraph (f) or paragraph (g) of this section are
deemed for purposes of this paragraph (a) to have been issued pursuant to the approval of the electors of the
village of the question of the issuance at a referendum. (Ord. 0-125-00 ?2 10/9/00, 0-86-02 ?2 5/28/02)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-64
(b) In addition, the village, acting by its president and board of trustees, by vote of a majority of the
corporate authorities then holding office may from time to time borrow money for proper public purposes and
in evidence of such borrowing issue its full faith and credit bonds (general obligation) payable from ad valorem
taxes to be levied without limitation as to rate or amount against all taxable property situated within the village
if the question of authorizing such bonds has been submitted to the electors of the village and approved by a
majority of the electors voting on that question. The question of issuing bonds may be submitted by the
president and board of trustees of the village at any state or municipal election or at any special election called
for that purpose. The submission of any such question and the call of any such special election shall be in the
form and in the manner as prescribed by the president and board of trustees of the village. The procedures for
the issuance of such bonds shall be substantially as herein provided.
(c) Any bond issue or portion thereof issued pursuant to an advisory referendum held prior to the
issuance of such bonds shall be deemed to have been issued pursuant to referendum as provided in this section.
In the event a portion of a bond issue is issued pursuant to referendum, that portion corresponding to the
amount voted upon shall be deemed issued pursuant to the first two sentences of this section.
(d) In addition, the village acting by its president and board of trustees, by vote of a majority of the
corporate authorities then holding office, may from time to time borrow money for the purpose of: (i) providing
funds to the Northwest Water Commission or financing improvements to the water system of the village
necessary to accommodate Lake Michigan water, and to pay the costs of borrowing for those purposes,
including costs of issuance of bonds, discount and capitalized interest, or (ii) providing funds (either at or prior
to maturity or redemption) to pay principal of (at maturity or upon redemption), and redemption premium and
interest on the bonds issued pursuant to clause (i) above (or bonds issued pursuant to this clause (ii)) and to pay
the costs of issuance and discount of the bonds issued for that purpose. In evidence of such borrowing, the
village may issue its full faith and credit bonds (general obligation) payable from ad valorem taxes to be levied
against all taxable property situated within the village without the submission of the question of the issuance of
those bonds to the electors of the village for their approval. Bonds may be issued pursuant to this paragraph (d)
if the corporate authorities find by the bond ordinance authorizing their issuance, that the portion of the total
principal of and interest on those bonds and all bonds previously issued for those purposes which is expected to
be paid from receipts of ad valorem taxes levied against the taxable property situated in the village, giving
account to expected revenues from provision of water to areas outside the village, is not in excess of $56
million dollars. Bonds issued for those purposes prior to January 1, 1985 are the $2,125,000 corporate purpose
bonds dated April 1, 1981, the $3,300,000 corporate purpose bonds dated February 1, 1982, the $6,875,000
corporate purpose bonds dated May 1, 1982 and the $11,600,000 corporate purpose bonds dated September 1,
1982. A finding in a bond ordinance as to the expectation of the portion of principal of and interest on bonds
which will be paid from ad valorem property taxes shall be conclusive as to the compliance with the
requirements of this paragraph. Such a finding in a bond ordinance shall not restrict the full faith and credit
general obligation of the village, nor in any way limit the rate or amount of the taxes that may be levied, to pay
principal of and interest on bonds authorized to be issued by that bond ordinance. This paragraph (d)
constitutes complete authority for the issuance of bonds for the purposes of refunding bonds issued pursuant to
clause (i) above, and the provisions of section 2-488 of the Code of Ordinances shall not apply to the issuance
of bonds for that purpose.
(e) In addition, the village, acting by its president and board of trustees, by vote of a majority of the
corporate authorities then holding office, may from time to time borrow money and issue bonds for the purpose
of providing funds to pay all or a portion of the local share of a sewer separation project or a sewer
rehabilitation project required as a condition of the village's national pollutant discharge elimination system
permit and funded or expected to be funded in part by a grant from the United States Environmental Protection
Agency and to pay costs of the village in connection with issuance of those bonds and capitalized interest,
without submission of the question of issuance of those bonds to the electors of the village for their approval. A
finding in a bond ordinance as to the purpose for which bonds are issued shall be conclusive as to the
compliance with the requirements of this paragraph. (Code 1961, ? 29.101; Ord. No. O-42-77, ? 1, 5-23-77;
Ord. No. O-8-80, ? 1, 1-28-80; Ord. No. O-21-81, ? 1, 3-9-81; Ord. No. O-41-82, ? 2, 5-10-82; Ord. No. O-9-
85, ? 2, 2-11-85)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-65
(f) In addition, the village, acting by its Mayor and Village Council, by vote of a majority of the
corporate authorities then holding office may from time to time borrow money for the purpose of financing or
refinancing ?redevelopment project costs? as such term is defined in the Tax Increment Allocation
Redevelopment Act, of any redevelopment project undertaken by the village pursuant to said Act. In evidence
of such borrowing, the village may issue its full faith and credit bonds (general obligation) payable from ad
valorem taxes to be levied against all taxable property situated within the village without the submission of the
question of the issuance of those bonds to the electors of the village for their approval. A finding in a bond
ordinance as to the purpose for which bonds are issued shall be conclusive as to compliance with the
requirements of this paragraph. This paragraph (f) constitutes full authority for the issuance of bonds for
purposed of refunding bonds issued pursuant to this paragraph (f). (Ord. 0-125-00 ?3 10/9/00)
(g) In addition, the village, acting by its Mayor and Village Council, by vote of a majority of the
corporate authorities then holding office may from time to time borrow money for the purpose of financing or
refinancing flood control projects (including the flood control projects described in Village Resolution R-53-02
and such additional flood control projects as may be determined from time to time by the Mayor and Village
Council). In evidence of such borrowing, the village may issue its full faith and credit bonds (general
obligation) payable from ad valorem taxes to be levied against all taxable property situated within the village
without the submission of the question of the issuance of those bonds to the electors of the village for their
approval. A finding in a bond ordinance as to the purpose for which bonds are issued shall be conclusive as to
compliance with the requirements of this paragraph. This paragraph (g) constitutes full authority for the
issuance of bonds for purposes of refunding bonds issued pursuant to this paragraph (g). (Ord. 0-86-02 ?3
5/28/02)
Sec. 2-482. Bond ordinance.
The village shall adopt an ordinance, hereinafter designated as the bond ordinance, describing the
public purpose or purposes to be accomplished by such borrowing and in such bond ordinance shall make a
finding and determination that such borrowing of money is necessary for the welfare of the government and
affairs of the village, is for a proper public purpose or purposes and is in the public interest, which finding and
determination shall be deemed conclusive. (Code 1961, ? 29.102)
Sec. 2-483. Bond details and contract for sale.
The bond ordinance shall indicate the amount of money necessary to be borrowed, the amount of
bonds to be issued in evidence thereof, shall fix the details of such bonds, including the date, number,
denomination and maturity, which shall not exceed forty (40) years from the date of said bonds, and the rate or
rates of interest, which shall not exceed the legal rate then in effect for Illinois municipal corporations under
"An Act to Authorize Public Corporations to Issue Bonds, Other Evidences of Indebtedness and Tax
Anticipation Warrants Subject to Interest Rate Limitations Set Forth Therein", as from time to time in effect. If
the bonds are sold to bear interest at the maximum rate, they shall be sold at a price of not less than par. If the
bonds are sold to bear interest at a rate less than the maximum interest rate, they may be sold at a price of less
than par, provided the price shall be such that the interest cost to the village of the money received as proceeds
of the sale of said bonds shall not exceed the maximum interest rate per annum, based on the average maturity
of all bonds sold as a single issue, computed according to standard tables of bond values.
A contract for the sale of such bonds may be entered into prior to the adoption of the bond ordinance
or the bond ordinance may provide for the subsequent sale of the bonds therein authorized. In the event of such
subsequent sale and bonds are sold bearing interest at a rate or rates less than that authorized in the bond
ordinance, prior to the delivery of such bonds the taxes levied in the bond ordinance shall be abated by that
amount representing the savings resulting from the sale of said bonds at a lower rate of interest than authorized
in the bond ordinance.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, if the president and board of trustees shall
determine that prevailing market rates of interest for the bonds are greater than the maximum rate provided by
the state statute described above, and that it is necessary for the village to issue the bonds without delay, then
the bonds may bear interest at such rate or rates as shall be specified in the bond ordinance, adopted pursuant
to the home rule powers of the village, without regard to the rate authorized by the state statute described
above. (Code 1961, ? 29.103; Ord. No. O-8-80, ? 2, 1-28-80; Ord. No. O-13-82, ? 1, 2-8-82; Ord. No. O-84-
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-66
82, ? 2, 9-13-82)
Sec. 2-484. Execution.
The bond ordinance shall direct the execution of the bonds therein authorized on behalf of the village
by the signatures of the president and the clerk, shall require the seal of the village to be affixed to such bonds,
shall determine whether such bonds to be issued shall be registered in the name of the owner as to principal
only or whether the same shall be fully registered as to both principal and interest, and shall set forth the form
of bonds. The place or places of payment of the maturing principal and interest on said bonds shall be
designated by the president and board either in the bond ordinance or in the proceedings confirming the sale of
the bonds.
The president may designate a deputy to affix his signature to any full faith and credit bonds of the
village which are required to be signed by the president. In such case, the president shall deliver to the board a
written notice of such designation, such notice stating the name of the person so selected and the specific bonds
which such person shall have authority to sign as proxy for the president. Said notice shall have attached
thereto a written signature of the president executed by the person so designated to sign, together with the
personal signature of the deputy authorized to sign on behalf of the president. Each such notice shall be
recorded in the official journal of the proceedings of the president and board and then filed with the clerk.
When the signature of the president is placed on a full faith and credit bond of the village at his direction in the
specified manner, such signature in all respects shall have the same legal effect as if signed by the president in
person. The bond ordinance may provide for the use of a facsimile signature of the president and the village
clerk to execute bonds authorized to be issued by the bond ordinance. (Code 1961, ? 29.104; Ord. No. O-41-
82, ? 3, 5-10-82; Ord. No. O-9-85, ? 3, 2-11-85)
Sec. 2-485. Tax levy.
The bond ordinance shall make provision for the payment of such bonds, both principal thereof and
interest thereon until maturity, by the levy of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property within the village
sufficient for such purposes. A copy of such bond ordinance, as adopted, certified to by the clerk, shall be filed
in the offices of the county clerk of the county or counties within which any part of the village may be situated.
Such bond ordinance, as so filed, shall constitute the authority for the county clerk or county clerks in and for
each of the years for which taxes are levied in said bond ordinance, to extend such taxes for collection against
all the taxable property situated within the village. The taxes so levied for the payment of principal of and
interest on the bonds shall be extended annually by the several county clerks without limitation as to rate or
amount and such taxes shall be in addition to and in excess of all other taxes levied or authorized to be levied
by the village. Except as provided herein, such taxes so levied shall not be subject to repeal or abatement in any
manner whatsoever until such time as all the bonds authorized and issued under the terms of said bond
ordinance shall have been paid in full, both principal thereof and interest thereon up to and including the date
of maturity; provided, however, that if the village has other funds available, the president and board may
appropriate such funds and deposit them in trust with the paying agent for the purpose of the payment of any of
the maturities of bonds or interest thereon, in which event the taxes so levied to pay such principal or interest
may be abated by the amount so deposited, such abatement to be directed by ordinance of the village duly
adopted and placed on file with the respective county clerks at any time prior to the extension of such taxes for
collection. (Code 1961, ? 29.105)
Sec. 2-486. This Code not a contract with bondholders.
The terms, provisions and limitations of this Code shall not constitute a contract with any holder of
bonds or other evidences of indebtedness of the village. The terms, provisions and limitations contained in this
Code may be amended, modified or revoked by action of the president and board of trustees of the village, at
any time before or after the issuance of any bonds or other obligations of the village pursuant to the provisions
hereof, provided that no subsequent action may invalidate or modify the constituent terms of any such
outstanding obligations as set forth in the ordinance providing for their issuance. (Ord. No. O-8-80, ? 3, 1-28-
80)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-67
Sec. 2-487. Bond ordinance as appropriation; publication.
The provisions of any bond ordinance shall constitute an appropriation of the amounts required as
therein referred to and described, and upon the delivery of the bonds therein authorized the proceeds thereof
shall be used solely and only for the purpose or purposes for which the bonds were authorized.
Upon the adoption of any bond ordinance by the village, and its approval by the president, the same
shall: (1) be printed or published in book or pamphlet form, published by authority of the corporate authorities,
or (2) be published in a newspaper published and of general circulation in the village if there be one and if
there is no such newspaper then in a newspaper published and of general circulation in the county in which the
village or the major portion thereof is situated, and said ordinance shall become effective ten (10) days after the
date of either such publication. (Code 1961, ? 29.106; Ord. No. O-9-85, ? 4, 2-11-85)
Sec. 2-488. Refunding bonds.
Any bonds authorized and issued pursuant to the provisions of any bond ordinance adopted pursuant to
the provisions hereof, and also any bonds heretofore issued and outstanding, which by their terms are payable
from taxes unlimited as to rate or amount and levied against all the taxable property within the village, may be
refunded prior to their maturity or at their maturity, and including the refunding of matured interest coupons
evidencing interest upon such unpaid bonds. The issuance of refunding bonds shall be authorized by a
refunding bond ordinance, which shall be adopted in the manner and subject to the terms, conditions and
provisions as herein required for the issuance of bonds for public purposes. (Code 1961, ? 29.107; Ord. No.
O-185-89, ? 1, 12-11-89)
Sec. 2-489. Constitutional home rule power.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 6 of Article VII of the Constitution of Illinois 1970, the
procedures hereinabove set forth for the issuance of full faith and credit bonds, general obligation, shall be
controlling and shall be complied with by the village in the borrowing of money through the issuance of
general obligation bonds of the village, notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained in the Illinois
Municipal Code and all acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto and in any other law or laws of the
state. (Code 1961, ? 29.108)
Sec. 2-490. Loans.
The village, acting by its president and board of trustees by vote of two-thirds of the corporate
authorities then holding office, may borrow money for proper public purposes from state or federally chartered
banks or savings and loan associations, repayable over not to exceed five (5) years, at such rates of interest and
on such other terms and conditions as the president and board of trustees in their sole judgment deem to be in
the best interests of the village. (Ord. No. O-127-79, ? 2, 11-13-79)
Sec. 2-491. Issuance of industrial revenue bonds.
(a) Legislative declaration of purpose. It is hereby determined and declared to be the purpose of this
section to provide a financing device which will aid in financing the cost of projects in order to relieve
conditions of unemployment and to encourage the increase of industry and business within the village thereby
reducing the evils attendant upon unemployment, and to provide for the increased welfare and prosperity of the
residents of the village; it is hereby further determined and declared to be the purpose of this section to provide
a financing device which will aid in financing the cost of pollution control facilities in order to eliminate, abate
or reduce the serious dangers to the public health and welfare caused by environmental pollutions; it is hereby
further determined and declared to be the purpose of this section to provide a financing device which will aid
in financing the cost of new and rehabilitated residential rental housing in order to provide decent, safe and
sanitary housing; and the same are hereby declared and determined to be public purposes and functions
declared pertaining to the government and affairs of the village.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-68
(b) Definitions. Whenever in this section unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
(1) "Economic development project" means any land, interest in land, building, structure, facility,
system, fixture, improvement, addition, appurtenance, machinery or equipment or any
combination thereof, and all real and personal property deemed necessary in connection
therewith, for use by any person, provided that the existence of such economic development
project will create or retain employment opportunities in the village or provide decent, safe
and sanitary residential rental housing.
(2) "Lease" includes a lease containing an option to purchase the project for a nominal sum upon
payment in full, or provision therefor, of all bonds issued in connection with the project and
all interest thereon and all other expenses in connection with the project.
(3) "Loan agreement" means an agreement providing for the village to loan the proceeds derived
from the issuance of bonds pursuant to this section to one or more persons to be used to pay or
finance the cost of one or more projects and providing for the repayment of such loan by the
other persons, and which may provide for such loans to be secured or evidenced by one or
more notes, debentures, bonds or other secured or unsecured debt obligations of the persons,
delivered to the village or to the trustee under the indenture pursuant to which the bonds were
issued.
(4) "Person" means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation
(including public utilities), association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political
subdivision, state agency or any other legal entity, or its legal representatives, agent or
assigns.
(5) "Pollution" means any form of environmental pollution including but not limited to, water
pollution, air pollution, land pollution, solid waste pollution, thermal pollution, radiation
contamination or noise pollution as determined by the various standards prescribed by this
state, the federal government or other governmental entities and including but not limited to,
anything which is considered as pollution or environmental damage in the Environmental
Protection Act, compiled as 415ILCS5/1 through 5/51, and any amendment thereto and
substitution therefor.
(6) "Pollution control facility" means any land, interest in land, building, structure, facility
system, fixture, improvement, appurtenance, addition, machinery or equipment, or any
combination thereof, and all real and personal property deemed necessary in connection
therewith, having to do with or the end purpose of which is, reducing, controlling or
preventing pollution.
(7) "Project" means any economic development project or pollution control facility or any
combination thereof.
(8) "Project cost" means and includes the sum total of all reasonable or necessary costs incidental
to the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, repair, alteration, improvement and extension
of a project including without limitation the cost of studies and surveys; plans, specifications,
architectural and engineering services; legal, marketing or other special services; financing,
acquisition, demolition, construction, equipment and site development of new and
rehabilitated buildings, rehabilitation, reconstruction, repair or remodeling of existing
buildings and all other necessary and incidental expenses including an initial bond and
interest reserve together with interest on bonds issued to finance a project to a date six (6)
months subsequent to the estimated date of completion.
(9) "Revenues" of a project, or derived from a project, include payments under a lease or sale
contract and repayments under a loan agreement, or under notes, debentures, bonds and other
secured or unsecured debt obligations of a person delivered as herein provided.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-69
(10) "Sale contract" means a contract providing for the sale of one or more projects to one or more
persons and includes a contract providing for payment of the purchase price in one or more
installments. If the sale contract permits title to the project to pass to the other person prior to
payment in full of the entire purchase price, it shall also provide for the other person to deliver
to the municipality or to the trustee under the indenture pursuant to which the bonds were
issued one or more notes, debentures, bonds or other secured or unsecured debt obligations of
such person providing for timely payments, including, without limitation, interest thereon for
the balance of the purchase price at or prior to the passage of such title.
(c) Additional powers of village. In addition to powers which it may now have, the village shall have
the power under this section:
(1) To finance one or more projects, whether or not now or hereafter in existence, within or
without the village or partially within or partially without the village, but in no event further
than ten (10) miles from the territorial boundaries of such village.
(2) To acquire, construct, improve, extend, rehabilitate, renovate, and equip one or more projects
including any property, real or personal, improved or unimproved, necessary in connection
therewith.
(3) To issue its revenue bonds to defray in whole or in part the project costs of any project and to
designate an appropriate name for such bonds.
(4) To rent, lease or sell any project to any person pursuant to a lease agreement or sale contract
or to enter into a loan agreement with any person with respect to any project in such manner
that payments to be received with respect to the project shall produce revenues and receipts
sufficient to provide for the prompt payment at maturity or principal, interest and redemption
premiums, if any, upon all bonds issued to finance the cost of such project.
(5) To pledge to the punctual payment of bonds authorized under this article, the interest thereon,
and the redemption premiums, and if any, the revenues to be received from such project.
(6) To mortgage such project in favor of the holder or holders of bonds issued therefor.
(7) To sell and convey such project, including without limitations the sale and conveyance thereof
subject to a mortgage, if any, as provided in this section, for such price and at such time as the
governing body of the village may determine. However, no sale or conveyance of such project
shall ever be made in such manner as to impair the rights or interests of the holder or holders
of any bonds issued to finance the project costs of such project.
(8) To issue its bonds to refund in whole or in part, bonds theretofore, issued by such village
under authority of this section.
Any property which is acquired by the village pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be exempt
from the imposition and collection of taxes thereon while owned by the village but the use of such property is
subject to taxation to be paid by the lessee or occupant as provided in Section 26 of the "Revenue Act of 1939"
filed May 17, 1939, or as may hereafter be amended.
(d) Exercise of powers; bonds generally. The exercise of all powers granted by this section may be
authorized and bonds may be authorized to be issued under this section for the purposes set forth in this section
by ordinance of the village president and board of trustees which may be adopted at the same meeting at which
it is introduced and shall take effect immediately upon adoption.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-70
The bonds shall bear interest at such rate or rates, payable at such times, may be in one or more series,
may bear such date or dates, may mature at such time or times, may be payable in such medium of payment at
such place or places, may carry such registration privileges, may be executed in such manner, may contain such
terms, covenants and conditions, and may be in such form, including coupon and registered, as such ordinance
may provide or as may be subsequently determined by the governing body before the bonds are issued. The
bonds may be sold at public or private sale in such manner and upon such terms as may be deemed advisable
by the governing body of the village. Pending the preparation of the definitive bonds, interim receipts of
certificates in such form and with such provisions as the president and board of trustees of the village may
determine, may be issued to the purchaser or purchasers of bonds sold pursuant to this section. The bonds and
interim receipts or certificates shall be deemed to be securities and negotiable instruments within the meaning
and for all purposes of the "Uniform Commercial Code."
(e) Covenants in bonds; mortgage or indenture of trust. Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of
bonds under this section may contain covenants as to:
(1) The use and disposition of the revenues from the project for which the bonds are to be issued,
including the creation and maintenance of reserves;
(2) The issuance of other or additional bonds relating to the project or any rehabilitation,
improvements, renovations, enlargements or additions thereto;
(3) The maintenance and repair of such project;
(4) The insurance to be carried thereon and the use and disposition of insurance monies;
(5) The appointment of any bank or trust company within or outside the State of Illinois, having
the necessary trust powers as trustee for the benefit of the bondholders, paying agent, and
bond registrar;
(6) The investment of any funds held by such trustee; and
(7) The terms and conditions upon which the holders of the bonds or any portion thereof or any
trustees therefor, are entitled to the appointment of a receiver.
Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds under this section may provide that the principal of
and interest on any bonds issued under this section shall be secured by a mortgage or indenture of trust
covering such project for which the bonds are issued and may include any improvements or extensions
thereafter made. Such mortgage or indenture of trust may contain such covenants and agreements to properly
safeguard the bonds as may be provided for in the ordinance authorizing such bonds and shall be executed in
the manner as may be provided for in the ordinance. The provisions of this section and any such ordinance or
ordinances and any such mortgage or indenture of trust shall constitute a contract with the holder or holders of
the bonds and continue in effect until the principal of, interest on, and the redemption premiums, if any on the
bonds so issued have been fully paid and the duties of the village and its corporate authorities and officers
under this article and any such ordinance or ordinances and any such mortgage or indenture of trust shall be
enforceable by any bondholder by mandamus, foreclosure of any such mortgage or indenture of trust or other
appropriate suit, action or proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction; provided the ordinance or any
mortgage or indenture of trust under which the bonds are issued may provide that all such remedies and rights
to enforcement may be vested in a trustee for the benefit of all the bondholders which trustee shall be subject to
the control of a majority of the holders or owners of any outstanding bonds.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-71
(f) Signatures of officers on bonds; validity of bonds. The bonds shall bear the manual or facsimile
signatures of such officers of the village as may be designated in the ordinance authorizing such bonds, and
such signatures shall be the valid and binding signatures of the officers of the village, notwithstanding that
before the delivery thereof and payments thereof any or all of the persons whose signatures appear thereon
have ceased to be officers of the village issuing such bonds. The validity of the bonds is not dependent on nor
affected by the validity or regularity of any proceedings relating to the acquisition, purchase, construction,
reconstruction, improvement, equipping, betterment or extension of the project for which the bonds are issued.
The ordinance authorizing the bonds may provide that the bonds shall contain a recital that they are issued
pursuant to this section, which recital shall be conclusive evidence of their validity and of the regularity of their
issuance.
(g) Revenue bonds. All bonds issued under this section have a lien upon the revenues derived from the
project for which the bonds have been issued, and the governing body may provide in the ordinance or
ordinances authorizing such bonds for the issuance of additional bonds to be equally and ratably secured by a
lien upon such revenues or may provide that the lien upon such revenues is subordinate.
(h) Liability of bonds. All bonds issued under and pursuant to this section shall be limited obligations
of the village payable solely out of the revenues derived from the project with respect to which such bonds are
issued. No holder of any bonds issued under this section has the right to compel any exercise of taxing powers
of the village to pay the bonds, the interest or premium, if any, thereon, and the bonds do not constitute an
indebtedness of the village or a loan of credit thereof within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory
provision. It shall be plainly stated on the face of each bond that it has been issued under the provisions of this
section and that it does not constitute an indebtedness of the village or a loan of credit thereof within the
meaning of any constitutional or statutory provisions.
(i) Investment of funds. The village, or any duly appointed agent on behalf of the village, may invest
any funds held by it pursuant to this section in bonds, notes, certificates of indebtedness, treasury bills or other
securities issued or fully guaranteed by the United States of America; in certificates of deposit or time deposits
constituting direct obligations of any bank as defined by the Illinois Banking Act, as heretofore and hereafter
amended or in such other securities (including without limitation repurchase agreements and investment
contracts with banks or other financial institutions) as the governing body may provide in the ordinance or
ordinances authorizing such bonds. Any such securities may be purchased at the offering or market price
thereof at the time of such purchase.
(j) Exemption from construction and bidding requirements for public buildings. The acquisition and
construction of a project shall not be subject to any requirements relating to public buildings, structures,
grounds, works or improvements imposed by the Illinois Revised Statutes or any other similar requirements
which may be lawfully waived by this section, and any requirement of competitive bidding or restriction
imposed on the procedure for award of contracts for such purpose or the lease, sale or other disposition of
property of the village is not applicable to any action taken under authority of this section.
(k) Powers conferred deemed additional and supplemental; effect of limitations imposed. The powers
conferred by this section are in addition and supplemental to, and the limitations imposed by this section shall
not affect, the powers conferred by any law or any other ordinance. Projects may be acquired, purchased,
constructed, reconstructed, improved, bettered, equipped, extended and financed, and bonds may be issued
under this section for such purposes, notwithstanding that any law or any other ordinance may provide for the
acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipping, betterment, extension and
financing of a like project, or the issuance of bonds for like purposes, and without regard to the requirements,
restrictions, limitations or other provisions contained in any law or any other ordinance.
(l) Applications.
(1) Applications for industrial revenue bonds shall be filed with the Palatine Business
Development Commission, established pursuant to Chapter 2 of this Code, on application
forms issued by said commission.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-72
(2) The filing fee for industrial revenue bond applications shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00),
payable to the Village of Palatine concurrently with the filing of the application. Said fees
shall be nonrefundable.
In addition, applicant shall pay to the village all legal fees and other costs incurred incident to
the review of industrial bond applications.
If the industrial revenue bond application is approved and such bonds issued, applicant shall
pay the village an administrative fee of one per cent of the total amount of the authorized
bond issue, together with any and all legal fees, bond consultant fees, printing fees, and all
other fees and costs which may be incurred incident to issuance of such bonds.
Ten (10) per cent of the administrative fee shall be due and payable to the village within
ten(10) days following adoption by the village of the inducement resolution approving the
issuance of such bonds, and in the event such payment is not made within said ten-day period,
the commitment by the village to issue said bonds or reserve such bonds for subsequent
issuance under its state and federal allocation shall lapse and be of no further force or effect,
and the applicant shall forfeit its priority position with respect to the issuance of industrial
revenue bonds by the village.
(3) The Palatine Business Development Commission shall screen and review the application, and
shall conduct a public hearing in respect thereto with the applicant or its duly authorized
representative present. Thereafter, the commission shall make its recommendation to the
president and board of trustees. In the event of a favorable recommendation, the applicant
shall file with the village, within thirty (30) days following such commission
recommendation, an inducement resolution and execute the customary supporting
memorandum of agreement in form acceptable to the village for submittal to the president and
board of trustees. In the event said inducement resolution is not submitted within the aforesaid
thirty-day period, the commitment by the village to issue said bonds or reserve such bonds for
subsequent issuance under its state and federal allocation shall lapse and be of no further force
or effect, and the applicant shall forfeit its priority position with respect to the issuance of
industrial revenue bonds by the village.
The president and board of trustees shall determine whether the application shall be approved
and the bonds issued. The determination of the president and board of trustees in all cases
shall be final.
(Ord. No. 105-81, ? 1, 12-14-81; Ord. No. O-35-84, ? 1, 6-11-84; Ord. No. O-25-85, ? 2, 4-8-85)
Sec. 2-492. Grant anticipation notes.
The provisions of this Division 2 shall not apply to the seven million three hundred seventy-five
thousand dollars ($7,375,000.00) grant anticipation notes of the village, dated December 1, 1982, and issued
pursuant to an ordinance adopted by the president and board of trustees on December 13, 1982, and entitled:
"Ordinance Authorizing the Issuance of Grant Anticipation Notes of the Village of Palatine, Illinois." (Ord.
No. O-122-82, ? 1, 12-20-82)
Secs. 2-493--2-500. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-73
ARTICLE XXVII. PALATINE EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (PEMA)*
*Editor’s Note - Ord. No. O-120-17 enacted Dec. 4, 2017, repealed former Art. XXVII PEMA,
Sec. 2-501—2-514 and enacted a new Art. XXVII, Sec. 2-501—2-518 Palatine Emergency Management
Agency (PEMA)
----------
*Editor's Note--Ord. No. O-95.77, ? 1, enacted Sept. 12, 1977, repealed former Art. XXVII, ?? 2-
501--2-513, pertaining to a local civil defense organization, and enacted in lieu thereof a new Art. XXVII, ??
2-501--2-513, as herein set out. Former Art XXVII was derived from Code 1961, ?? 7.901--7.913, and Ord.
No. O-10-75, ? 1, adopted Jan. 27, 1975. Ord. No. 0-172-96 repealed the former Emergency Services and
Disaster Agency (ESDA) and replaces it with Palatine Emergency Management Agency (PEMA) Ordinance.
----------
Cross reference(s)--State of emergency, ? 12-151 et seq.
State law reference(s)--Illinois Civil Defense Act of 1951, 20ILCS3305 et seq.; for provisions
relating to local organization, etc., see 20ILCS3305/13.
----------
Sec. 2-501. Establishment.
There is hereby created the Village of Palatine Emergency Management Agency, hereinafter
designated as Village EMA, established to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting
from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile actions or from natural or man-made disaster,
in accordance with "The Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act", as amended. The Village EMA shall
consist of the Village Manager, who shall serve as “EMA Director”, and the “Coordinator”, as designated by
the EMA Director. The Coordinator shall be under the authority, command, and control of the EMA Director.
Sec. 2-502. Coordinator.
Duties: Under the supervision of the Mayor, the EMA Director shall have the responsibility for the
management of the Emergency Management Agency, to include the Coordinator and support staff.
Sec. 2-503. Vacancy in office.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve as the EMA Director, the Mayor or
individual designated by the Mayor, shall be and act as EMA Director until a new appointment is made as
provided in this Chapter.
Sec. 2-504. Coordinator.
Duties: Under the supervision of the EMA Director, the Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for
the planning, coordination, and operation of the emergency management activity in the Village. The
Coordinator shall maintain liaison with the State and Federal authorities and the authorities of other nearby
political subdivisions to ensure the most effective operation of the Emergency Operations Plan (EOP). The
Coordinator's duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel
and facilities of the Village for emergency management purposes.
B. Development and coordination of plans for the immediate use of all Village facilities,
equipment, manpower and other resources for the purposes of minimizing or preventing
damage to persons and property and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental
services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety and welfare.
C. Negotiating and concluding agreements with owners or persons in control of buildings or
other property for the use of such buildings or other property for emergency management
purposes, and designating suitable buildings as public shelters.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-74
D. Conducting public practice alerts to ensure the efficient operation of emergency management
regulations, procedures, and operations.
E. Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any
emergency management activity.
F. Assuming such authority and conducting such activity as the EMA Director may direct to
promote and execute the Emergency Operations Plan.
G. Vacancy in Office: In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve as the
Coordinator, the EMA Director or any person designated by the Mayor, shall be and act as
Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this Chapter.
Sec. 2-505. Membership with the Joint Emergency Management System.
The Village of Palatine is a member of the Joint Emergency Management System (JEMS), a regional
agreement between neighboring municipalities for emergency management support. The Joint Emergency
Management System is over seen by a board which is composed of the Chief Administrative Officer, or their
designee, from each of the member communities. The board is led by a Chairman and Vice-Chairman, who are
elected by the board members. As a member of JEMS, the Village of Palatine coordinates their emergency
management program activities with the JEMS Coordinator in order to establish regional standardization.
Sec. 2-506. Joint Emergency Management System (JEMS) Coordinator.
Duties: In cooperation with the EMA Director, the JEMS Coordinator will have the responsibility for
planning, training and exercise coordinator of the emergency management activity in the Village. The JEMS
Coordinator's duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Maintain, coordinate, and recommend for adoption or amendment, an EOP.
B. Be on-call 24-hours a day.
C. Monitor news and severe weather.
D. Maintain, update and monitor the subscriber community Continuity of Operations Plan
(COOP).
E. Serve as the liaison for Subscribers to state emergency management agencies and emergency
service and disaster agencies.
F. Act as the NIMS Compliance Officer under the National Incident Management System.
G. Ensure that the Subscribers’ Emergency Operations Centers (EOC’s) are maintained and
ready.
H. Provide training on the use of EOC equipment and readiness including regional disaster
exercises to measure the subscriber’s preparedness to respond to emergencies and to develop
action plans to address any deficiencies identified during such exercises.
I. Oversee the maintenance and evaluation of the emergency warning systems including the
outdoor warning sirens or additional warning systems in place in each subscriber community.
J. Assist in the preparation and distribution of Incident Action Plans (IAP) for planned special
events.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-75
Sec. 2-507. Functions.
The Village of Palatine EMA shall perform such EMA functions within the Village as shall be
prescribed in and by the State of Illinois EMA plan and program prepared by the Governor, and, in addition,
shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement
with any other political subdivision, municipality, or quasi- municipality entered into as provided in "The
Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act", as amended.
Sec. 2-508. Service as Mobile Support Team.
All or any member of the Village of Palatine EMA organization may be designated as a member of a
mobile support team created by the Director of the State of Illinois Emergency Management Agency, as
provided by law. The leader of the mobile support team shall be designated by the EMA Director. Any member
of a mobile support team who is a Village employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor, or
the State Director, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident
to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or employee of the Village, while so
serving, shall receive from the State of Illinois, reasonable compensation as provided by law.
Sec. 2-509. Agreement with other political subdivisions.
The EMA Director may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other cities or political subdivisions of
the State of Illinois, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the Mayor and
Village Council.
Sec. 2-510. Emergency Action.
If the Governor proclaims that a disaster or state of emergency exists in the event of actual enemy
attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the State of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from
enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from man-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the Village
of Palatine EMA to cooperate fully with the State of Illinois EMA and with the Governor in the exercise of
emergency powers as provided by law.
Sec. 2-511. Emergency powers and duties.
A. The Mayor may exercise the emergency power and authority necessary to fulfill his general powers
and duties as defined in the Village Code of Ordinances. The judgment of the Mayor shall be the sole
criteria necessary to invoke emergency powers provided by ordinance and other appropriate
authorities. The Village Council may convene to perform its legislative and administrative powers as
the situation demands and shall receive reports relative to emergency management activities. Nothing
in this Chapter shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers or restrictions of the Village
Council.
B. During any period when disaster threatens or when the Village has been struck by disaster, within the
definition of this Chapter, the Mayor or the EMA Director may promulgate such regulations as
deemed necessary to protect life and property and preserve critical resources. Such regulations may
include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
1. Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles in order to facilitate the work
of emergency management personnel or to facilitate the mass movement of persons from
critical areas within or without the Village.
2. Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from areas deemed to be hazardous or
vulnerable to disaster.
3. Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety.
4. Regulations promulgated in accordance with the authority above will be given widespread
circulation by proclamations published and expressed by newspaper, radio, televised media
and social media.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-76
C. Emergency Locations; Governmental Powers: Whenever, due to an emergency resulting from the
effects of natural or manmade disaster or hostile act or the anticipated effects thereof, it becomes
imprudent, inexpedient or impossible to conduct the affairs of local government at the regular or usual
place or places, the Village Council may meet at any place within or without the Village limits on the
call of the presiding officer or any two members of such governing body and shall proceed to establish
and designate by ordinance, resolution, or other manner alternate or substitute sites or places as the
emergency temporary location or locations of government where all, or any part of, the public business
may be transacted and conducted during the emergency situation. Such sites or places may be within
or without the territorial limits of the Village.
D. During the period when the public business is being conducted at the emergency temporary location or
locations, the governing body and other officers of the Village shall have and possess and shall
exercise, at such location or locations, all of the executive, legislative, and judicial powers and
functions conferred upon such body and officers by or under the laws of this State. Such powers and
functions may be exercised in the light of the exigencies of the emergency situation without regard to
or compliance with time- consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law and pertaining
thereto, and all acts of such body and officers shall be valid and binding as if performed within the
territorial limits of their Village.
E. Continuity In Office: In the event that the Mayor is unavailable, the powers of the office shall be
exercised and duties shall be discharged by the designated emergency interim successors in the order
specified. The emergency interim successor shall exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the
office to which designated until such time as a vacancy which may exist shall be filled in accordance
with the constitution or statutes; or until the officer, or their deputy or a preceding emergency interim
successor, again becomes available to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office. Based
on the authority of 5 ILCS 275/3 the line of succession for the executive branch of government will
be: Mayor, most Senior Council Member, second most Senior Council Member.
In the event that, at the time or as a consequence of any disaster or occurrence described in this Chapter, the
Mayor and their three successors on file with the Village shall be absent, killed, or rendered incapable of
performing the duties of such office, such office shall be filled until such time as a successor can be selected in
the manner prescribed by law, in the following line of succession: the remaining members of the Village Board
based on tenure, the Village Manager, the Director of Finance, the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief, the Public
Works Director. In the event that, at the time or as a consequence of any disaster or occurrence described in
this Chapter, the incumbent of any Municipal office or position shall be absent, killed, or rendered incapable of
performing the duties of such office or position, such office or position shall be filled, until such time as a
successor can be selected in the manner prescribed by law, by appointment by the Mayor. The Mayor shall give
due consideration to the list of three successors on file with the Village but is not required to select from said
list.
Sec. 2-512. Emergency management agency and emergency plans.
A. A comprehensive EOP shall be adopted and maintained by resolution of the Corporate Authorities
upon the recommendations of the Mayor. In the preparation of the Plan as it pertains to the Village
organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and approved, it shall be the duty of
the EMA Director, all departments, and all employees to perform personnel of all existing departments
and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When the functions assigned by the Plan and to
maintain their portion of the Plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The EOP shall be
considered supplementary to this Chapter and have the effect of law whenever a disaster has been
proclaimed.
B. Each department head assigned responsibility in the EOP shall be responsible for carrying out all
duties and functions assigned therein. Duties will include the organization and training of assigned
Village employees and volunteers.
C. The Mayor shall prescribe in a Continuity of Operations and Continuity of Government Plan those
positions within the disaster organization, in addition to their own, for which lines of succession are
necessary. In each instance, the responsible person will designate and keep on file with the Village a
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-77
current list of three persons as successors to the position. The list will be in order of succession and
will as nearly as possible designate persons best capable of carrying out all assigned duties and
functions.
D. When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not available within the Village
government, the Mayor is authorized to seek assistance from persons outside of government. The
assignment of duties, when of a supervisory nature, shall also grant authority for the persons so
assigned to carry out such duties prior to, during, and after a disaster. The Village may accept such
services from persons outside of government on a volunteer basis. Such persons shall be enrolled as
emergency management volunteers in cooperation with the heads of departments affected.
E. Some of the duties ascribed to the Mayor in this Section will ordinarily be handled as a matter of
routine by the EMA Director or Coordinator, but the responsibility and authority stem from and remain
with the Mayor.
Sec. 2-513. Compensation.
Members of the Village EMA who are paid employees or officers of the Village, if called for training
by the State of Illinois Director of EMA, shall receive for the time spent in such training, the same rate of pay
as is attached to the position held; members who are not such Village employees or officers shall receive for
such training time, such compensation as may be established by the Mayor and Village Council.
Sec. 2-514. Reimbursement by state.
The Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any reimbursement by the State of
Illinois to the Village for expenses incident to training members of the EMA as prescribed by the State EMA
Director, compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside
the Village in response to a call by the Governor or State Director of EMA, as provided by law, and any other
reimbursement made by the State incident to EMA activities as provided by law.
Sec. 2-515. Purchases and expenditures.
The Village Council, may, on recommendation of the EMA Director, authorize any purchase or
contracts necessary to place the Village in a position to combat effectively any enemy attack upon the United
States or the occurrence within the State of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other
hostile action, or from man-made or natural disasters and to protect the public health and safety, protect
property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster.
In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the EMA Director is authorized, on behalf of the
Village, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in
view of the emergency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law
pertaining to Village contracts or obligations, as authorized by "The Illinois Emergency Management Agency
Act", as amended; provided, that if the Mayor is available at such time, the Village Coordinator shall act
subject to the direction and restrictions imposed by the Mayor.
Sec. 2-516. Oath.
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the EMA organization shall, before entering upon
his or her duties, subscribe to the following oath:
"I (state your name) of the Emergency Management Agency of the Village of Palatine do solemnly swear (or
affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States
and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and
private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental
reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am
about to enter, and I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of
any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of
this state by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Village of Palatine EMA
organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-78
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence."
Sec. 2-517. Office.
The Village Manager is authorized to designate space in any Village building or elsewhere, as may be
provided for by the Village Corporate Authorities for the Village of Palatine EMA organization as its office.
Sec. 2-518. Local disaster emergencies.
See Chapter 12, Article IX of the Village Code of Ordinances regarding Declaration of Emergencies.
Secs. 2-519--2-614. Reserved.
ARTICLE XXVIII. PALATINE BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION*
----------
*Editor's note--Section 1 of Ord. No. O-2-86, enacted Jan. 13, 1986, deleted Art. XXVIII, ?? 2-
602--2-605, in their entirety. Formerly, Art. XXVIII pertained to departmental employee committees and
was derived from Ord. No. O-99-77, ? 1, enacted Sept. 12, 1977; Ord. No. O-21-83, ? 1, enacted April 11,
1983; and Ord. No. O-62-84, ? 1, enacted Aug. 13, 1984. Section 2 of Ord. No. O-2-86 renumbered Art.
XXIX as Art. XXVIII, as set out herein, and provided that ?? 2-514--2-614 be reserved for future use.
----------
Sec. 2-615. Creation; composition; appointment, terms of members,
There is hereby created a commission of the Village of Palatine named Palatine Business
Development Commission (PBDC) which shall consist of nine (9) members, not more than four (4) of
whom may be elected officials or employees of the village. All members shall be appointed by the village
president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The village president, with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees, shall appoint a chairman who shall serve for the term of his appointment
or until his successor is appointed and qualified.
Terms of the members shall be three (3) years, except that upon the occasion of the first membership
appointments, three (3) members shall be appointed for one year, three (3) members shall be appointed for two
(2) years and three (3) members shall be appointed for three (3) years so as to establish staggered terms, and
except that the term of any elected official shall expire concurrently with the expiration of his term in office.
Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments. (Ord. No. O-104-81, ? 1, 12-14-81)
Sec. 2-616. Compensation and meetings.
The members of the PBDC shall serve without compensation. The PBDC shall meet upon call of the
chairman or any three (3) members. Not less than forty-eight hours prior written notice by mail or personal
delivery, to all PBDC members, shall be required to call any meeting. (Ord. No. O-104-81, ? 1, 12-14-81)
Sec. 2-617. Quorum.
A majority of the members of the PBDC assembled shall constitute a quorum. No final action shall be
taken on any measure before the PBDC except with the concurrence of a majority of such quorum. The
chairman may vote on any action which comes before the PBDC. (Ord. No. O-104-81, ? 1, 12-14-81)
Sec. 2-618. Purpose and duties.
It shall be the purpose of the PBDC to stimulate business activity, expand employment opportunities
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-79
and promote business development in the village consistent with the public health, safety, morals and welfare
of the village as a whole. The PBDC shall submit annually a report of its activities to the president and board of
trustees. (Ord. No. O-104-81, ? 1, 12-14-81)
Sec. 2-619. Subcommittees.
(a) Industrial revenue bond subcommittee. The industrial revenue bond (IRB) subcommittee is hereby
created as a permanent subcommittee of the PBDC. The IRB subcommittee shall consist of five (5) members to
be appointed by the chairman of the PBDC, with the advice and consent of the remaining members of the
PBDC; provided, however, that no elected official shall be appointed to or serve on the IRB subcommittee.
The members may elect their own chairman for such period as they shall designate. In addition to the
five (5) regular members of the IRB subcommittee, the village manager, or his designee, shall serve as an ex
officio member.
The IRB subcommittee shall review and make recommendations with respect to all applications
received by the village for industrial revenue bonds pursuant to the provisions of section 2-491 of this Code
and shall perform such other duties as are assigned to it under that section or by the PBDC. In addition, it shall
be the responsibility of the IRB subcommittee to cause to be prepared all application forms for industrial
revenue bonds, The IRB subcommittee is authorized to retain such consultants and obtain such professional
assistance as the members of the subcommittee deem necessary in performing their duties and responsibilities;
provided, however, that the entire cost of such consultants and assistance shall be charged to and paid by the
applicant pursuant to the aforesaid section 2-491.
Members of the IRB subcommittee shall serve for such terms as shall be designated at the time of their
original appointments. Vacancies on the subcommittee for any unexpired term shall be filled in the same
manner as herein provided for the original appointment of members. A majority of the members of the
subcommittee shall constitute a quorum and no final action shall be taken on any measure before the
Subcommittee except with the concurrence of a majority of the full subcommittee. The chairman may vote on
all questions which come before the subcommittee.
(b) Additional subcommittees. The chairman of the PBDC, with the advice and consent of the
members, may create such additional subcommittees from time to time as he deems appropriate. (Ord. No. O-
104-81, ? 1, 12-14-81)
ARTICLE XXIX. DEPARTMENT OF DATA PROCESSING
AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT
Sec. 2-620. Department created; composition.
There is hereby created a department of data processing and information management. (Ord. No.
O-57-92, ? 1, 4-27-93)
Sec. 2-621. Office of director of data processing and information management.
There is hereby created the office of director of data processing and information management, an
executive office of the village. The director of data processing and information management shall be appointed
by the village manager. (Ord. No. O-57-92, ? 1, 4-27-93)
Sec. 2-622. Duties and functions generally.
The director of data processing and information management shall be responsible for the oversight and
management of all data processing operations of the village. The director shall be responsible for the
supervision and direction of the department of data processing and information management under the general
direction of the village manager. The director shall advise the village manager on all data processing and
information management needs of the village and shall coordinate all purchases of equipment, systems and
maintenance of data processing operations. The director shall coordinate the information management program
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-80
of the village and such other quality assurance related and management programs as assigned by the village
manager. (Ord. No. O-57-92, ? 1, 4-27-93)
ARTICLE XXX - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING DIVISION
[Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-132-03 enacted October 20, 2003, added a new Article XXX]
[Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-109-05 enacted June 6, 2005, amended Article XXX]
Sec. 2-700. Preamble
Pursuant to its powers as a home rule municipality and pursuant to the express grant of authority as set
forth in Division 2.1 of Article I of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-1 et seq.), the Village is
authorized to provide by ordinance for a system of administrative adjudication of certain Village code
violations.
The corporate authorities of the Village of Palatine have determined that it is in the best interests of the
Village of Palatine that a system of administrative adjudication of Village code violations be created, as a nonexclusive
method of enforcing the various provisions of the Village Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 2-701. Recitals
The foregoing recitals are adopted as express findings of the corporate authorities of the Village of
Palatine and are incorporated herein by specific reference.
Sec. 2-702. Purpose
The stated purpose of this Ordinance is to provide for fair and efficient enforcement of the Village
Code of Ordinances as may be allowed by law and directed by ordinance, through an administrative
adjudication of violations of such Village Code of Ordinances and by establishing a schedule of fines and
penalties, and authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties.
Sec. 2-703. Creation of Administrative Hearing Division; Jurisdiction
There is hereby created within the Village of Palatine a Administrative Hearing Division, which is
authorized to provide for and operate a “system of administrative adjudication,” which shall be defined as the
adjudication of a violation of any of the following Chapters of the Village of Palatine Code of Ordinances:
(1) Chapter 4, Ambulance and Mobile Intensive Care Units
(2) Chapter 5, Animals
(3) Chapter 6, Building Codes and Building Regulations, as it may be amended from time to
time, including the following Codes which have been adopted by reference:
(a) International Residential Code/2000 Edition (with amendments).
(1) Swimming pools, Spas and hot tubs, Appendix G
(2) Patio covers, Appendix H
(2) Existing buildings and structures, Appendix J
(b) International Building Code, 2000 Edition (with amendments).
(c) International Mechanical Code, 2000 Edition (with amendments).
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-81
(d) International Fuel Gas Code, 2000 Edition.
(e) International Energy Conservation Code, 2000 Edition (with amendments).
(f) International Code Council Electrical Code – Administrative Provisions, 2000
Edition (with amendments).
(g) National Electrical Code, 1999 Edition (with amendments).
(h) Illinois Plumbing Code, 1998 (with amendments).
(i) Illinois Accessibility Code, 1997 Edition
(4) Chapter 7, Fire Prevention and Protection, as it may be amended from time to time, including
the following Code which has been adopted by reference:
(a) Life Safety Code, NFPA 101, Edition (with amendments)
(b) International Fire Code, 2000 Edition (with amendments)
(c) Building Officials and Code Administrators National Fire Prevention Code;
(5) Chapter 8, Garbage and Refuse, as it may be amended from time to time.
(6) Chapter 9, Health and Sanitation, as it may be amended from time to time.
(7) Chapter 10, Existing Structures’ Maintenance and Occupancy, as it may be amended from
time to time, including the following Codes which have been adopted by reference:
(a) Building Officials and Code Administrators Building Code
(b) Property Maintenance Code
(c) International Mechanical Code
(d) International Plumbing Code
(e) National Electrical Code
(8) Chapter 11, Licenses, Permits and Business Regulations, as it may be amended from time to
time, including the following Codes which have been adopted by reference:
(a) State of Illinois, Department of Health, Food Service Sanitation Rules and
Regulations of 1975
(b) State of Illinois, Department of Public Health, Division of Food and Drugs, Rules of
Regulations Pertaining of the Sanitation of Retail Food Stores of January 1983
(9) Chapter 12, Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, as it may be amended from time to time.
(10) Chapter 15, Emergency Energy Plan, as it may be amended from time to time.
(11) Chapter 16, Construction and Maintenance of Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(12) Chapter 17, Taxes, as it may be amended from time to time.
(13) Chapter 18, Traffic, as it may be amended from time to time, including the following Codes
which have been adopted by reference:
(a) Illinois Vehicle Code, 625IL5/1-100 through 5/20-402
(14) Chapter 19, Water and Sewer Services, as it may be amended from time to time.
(15) Appendix A, Zoning, as it may be amended from time to time.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-82
(16) Appendix B, Subdivisions, as it may be amended from time to time.
Sec. 2-704. Hearing Procedures Non-Exclusive
The provisions of this Ordinance shall not preclude the Village from using other methods or
proceedings to enforce the ordinances of the Village of Palatine, including, but not limited to, the institution of
any action in the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois or any administrative proceeding.
Sec. 2-705. Administrative Hearing Division
The Administrative Hearing Division shall be composed of an Administrative Hearing Officer
(Administrative Law Judge), an Administrative Hearing Director, the Chief of Police or his designee, Hearing
Room personnel, and any other duly appointed person or persons deemed necessary for the efficient
administration of the Administrative Hearing Division, with the following powers, duties and authority:
(a) All adjudicatory hearings shall be presided over by an Administrative Hearing Officer who
shall be appointed by the Village Mayor with the consent of the Village Council.
Prior to conducting administrative adjudication hearings, the Administrative Hearing Officers must be
an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for at least three (3) years and shall have
successfully completed a formal training program, which includes the following:
(1) instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings which they will
conduct;
(2) orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they will adjudicate;
(3) observation of administrative hearings; and
(4) participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuing final
orders.
(b) Administrative Hearing Officers are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to:
(1) hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues;
(2) administer oaths and affirmations to witnesses;
(3) hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the existence of an ordinance
violation;
(4) rule upon motions, objections, and the admissibility of evidence;
(5) issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant testimony at the
hearing, upon the request of the parties or their representatives or upon the initiative
of the Administrative Hearing Officer
(6) preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing, including all exhibits and
evidence introduced at the hearing;
(7) issue a determination, based on the evidence presented at the hearing, of whether a
code violation occurred or exists. The Administrative Hearing Officer’s
determination shall be in writing and shall include a written finding of fact, decision,
and order including the fine, penalty, or other action with which the respondent must
comply;
(8) impose penalties consistent with applicable Village of Palatine Code provisions and
assess costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation, except, however,
that in no event shall the Administrative Hearing Officer have authority to (i) impose
a penalty of incarceration, or (ii) impose a fine in excess of $50,000. The maximum
monetary fine under this item (8) shall be exclusive of costs of enforcement or costs
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-83
incurred by the Village to secure compliance with the Village’s ordinances and shall
not be applicable to cases to enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected
by the Village.
(9) ordering, regardless of fines imposed or costs assessed, the respondent to perform a
term of community service;
(10) imposing, in addition to fines imposed and penalties or costs assessed, administrative
and/or enforcement costs;
(11) ordering the respondent to comply with the code provision(s) found to have been
violated;
(12) waive any court costs and fine upon a finding of compliance for a violation where
that violation required the respondent to take corrective action to comply with the
Code of Ordinance;
(13) waive any court costs and fine for one or more code violations upon a finding that the
violation(s) occurred under such circumstances as to a reasonable person would
constitute an excuse for the violation(s); and
(14) grant equitable relief as otherwise authorized by law or local ordinance.
(c) The Administrative Hearing Director shall either be an employee of the Village of Palatine
appointed by the Manager, or an independent contractor or agency contracted by the Village to perform
such duties as enumerated herein. The Administrative Hearing Director is hereby authorized,
empowered and directed to:
(1) operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing
and/or parking regulation violations, vehicle compliance violations, vehicle license or
sticker requirement violations, building, fire and health code violations, and all other
Village ordinance violations as may be permitted by law and directed by ordinance;
(2) adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required under this Ordinance or
as may reasonably be required to carry out the purpose of this ordinance;
(3) collect moneys paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final determination of
liability;
(4) certify copies of final determinations of vehicular standing and/or parking regulation
violation liability, vehicle compliance violations, vehicle license or sticker
requirement violations, building, fire and health code violations or any other
ordinance violation adjudicated pursuant to this Ordinance, and any factual reports
verifying the final determination of any violation liability which were issued in
accordance with this Ordinance or the laws of the State of Illinois, including 625
ILCS 5/11-208.3, as from time to time amended;
(5) certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning initiation of suspension of driving
privileges in accordance with the provisions of this Article and those of 625 ILCS
5/6-306.5;
(6) promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and maintain the
system of administrative adjudication hereby established; and
(7) collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection agencies that may be
retained by the Village or by filing complaints in the County Circuit Court, or by
selecting or appointing an individual or agency to act on behalf of the Village in
filing complaints, seeking judgments for unpaid fines or penalties and pursuing all
post-judgment remedies available under current law.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-84
(d) The Administrative Hearing Director is hereby further authorized, empowered and directed to
operate and maintain the computer programs for the system of administrative adjudication hereby
established, on a day-to-day basis, including, but not limited to:
(1) inputting of violation notice information;
(2) establishing hearing dates and notice dates;
(3) recording fine and penalty assessment and payments;
(4) issuing payment receipts;
(5) issuing succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final determination of liability,
issuing notices of immobilization, issuing notices of impending impoundment, and
issuing notices of impending driver’s license suspension as may be required, in
accordance with the Illinois Vehicle Code;
(6) keeping accurate records of appearances and non-appearances at administrative
hearings, pleas entered and fines and other penalties assessed and paid.
(e) Hearing room personnel appointed by the Chief of Police shall be any police officer or
auxiliary police officer, and such persons are hereby authorized and directed to:
(1) maintain hearing room decorum;
(2) execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of the Circuit Court;
(3) perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and as directed by
the Administrative Hearing Officer or the Administrative Hearing Director.
Sec. 2-706. Compensation of Administrative Hearing Division Personnel
Authorization for compensation for each of the above-stated positions shall be made by the Village
Council through the annual budget process. Compensation shall be determined by the Village Manager within
approved budget limitations.
Sec. 2-707. Complaints and Notices of Hearings
(a) A proceeding before an Administrative Hearing Officer shall be instituted upon the filing of a
written sworn pleading or complaint by any authorized official of the Village, including police
officers, code enforcement officers, and such other employees as authorized.
(b) Respondents shall be served with a copy of the written sworn pleading or complaint along
with a notice of adjudicatory hearing in any manner reasonably calculated to give them actual notice
of the proceeding instituted against them including:
(1) personal service upon a party or its employees or agents;
(2) service by first class mail, certified mail return receipt requested, express mail or
overnight mail, at the party’s address;
(3) service by posting a copy of the sworn pleading or complaint upon the property
where the violation is found when the party is the owner or manager of the property.
(c) Notices of the adjudicatory hearing shall include:
(1) the type and nature of the ordinance violation to be adjudicated;
(2) the date and location of the adjudicatory hearing;
(3) the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held; and
(4) the penalties for failure to appear at the hearing.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-85
Sec. 2-708. Administrative Hearing Procedures
(a) Hearings shall be scheduled with reasonable promptness, provided that for hearings scheduled
in all non-emergency situations, if requested by the respondent, the respondent shall have at least 15
days after service of process to prepare for a hearing. For purposes of this subsection, “non-emergency
situation” means any situation that does not reasonably constitute a threat to the public interest, safety,
health or welfare. If service is provided by mail, the 15-day period shall begin to run on the day that
the notice is deposited in the mail.
(b) All hearings shall be open to the public and conducted before an Administrative Hearing
Officer.
(c) The Village shall not be represented by an employee of the Administrative Hearing Division;
however documentary evidence including the notice of violation, complaint and attached exhibits may
be presented by the Administrative Hearing Officer.
(d) Any person appearing on behalf of the Respondent shall file with the Administrative Hearing
Officer a written appearance on a form provided by the Administrative Hearing Division.
(e) All testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation.
(f) The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in an adjudicatory hearing
authorized under this ordinance. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is of a type
commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
(g) Parties shall be provided with an opportunity for a hearing during which they may be
represented by counsel, present witnesses, and cross-examine opposing witnesses. Parties may request
the Administrative Hearing Officer to issue subpoenas to direct the attendance and testimony of a
relevant witness and the production of relevant documents. Issuance of the subpoena shall be at the
discretion of the Administrative Hearing Officer where it is determined the witness or documents are
material and do not constitute a needless presentation of cumulative or repetition evidence.
(h) Continuances may be granted at the discretion of the Administrative Hearing Officer upon a
finding of good cause.
(i) No violations may be established except by proof by a preponderance of the evidence;
however, the notice of violation, or a copy hereof, issued and signed in accordance with Section 2-707
shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts specified therein.
(j) Upon the conclusion of a hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall issue a final
determination of liability or no liability. Upon issuance, the Administrative Hearing Officer may
impose penalties and or fines that are consistent with applicable provisions of the Code of Ordinance,
impose a term of community service, assess costs reasonable related to instituting the administrative
adjudication proceeding, and, if applicable, order the respondent to immediately correction of the
violation.
Sec. 2-709. Judicial Review
Any final decision by an Administrative Hearing Officer that a code violation does or does not exist
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-86
shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review and shall be subject to review under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.).
Section 2-710. Enforcement of Judgment
(a) Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction, or costs
imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures
under the Illinois Administrative Review Law are a debt due and owing the Village of Palatine and
may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
(b) After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Illinois Administrative
Review Law may be sought for a final determination of an ordinance violation, unless stayed by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision, and order of the Administrative Hearing
Officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(c) In any case in which a respondent has failed to comply with a judgment ordering that
respondent to correct an ordinance violation or imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of an
ordinance violation, any expenses incurred by the Village to enforce the judgment entered against that
defendant, including, but not limited to, attorney’s fees, court costs, and costs related to property
demolition or foreclosure, after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or a hearing officer,
shall be a debt due and owing the Village of Palatine and may be collected in accordance with
applicable law. Prior to any expenses being fixed by the Administrative Hearing Officer pursuant to
this subsection (C), the Village shall provide a notice to the respondent that states that the respondent
shall appear at a hearing before the Administrative Hearing Officer to determine whether the
respondent has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set the date for such hearing,
which shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date that notice is served. If notice is served by
mail, the 7-day period shall begin to run on the date that the notice was deposited in the mail.
(d) Upon being recorded in the manner required by Article XII of the Illinois Code of Civil
Procedure (735 ILCS 5/12-10 1 et seq.), or by the Uniform Commercial Code (810 ILCS 5/1-101 et
seq.), a lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the respondent in the
amount of any debt due and owing the Village under this ordinance. The lien may be enforced in the
same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(e) The Administrative Hearing Officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and set a
new hearing date, upon a petition filed by the respondent within twenty-one (21) days after the
issuance of the order of default, if the Administrative Hearing Officer determines that the defendant’s
failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause, or at any time if the respondent establishes, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the Village did not provide proper service of process. If any
judgment is set aside pursuant to this subsection, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall have
authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien which has been recorded for any debt due and owing
the Village as a result of the vacated default judgment. When a judgment is vacated, the
Administrative Hearing Officer shall proceed immediately with a new hearing set a new date for a
hearing on the underlying violation(s) as soon as practical.
(f) After an order of liability become final, the Village department or agency which instituted or
prosecuted an administrative adjudication before the Administrative Hearing Division may file a
written petition for relief for a final order of liability entered in error with the Administrative Hearing
Division. If the petitioner is granted, the final order of liability shall be vacated and the
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-87
Administrative Hearing Officer shall have the authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien which
has been recorded for any debt due and owning as a result of the vacated order and directing the
Village to refund any fines and/or penalties as a resulted of the vacated order.
Section 2-711. Election of Remedies
In no case may the Administrative Hearing Division conduct an administrative adjudication proceeding
for an alleged violation of the Code of Ordinance where the remedy provided is a punishment of imprisonment;
provided, however, where a violation of the code is punishable by fines and other penalties in addition to
imprisonment, the Village may elect to institute an action with the Administrative Hearing Division and waive
any imprisonment for the code violation. Nothing in this Article, however, shall preclude the Village from
seeking the remedy of imprisonment in a court of competent jurisdiction.
Section 2-712. Severability.
The provisions of this article shall be interpreted so as not to be in conflict with the laws of the State of
Illinois or any other limitations imposed by law. In the event however that any provision, sentence, or clause of
this Article is declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not affect the remaining
provisions of this Article.
ARTICLE XXXI.
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF VEHICULAR STANDING, PARKING,
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW, AND COMPLIANCE REGULATION VIOLATIONS
[Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-185-08 enacted December 8, 2008, added a new Article XXXI]
Sec. 2-720. Purpose.
The stated purpose of this article is to provide a fair and efficient enforcement of municipal vehicular
standing, parking, automated traffic law, and condition of vehicle regulation, compliance regulation violations
and municipal wheel tax licenses within the Village, as may be allowed by law, through an administrative
adjudication of violations of Village ordinances regulating the standing, parking, automated traffic law, and
condition of vehicles within the geographic boundaries of the Village of Palatine and authority and procedures
for collection of unpaid fines and penalties, and procedure for vehicle immobilization which shall be in
addition to any other system for administrative adjudication of ordinance violations. (Ord. #0-145-12, §1,
10/15/12)
Sec. 2-721. Definitions.
For purposes of this article:
1) Compliance regulation violation means a violation of a Village of Palatine regulation governing the
condition or use of equipment on a vehicle or governing the display of a municipal wheel tax license, or
zoning ordinance violation within Appendix A of the Village of Palatine Code of Ordinances, or violations
of Article 16 – Rights-of-way of the Village of Palatine Code of Ordinances. (Ord. #0-145-12, §1,
10/15/12)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-88
2) Nonresident means a person that does not reside on a permanent or temporary basis within the corporate
limits of the Village of Palatine, Cook County, Illinois or a business or corporation that does not have an
office in or license to do business within the Village of Palatine, Cook County, Illinois.
Sec. 2-722 Administrative composition.
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking, automated traffic law, and
compliance regulation violations shall provide for a traffic compliance administrator, hearing officer, computer
operator/system coordinator and hearing room personnel, all with the power and authority, subject to the
limitations, as are hereinafter set forth:
1) Traffic compliance administrator and/or Village of Palatine Administrative Hearing Division. The traffic
compliance administrator and/or Village of Palatine Administrative Hearing Division shall be empowered
and is hereby authorized and directed to:
(Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
a) Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violations.
b) Adopt, distribute and process standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation notices and other
notices as may be required under this article or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose
of this article. (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
c) Collect moneys paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final determination of vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violations liability.
d) Certify copies of final determinations of vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation
violation liability and factual reports verifying that the final determination of liability was issued in
accordance with this article and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3.
e) Review final determinations of vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violations
liability, validity of notices of impending impoundment and/or validity of notices of impending drivers
license suspension, in accordance with the provisions of this article, hereinafter set forth.
f) Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably necessary to operate and maintain the administrative
adjudication system hereby created.
g) Collect unpaid fines and penalties and authorize the Village attorney or prosecutor, or their designee,
to file complaints in the circuit court of Cook County on behalf of the Village of Palatine for the
purpose of seeking judgments for unpaid fines or penalties and pursue all post-judgment remedies
available by current law on behalf of the Village.
h) Recommend to the Village council selection or appointment of an individual, agency or firm to tow
and impound vehicles in accordance with the provisions of this article.
2) Hearing officer shall be empowered and is hereby authorized and directed to:
a) Preside over the administrative hearings, established herein, as the adjudicator.
b) Administer oaths.
c) Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and production of relevant papers or
documentation.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-89
d) Assess fines and penalties for the violation of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violations as set forth in this Code provided no fine shall exceed $250.00 per violation, exclusive of
costs excepting as such fines may be otherwise stipulated in the Village of Palatine Code of
Ordinances. (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
e) Make final determinations of:
(1) Vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation violation liability,
(2) Validity of notice of impending impoundment, and
(3) Validity of notice of impending drivers license suspension in accordance with the provisions
of this article.
(4) Provide for the accurate recordation of the administrative adjudication hearings.
3) System coordinator/computer operator. The system coordinator/ computer operator is hereby authorized
and directed to operate and maintain the computer programs for the administrative adjudication system
hereby created, on a day-to-day basis, including but not limited to:
a) Input of violation notice information.
b) Issuance of hearing dates and other required notice dates.
c) Fine and penalty assessments and payment(s).
d) Issuance of payment receipts.
e) Issuance of succeeding notices of Hearing dates, final determinations of liability, notices of impending
impoundment, and notices of impending drivers license suspension, as directed by the traffic
compliance administrator as hereinafter set forth.
f) Keeping of accurate records of appearances and non-appearances at administrative hearings, pleas
entered, and fines and penalties assessed and paid.
4) Hearing room personnel. The hearing room personnel shall:
a) Maintain hearing room decorum.
b) Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of the Circuit Court of Cook County.
c) Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and as directed by the hearing officer
or traffic compliance administrator.
Sec. 2-723. Appointments
1) All adjudicatory hearings shall be presided over by a Hearing Officer who shall be appointed by the
Village Mayor with the consent of the Village Council.
2) All other positions shall either be an employee of the Village of Palatine appointed by the Village
Manager, or an independent contractor or agency contracted by the Village to perform such duties as
enumerated above.
Sec. 2-724. Compensation of Administrative Hearing Division Personnel
Authorization for compensation for each of the above-stated positions shall be made by the Village
Council through the annual budget process. Compensation shall be determined by the Village Manager within
approved budget limitations.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-90
Sec. 2-725. Procedure.
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking, automated traffic law, and
compliance regulation violations shall be in accordance with the following procedures and final determinations
of vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violations liability, validity of notice of impending
impoundment, validity of notice of impending drivers license suspension, impoundment of vehicles and
collections shall be made only in accordance with the provisions set forth below:
1) Violation notice. Vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation notices ("violation
notice") shall be issued by the persons authorized herein and shall contain information and shall be served,
certified, and have evidentiary admissibility as is hereinafter set forth.
a) Authorization. All full-time and part-time, commissioned police officers, auxiliary police officers and
community service officers, as well as other specifically appointed Village of Palatine employees or
individuals shall have the authority to issue violation notices. (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
b) Detection of violations. Any individual authorized hereby to issue violation notices and who detects a
violation of any section of any applicable Village Ordinance, shall issue a notice of violation thereof
and shall make service thereof as is hereinafter set forth.
2) The vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation "violation notice" shall contain, but
shall not be limited to, the following information: (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
a) The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).
b) The particular vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violated, including the Village
Code section of the violation and sufficient description of the violation to inform the violator of the
offense and thereby afford the violator an opportunity to defend against the violation.
c) The fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment.
d) The signature and identification or badge number of the person issuing the notice.
e) A section entitled "request for hearing" which shall clearly set forth that the party named on the
violation including the property owner, or registered owner, tenant, lessee, contractor, or lessee of the
vehicle may request an opportunity for a hearing. (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
3) Service of the violation notice shall be made by the person issuing such notice by:
a) Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to a violating vehicle, or
b) Handing the notice to the property owner, registered owner, tenant, lessee, contractor, tenant operator
or lessee of the vehicle, if present. (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
c) Mailing the violation by standard mail to the property owner, or registered owner, tenant, lessee,
contractor or lessee of the vehicle. (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
4) The correctness of facts contained in the vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation
notice shall be certified by the person issuing said notice by signing his/her name to the notice at the time
of service; or
5) The original, facsimile or electronic copy of the violation notice shall be retained by the traffic compliance
administrator and/or Village of Palatine Administrative Hearing Division and kept as a record in the
ordinary course of business. (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-91
6) Prima facie evidence of correctness. Any violation notice issued, signed and properly served in accordance
with this section, or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of
the correctness of the facts shown on the notice. The violation notice or a copy of the notice shall be
admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding.
Sec. 2-726. Request of Hearing Procedure.
The party named on the violation, including the property owner, registered owner, tenant, lessee,
contractor, or other registered owner or lessee of a vehicle who have been served vehicular standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation notices may contest the alleged violation on its merits in person or may
contest the validity without personally appearing at an administrative hearing within 14 days of the issue date
of violation notice. (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
The Administrative Hearing Division or System coordinator/computer operator shall provide the
registered owner, property owner, tenant, lessee, contractor, or lessee of a vehicle cited in the violation notice
requesting a hearing with the following: (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
1) In-Person Administrative Hearing Option
a) The date, time and place of an administrative hearing at which the violation may be contested on its
merits.
b) That payment of the indicated fine and any late payment penalty shall operate as a final disposition of
the violation.
c) The request of hearing shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance administrator
and/or Village of Palatine Administrative Hearing Division. (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
2) Mail-In Administrative Hearing Option
a) Signing a Mail-In Administrative Hearing Option request form and acknowledging that their personal
appearance is waived and that they submit to an adjudication based upon the notarized statement filed
by them and the facts contained in the violation notice; and
b) Filing the Mail-In Administrative Hearing Option request form fully completed with the traffic
compliance administrator and/or Village of Palatine Administrative Hearing Division postmarked
within ten days of requesting a Mail-In Administrative Hearing. The request shall be deemed filed
upon receipt by the traffic compliance administrator and/or Village of Palatine Administrative Hearing
Division. (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
c) The hearing officer shall make an adjudication based upon a review of the facts set forth in the
notarized statement of facts filed by the party requesting the hearing, as well as, the factual allegations
contained in the violation notice. (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
d) Notice of the hearing officer's determination shall be served upon the party requesting the hearing, as
well as, the registered owner or lessee of a vehicle by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
registered owner or lessee of a vehicle at the address set forth in the statement of facts submitted and
service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is placed in the United States mail. (Ord.
#0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-92
Sec. 2-727. Administrative hearings.
The administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation on
its merits:
1) Shall be granted to the registered owner, property owner, tenant, lessee, contractor, or other registered
owner or operator of the "cited vehicle," pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 or the lessee of the "cited
vehicle," pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-1306, incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. #0-145-12, §1,
10/15/12)
2) Hearings shall be at the date, time and place as is set forth in Section 2-276 of this article.
3) Shall be tape recorded or recorded by a certified court reporter.
4) Shall result in a determination of liability or nonliability, made by the hearing officer, who shall consider
testimony and other evidence without the application of the formal or technical rules of evidence. The
hearing officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and penalties in accordance with
Village Code of Ordinances.
5) Persons appearing to contest the alleged standing parking, or compliance regulation violation on its merits
may be represented by counsel at their own expense. (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
6) Judicial review. The final determination of any matter which may be decided by the hearing officer may be
reviewed pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Review Act (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.).
Sec. 2-728. Additional notices.
1) If the registered owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle" fails to appear at the administrative hearing on the
date as is set forth in Section 2-276 of this article, the traffic compliance administrator and/or Village of
Palatine Administrative Hearing Division shall send or cause to be sent additional notices which:
a) Shall be sent to registered owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle," or the party who requested the
hearing, or the registered owner, property owner, tenant, lessee, contractor, or other registered owner
where the ordinance violation occurred, or at the address as is recorded with the Secretary of State or
to the lessee of the "cited vehicle" at the address last known to the lessor of the "cited vehicle" at the
time of the lease or the last best known address of the party. (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
2) All such additional notices shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, and service of additional
notices shall be complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
3) The additional notices sent pursuant to this section shall be in the following sequence and shall at a
minimum contain the following information:
a) Upon the failure of the party who requested the hearing to appear at the hearing set forth in Section 2-
276 of this article additional notices shall be sent and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following
information: (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-93
i) Date and location of violation cited in the vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation notice;
ii) Particular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violated, including code section and
description of violation sufficient to allow owner or lessee to understand the offense and to
prepare a defense;
iii) Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment;
iv) Notice to the registered owner or property owner, tenant, lessee, contractor, or other registered
owner where the ordinance violation occurred, or lessee of the current status, other than paid in
full; (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
v) Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the owner, registered owner, or
property owner, business owner, contractor, tenant, lessee, or other registered owner or lessee may
contest the violation notice on its merits; (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
vi) Failure to either pay fine and any applicable late payment penalty or failure to appear at the
hearing on its merits on the date and at the time and place specified will result in a final
determination of violation liability in the amount of the fine and late payment penalty indicated;
and
vii) Statement that upon the entry of a final determination of liability for the failure to appear, or the
failure to exhaust available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any remaining unpaid
fine and/or late payment penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the Village of Palatine.
4) A notice of final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation liability
shall be sent following a final determination of liability and the conclusion of administrative review and
judicial review procedures as hereinafter set forth. The notice shall state that:
a) The unpaid fine and any late penalty assessed is a debt due and owing the Village of Palatine;
b) A warning that failure to pay the fine and any late penalty due and owing the Village within the time
specified may result in the Village filing a complaint in the circuit court to have the unpaid fine or
penalty rendered a judgment in accordance with Illinois law including 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(f); and
(Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
c) The vehicle may be impounded for failure to pay fines or penalties after a final determination of
liability for five or more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violations, or drivers
license suspension for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten or more such violations.
Sec. 2-729. Final determination of liability.
A final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation liability shall:
1) Occur following the failure to pay the total assessed fine and/or penalty after the hearing officer's
determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation liability and the
exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth; or
2) Where a person fails to appear at a prior hearing or by the third and final administrative hearing (provided
proper notice has been given), the hearing officer's determination of liability shall become final:
a) Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside the determination of liability; or
b) Upon the expiration of the period for filing petition to set aside a final determination of liability
without such filing having been made.
3) When a person fails to request a hearing or fails to pay the fine in conformance with the time frame
specified on the violation.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-94
Sec. 2-730. Schedule of fines/penalties.
1) The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for the violation of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation shall be as set forth in Village Code of Ordinances and the fines and
penalties therein set forth shall be uniformly applied for each violation of any applicable Village Code of
Ordinances.
Sec. 2-731. Illinois Compiled Statues governing the standing, parking, or condition of vehicles--
Adopted.
The Village of Palatine adopts by reference all current and future provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statues
governing the standing, parking, or condition of vehicles, for its enforcement and adjudication within the
corporate boundaries of the Village and in those areas subject to off-street parking agreements, as well as, those
sections allowing for the administrative adjudication or municipal code violations.. (Ord. #0-145-12, §1,
10/15/12)
Sec. 2-732. Immobilization/towing and impoundment.
Any motor vehicle may be immobilized or towed and impounded if:
1) The traffic compliance administrator has determined that a person has been found to be liable for five or
more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violations, the fines and penalties for which
remain unpaid,
2) The person determined to be liable for the five or more violations is the registered owner of a motor
vehicle that is located within the corporate limits of the Village of Palatine at the time of immobilization,
impoundment or towing; and
3) A pretowing notice has been sent to the registered owner of the motor vehicle which notice contains the
following:
a) Final determinations of liability have been made on five or more vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violations, the fines and penalties for which remain unpaid;
b) A list of the violations for which the person has been determined to be liable, which shall include for
each violation:
i) The vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation notice number.
ii) Date of issuance.
iii) Total amount of fine and penalty assessed.
iv) The motor vehicles owned by the person and located within the Village is subject to
immobilization and/or towing and impoundment if the fines and penalties are not paid within 14
days of the date of the notice.
v) The registered owner may contest the validity of the notice by fully completing and signing the
"request for hearing" portion of one notice and by filing the request for hearing with the traffic
compliance administrator within, but not later than 14 days of the date of the notice.
vi) The request for hearing shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance administrator.
4) The motor vehicle of the registered owner to whom notice is sent has failed to make payment of the fines
or penalties as specified in the notice and no timely request for hearing has been filed with the traffic
compliance administrator to contest the validity of the notice.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-95
Sec. 2-733 Impoundment or pretowing hearing.
Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity of the notice of impending
immobilization or towing and impoundment, the traffic compliance administrator shall schedule an
administrative hearing whereby the registered owner of the vehicle may contest the validity of said notice, by
disproving liability for the unpaid Final Determinations of liability listed on the notice. The hearing shall be
scheduled on the next available hearing date, if practicable, but in no event shall the hearing be scheduled later
than 60 days after the request for hearing is filed.
1) The traffic compliance administrator shall serve notice of the hearing date upon the registered owner by
first class mail, postage prepaid to the address on the request for hearing; and
2) Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed in the United States mail.
Sec. 2-734. Posttowing hearing.
The registered owner of a vehicle already immobilized or towed and impounded pursuant to this
section, shall have the right to a prompt administrative hearing without the requirement of payment of the
outstanding fines and penalties for which final determination has been made.
1) The traffic compliance administrator shall serve a posttowing hearing notice upon the registered owner of a
vehicle immobilized or towed and impounded and the notice shall contain the following information:
a) Date of immobilization or towing and date of impoundment.
b) Location of vehicle.
c) That the vehicle was immobilized under this section of the Village Code of Ordinances for
nonpayment of fines or penalties assessed for five or more violations of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulations violations for which there has been a final determination of liability and for
which the owner was previously notified of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment.
d) Date of notice of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment.
e) The registered owner may contest the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment by
completing and signing the "request for hearing" portion of the notice and filing the request for
hearing with the traffic compliance administrator within 14 days of the date of the notice.
2) Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity of the immobilization or towing and
impoundment, the traffic compliance administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest the
validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment on the next available hearing date, if
practicable, or sooner if scheduled by the traffic compliance administrator for good cause shown, but in no
case shall the hearing be scheduled later than 60 days after the request for hearing is filed.
a) The traffic compliance administrator shall serve notice of the hearing date upon the registered owner.
b) Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid to the address as is set forth on the request for
hearing and service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed in the United States mail.
3) An order entered after the hearing to contest the validity of the immobilization or towing and
impoundment is a final administrative decision within the meaning of 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-96
Sec. 2-735. Release of impounded vehicle.
A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall be released to its registered owner or agent, upon
payment of the fines and penalties due and owing the Village as specified in the notice plus the payment of
towing charges and accrued daily impound charges. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a vehicle may be released
upon written order of the hearing officer following a hearing contesting the validity of the impoundment.
Sec. 2-736 Impoundment facility.
The Village shall retain the services of an individual agency or company to tow and impound vehicles
and such agency or company shall be:
1) Fully licensed according to local and state law;
2) Fully insured; and
3) Have available a secured impound area within which to retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For the
purpose of this section a secured area shall mean an area bounded by a fence, chain-link or otherwise, of a
sufficient height and with locking gates so as to minimize or prevent unauthorized entry into the
impounded vehicles.
Sec. 2-737 Judicial review.
Judicial review of final determinations of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violations and final administrative decisions issued after hearings regarding vehicle immobilization or towing
and impoundment made under this section shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the
Administrative Review Act, 735 ILCS 5/301, et seq.
Sec. 2-738. Debt to municipality.
Any fine or penalty assessed in accordance with the provisions of this article and remaining unpaid
after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, administrative remedies and the conclusion of any judicial
review procedures shall be a debt due and owing the Village and such debt may be collected in accordance
with the applicable law. Payment in full of any fine or penalty shall constitute a final disposition of that
violation.
Sec. 2-739. Judgment.
1) The traffic compliance administrator and/or Village of Palatine Administrative Hearing Division shall,
following the expiration of the period within which administrative or judicial review may be sought for a
final determination of violation, take all necessary action, execute all required documents and direct the
Village attorney or Village prosecutor to obtain a judgment against and collect moneys from the person
who has been assessed fines or penalties which remain unpaid and have become a debt due and owing the
Village by: (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION
2-97
a) Filing a complaint in the Circuit Court of Cook County praying for the entry of a judgment against the
person(s) for whom a final determination of liability has been made.
b) The complaint filed on behalf of the Village shall have appended:
i) A certified copy of a final determination of the standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violations, and
ii) A certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the final determination of standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violations were issued in accordance with this article and/or 625
ILCS 5/11-208.3.
c) Nothing herein shall prevent the Village from consolidating multiple final determinations of standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violations liability in an action against an individual.
2) Service of summons and a copy of the complaint may be served upon the person against whom a judgment
is sought under the provisions of this section by any method provided under 735 ILCS 5/2-203, or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, provided the total amount of fines and penalties levied does not
exceed $2,500.00, excepting as such fines may be otherwise stipulated in the Village of Palatine Code of
Ordinances. (Ord. #0-145-12, §1, 10/15/12)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-1
Chapter 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
----------
State law reference(s)--Liquor Control Act of January 31, 1934, 235ILCS5; for provisions relating to
local control see 235ILCS5/4-1 et seq.
----------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-73-06, replaced Chapter 3 in its entirety. This Ordinance was passed on April 17,
2006, with an effective date of June 1, 2006.
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-34-12, approved on March 19, 2012, replaced Chapter 3 in its entirety.
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-11-17, approved on February 21, 2017, replaced Chapter 3 in its entirety.
Editor’s Note: Ordinance O-19-19, approved March 11,2019, replaced Chapter 3 in its entirety.
_______
Art. I. In General, §§ 3-1--3-25
Art. II. Licenses, §§ 3-26--3-48
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 3-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless their
context clearly requires otherwise; provided that, any terms used in this chapter which are not defined herein
shall have the meaning as provided in the Liquor Control Act, 235 ILCS 5/1-1:
Alcohol means the product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted,
whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol
or wood alcohol.
Alcoholic Liquor means any alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, or other liquid containing more than one-half
of one per cent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being.
Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquor or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits,
wine or beer, and in the judgment of the Commission, capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human
being.
Beer means a beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley,
or other grain, malt, and hops in water, and includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and
the like.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-2
Club means a corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the
promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and
maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or
space in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and
comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate
kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants and employees
for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and their guests; provided that such club
files with the local liquor control commission at the time of its application for a license under this article two
(2) copies of a list of names and residences of its members, and similarly files within ten (10) days of the
election of any additional member his name and address; and, provided further, that its affairs and management
are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at their
annual meeting; and that no member or any officer, agent, or employee of the club is paid, or directly or
indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the distribution or sale of
alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount
of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or
other governing body out of the general revenue of the club.
Commission means Palatine Local Liquor Control Commission.
Committee means the Palatine Local Liquor Control Hearing Committee, which shall consist of 3
members appointed by the Commission and may include ex officio members who may be any member of the
Commission.
Corporation means any corporate, domestic or foreign, qualified to do business in the state of Illinois
under the Business Corporation Act of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, including a limited liability company as
defined in said Act.
Keg means any original package container capable of holding more than three gallons of beer.
Licensee means any person issued a license under this chapter.
Limited Liability Company means a legal business entity created and recognized under the Illinois
Liability Company Act of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
Live Entertainment shall be defined pursuant to Chapter 11, Licenses, Permits and Business
Regulations. (Ord. #0-1-10, §1, 1/11/10)
Manager or Agent means any individual of a licensed place of business provided the individual possesses the
same qualifications required of the licensee. Satisfactory evidence of such employment shall be furnished to
the Commission in the form and manner as the Commission shall, from time to time, prescribe.
Manufacturer shall include every person who, in the process of filling or re-filling an original package
with alcoholic liquors purchased by such person, changes the degree or quality of such alcoholic liquors by any
manner or means whosoever.
Microbrewery, Any public place or establishment that engages in the production, manufacturing, or
brewing of beer on the premises by means of adequate and sanitary equipment designed and maintained to
facilitate the brewing process and dispenses that beer produced on the premises for consumption on the
premises and packaged for retail sale.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-3
Peddling shall be defined pursuant to Chapter 11 Article VI. Solicitors
Person includes a corporation, co-partnership(s), association(s), club(s), individual(s), trustee(s),
receiver(s), assignee(s), executor(s), administrator(s), or other personal representatives of decedent(s).
Premises or Place of Business, as used in this chapter, means the place or location where alcoholic
beverages are manufactured, stored, displayed or offered for sale, or where drinks containing alcoholic
beverages are mixed, concocted and served for consumption including the interior of the building, sidewalks,
streets, parking areas and grounds adjacent to any such place or location or any other area within the control of
the licensee.
Retail sale means the sale for use or consumption, and not for resale in any form.
Sale of Keg means any sale of beer in a keg, even though the keg is to be returned by the purchaser to
the seller.
Spirits means any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other
substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors
when rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a
place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping
accommodations, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment
and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and
serve suitable food for its guests.
Wine means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits, or
vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as
above defined.
Sec. 3-2. Local liquor control commission - duties generally.
The Mayor and Village Council of the Village shall be the local liquor control commission of the
Village. The Mayor shall serve as the Chairman of the local liquor control commission. The local liquor
control commission is charged with the administration of the Liquor Control Act 235 ILCS 5, and or such
ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted by the Village. The local liquor
control commission may appoint a person or persons to assist them in the exercise of the powers and
performance of the duties herein provided for the local liquor control commission.
Sec. 3-3. Same--Right of entry.
The local liquor control commission hereby is given the power to enter or to authorize any lawenforcing
officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of this chapter, the Liquor Control Act 235 ILCS 5, or any rules or regulations adopted by them or
by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine the
premises of said license in connection therewith.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-4
Sec. 3-4. Public indecency.
(a) No person who is the owner or occupant of any premises open to the public shall permit on the
premises any person to:
(1) Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum and anal region or pubic hair
region; or
(2) Expose any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the
genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
(3) Expose any portion of the female breasts at or below the areola thereof, or
(4) Commit an act which constitutes public indecency under Section 12-6 hereof.
(b) No person holding a liquor license under this chapter shall permit any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent, entertainer or employee of such licensee to:
(1) Solicit, induce or request any patron of the licensed establishment to purchase any alcoholic
or nonalcoholic beverage for himself or any other employee of the licensed establishment;
or
(2) Knowingly serve any employee any alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage which was purchased
by any patron; or
(3) Allow any employee, entertainer or other agent of the license to remain on the premises of the
licensed establishment who solicits, induces or requests a patron to purchase an alcoholic or
nonalcoholic beverage for any employee.
Sec. 3-5. Peddling prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the Village.
Sec. 3-6. Condition of premises.
All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for such sale,
shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be kept in full compliance with the ordinances
regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption.
Sec. 3-7. Employees.
It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person
who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of, any contagious, infectious disease; except to the extent that denial
of employment on such ground would be a violation of state or federal law, and it shall be unlawful for any
person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such disease to work in or about any such premises or to engage
in any way in the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor.
Sec. 3-8. Restricted areas.
It is hereby determined that the following described portions of the Village are predominately
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-5
residential in character: all of the area of the Village except that portion now zoned as manufacturing zones,
business zones or which hereafter may be zoned as business or manufacturing zones.
Sec. 3-9. Location restrictions.
(a) No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of any
church, school other than an institution of higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for
veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval station, provided, that this prohibition shall not
apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other
places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on; nor to the renewal of a license
for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within 100 feet of any church or school where the church or
school has been established within such 100 feet since the issuance of the original license. In the case of a
church, the distance of 100 feet shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship services
or educational programs and not to property boundaries.
(b) For purposes of this Section, a "banquet facility" is any part of a building that caters to private
parties and where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business. Nothing in this Section shall
prohibit the issuance of a license to a church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales
are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of some common
object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors.
Sec. 3-10. Promotional restrictions; happy hours prohibited.
All promotions and/or happy hour periods shall be conducted in accordance with Illinois State law.
(a) A violation of this section shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the retailer's license as
provided by section 3-44.
Sec. 3-11. Premises to be in full view and lighted.
In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the premises or package
sales is licensed, (other than as a restaurant, hotel or club) no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing
shall be permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside such premises which
shall substantially prevent a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises from the street, road or
sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen, partition, or other obstruction nor any arrangement of lights or
lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such licensed premises which shall prevent a full view of
the entire interior of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk, and said premises must be so located that
there shall be a full view of the entire interior of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk. All rooms
where liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises shall be continuously lighted during business hours by
natural light or artificial white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In
case the view into any such licensed premises required by the foregoing provisions shall be obscured by the
licensee or by him suffered to be obscured or in any manner obstructed, then such license shall be subject to
suspension or revocation in the manner herein provided. In order to enforce the provisions of this section, the
local liquor control commission shall have the right to require the filing with them of plans, drawings and
photographs showing the clearance of the view as above required.
(Ord. No. 0-146-10, §1, 12/6/10)
Sec. 3-12. Persons under the age of twenty-one.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person within the Village to sell alcoholic liquor to any person under
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-6
the age of twenty-one (21) years, for the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any licensee, or his
agent, or employee, may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce not
less than two (2) forms of adequate written evidence of identity, at least one of which shall evidence the fact
that he or she is over the age of twenty-one (21) years, and it shall be presumed that any licensee, or his agent,
or employee, who does not require at least two (2) such forms of identification has failed to require adequate
evidence of age and identity. Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is a document issued
by a federal, state, county or municipal government, or subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not
limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal Selective
Service Act, or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to purchase or obtain any
alcoholic liquor in any tavern or other place in the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to misrepresent his or her
age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any tavern or other place in the Village
where alcoholic liquor is sold.
(4) Any place in the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold there shall be displayed at all times in a
prominent place a printed card which shall be displayed and which shall read substantially as follows:
"Warning to persons under the age of twenty-one,
You are subject to a fine up to one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) under the Code of
Ordinances of the Village of Palatine if you are under the age of twenty-one (21) and you purchase alcoholic
liquor, or misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor."
(5) It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor dealers license, or its agent or employee, to
suffer or permit any person, including agents and employees, under the age of twenty-one (21) years to be or
remain in any room or place where such licensed premises is located at any time such premises is open for
business and while alcoholic beverages are being served or are permitted to be served; provided that this
paragraph shall not apply to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years who is accompanied by his or
her parent or guardian, or to any licensed premises which derives its principal business from the sale or service
of other commodities than alcoholic liquor.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to serve or sell liquor in
establishments where alcoholic liquor is sold and it shall be unlawful for the holder of a retail dealer's license,
his agent or employee, to suffer or permit any such person to serve or sell alcoholic liquor of any kind, except
as permitted pursuant to the holder liquor license classification.
(7) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to carry, transport,
consume, or to have in such person's possession any alcoholic liquor anywhere in the Village; provided
however that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any person under the age of twenty-one (21) from
carrying, transporting or possessing sealed alcoholic liquor when the carrying, transporting or possession shall
be directly related to said person's employment by a transport or trucking company engaged in the cartage,
delivery, or storage of alcoholic liquor for hire.
(8) It shall be unlawful for any person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, to sell,
give or otherwise deliver such alcoholic liquor to any other person under the age of 21 years except in the
performance of a religious ceremony or service.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-7
(9) In addition to all other fines and penalties, the local liquor control commission may suspend or
revoke the retail dealer's license for any violation of this section.
(10) It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any minor child of which he may be
parent or guardian to violate any provision of this section.
(11) Notwithstanding anything hereinabove to the contrary, the Village hereby adopts the provisions of
Section 6-16.1 of the State Liquor Code (235 ILCS 5/6-16.1) which allows the Palatine Liquor Control
Commission to employ or direct a “person under 21 years” of age to assist in investigations of possible sale to
minors.
Sec. 3-13. Sale to intoxicated persons.
It shall be unlawful for the holder of an alcoholic liquor dealer's license to sell, deliver or give any
alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated person
Sec. 3-14. Gambling prohibited.
There shall be no card games or gambling allowed on any premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor
unless otherwise exempted by law.
Sec. 3-15. Transporting of alcoholic liquor into restaurant prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring, carry, transport or otherwise convey alcoholic liquor into a
restaurant establishment or other eating establishment for purposes of consumption in such restaurant or other
eating establishment, whether or not consumed with a meal, and regardless of whether such restaurant or other
eating establishment has been issued a liquor license. Nothing herein shall prevent the bringing in, carrying, or
transporting of alcoholic liquor into a restaurant or other eating establishment in connection with the holding of
a private party, with the permission of the owner or manager of said establishment, if otherwise authorized
pursuant to the provisions of this Code.
Sec. 3-16. Complaint of violation.
Any resident of the Village shall have the right to file a complaint with the local liquor control
commission that any licensee has been or is violating the provisions of this chapter or the rules or regulations
issued pursuant thereto. Such complaint shall be in writing and shall be signed and sworn to by the parties
complaining. The complaint shall state the particular provisions, rule or regulation believed to have been
violated and the facts in detail upon which belief is based. If the local liquor control commission is satisfied
that the complaint substantially charges a violation, it shall set the matter for hearing and shall serve notice
upon the licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charges in the complaint in the
manner hereinafter provided.
Sec. 3-17. Transportation of alcoholic liquor.
No person within the Village shall transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic beverage within the
passenger area of any motor vehicle except in the original package and with the seal unbroken.
Sec. 3-18. Sale of alcoholic liquor from drive-up windows, in drive-through facilities or to persons
within the passenger areas of motor vehicles; penalty.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-8
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, retail licensee or employee or agent of such licensee to sell or
deliver alcoholic liquor, including, but not limited to, the sale or delivery of alcoholic beverage in the original
package with the seal unbroken and alcoholic beverage in a glass or cup:
(1) From a drive-up window or in a drive-up manner;
(2) From a drive-through facility; or
(3) To a person within the passenger area of a motor vehicle.
Nothing herein shall prevent the person or licensee from assisting in loading a vehicle where the sale was
otherwise consummated in compliance with Village ordinances.
Sec. 3-19. Penalty.
Except as may be imposed pursuant to Section 3-44, any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) nor more than
one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Sec. 3-20. Sale of Kegs
A licensee who sells a keg shall keep a logbook of all kegs sold showing the purchaser's name, address,
telephone number, driver's license/state identification number, date of birth, and signature. The logbook shall
be available for inspections by the Village Police Department during normal business hours.
Secs. 3-21-3-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. LICENSES
Sec. 3-26. Required.
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, in the Village any alcoholic liquor either without a
valid retail liquor dealer's license, or other than as is specifically permitted in the terms of such a license.
It shall be unlawful to serve, deliver, or to permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor on any premises
for which a retail liquor dealer's license is required, other than as is specifically permitted in the terms of such a
license.
No licensee under this Code shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages outside the licensed premises.
Sec. 3-27. Alcoholic beverage seller and server permit required.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any liquor license holder to employ any person that has not obtained a
permit to sell or serve alcoholic beverages pursuant to the granted liquor license requirements in Section 3-35.
(b) A permit shall be issued by the Village Manager or his designee to such applicant upon proof of
completion of a state-certified beverage alcohol sellers and servers educational and training (BASSET)
program meeting the minimum curriculum requirements of the Department of Human Services (DASA) 77
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-9
Adm. Code 3500.101 et seq. or its equivalent (to be determined by the Palatine Police Department) and upon
receipt from the Police Department of a background check of the applicant. The Village Manager or his
designee shall prepare an appropriate form which all such applicants must fill out.
(c) No permit shall be issued to:
(1) A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any
other state or of the United States, unless the Village Manager determines that such person
has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering matters set
forth in such person’s application and the Village Manager’s investigation. The burden of
proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant.
(2) A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is keeping a house of ill repute;
(3) A person who has been convicted of pandering; and
(4) A person whose permit issued under this Code has been revoked for a cause.
(d) The Village Manager or his designee shall issue to the applicant a permit. A facsimile of such
permit is to be kept on the premises of the employer at all times.
(e) New employees or managers of an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages are required to
secure a permit from the Village Manager within thirty (30) days from the beginning of their employment.
Until receipt of such a permit, the new employee or manager shall work under the supervision of a person who
has been licensed by the Village.
(f) All employees and managers who have not yet obtained a permit from the Village Manager or his
designee must register with the Police Department within 72 hour upon becoming employed at such an
establishment. To register, such individual shall obtain from the Police Department a registration card. The
employee registration card will expire thirty (30) days from the date of issuance at which time the employee
must have completed a BASSET or equivalent program approved by the Police Department.
(g) Each permit shall be valid for three (3) years from the date of issuance. Renewal licenses shall be
issued upon completion of the background check by the Police Department.
(h) The fee for such permit or renewal permit shall be as provided for in the Fee Supplement
Ordinance. The Village Manager shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such permit issued.
Sec. 3-28. Applications.
No application for a liquor license may be considered by the Palatine Liquor Commission unless the
number of licenses authorized under section 3-33 of this Code for the class of liquor license for which such
application is made is greater than the number of such licenses then issued and outstanding, except that a
person or persons holding a signed contract to purchase an already licensed establishment may make
application for a license of the same class regardless of the number of licenses issued and outstanding. A copy
of the contract to purchase must accompany such application.
All applications for liquor licenses shall be made to the local liquor control commission in writing,
signed by the applicant, if an individual, by all the partners, if a partnership, or by a duly authorized officer
thereof, if a club or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, accompanied by a non-refundable two hundred
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-10
fifty dollar ($250.00) filing fee and shall contain the following information and statements:
(Ord. O-19-19, 3/11/19)
(1) The name, age and residence address of the applicant, if an individual or in the case of a
copartner, of each person entitled to share in the profits thereof and, in the case of a
corporation for profit or a club, the date and state of incorporation, the objects for which
organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and the name and address of
each stockholder owning in the aggregate more than five (5) per cent of the total issued and
outstanding stock of such corporation;
(2) The same information in regard to the manager or agent, if any, by whom such business will
be conducted;
(3) The citizenship of each person mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this section, his place of
birth and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization;
(4) The type of business then conducted by the applicant and his co-partners, if any, and also the
length of time that said applicant or his co-partners, if any, has been in business of that
character;
(5) The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated
under such license and that the licensee owns said premises or has a lease thereon for the full
terms for which the license is requested.
(6) A statement whether applicant, his co-partners, if any, corporation or club has made
application for a liquor license on premises other than described in said application, and the
disposition thereof.
(7) The name and address of the landlord if the premises are leased;
(8) A statement that applicant and each of his co-partners, if any, have never been convicted of a
felony and are not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained
in this Code, laws of this state, or other ordinances of this Village.
(9) Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government
has been revoked, and the reasons therefor;
(10) A statement whether the applicant and each of his co-partners have ever owned and/or
operated another liquor licensed establishment that has ever had any violations related to the
liquor license.
(11) A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state or of the United
States, or any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the Village in the conduct of his
business.
(12) All applicants for Class "E" licenses shall submit concurrently with the filing of their license
application a layout of the premises wherein alcoholic liquor service will be provided,
including a detailed sketch of screening or other physical barriers to be placed around the
serving area.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-11
(13) Certificate of Dram Shop insurance evidencing coverage for the full term of the Palatine
Liquor License in compliance with the following.
a. The certificate shall insure the applicant and the owner or lessor of the premises for
not less than the amount in this section $500,000.00 per occurrence.
b. The Village of Palatine shall be named as an additional insured on the policy of
comprehensive general liability insurance.
c. Such certificate shall also on its face name the Village of Palatine as a certificate
holder and provide that the Village of Palatine shall be entitled to thirty (30) days
advance written notice of cancellation before expiration of such policy.
d. Said coverage shall be from an insurer licensed to do business in the State of Illinois
and shall be kept current at all times. Licensees shall have certificates of insurance
immediately provided to the Village at the time or renewal and/or within ten (10)
days of the date when at such time as a change in insurance carriers occurs. Upon
request of the Village, a Licensee shall provide evidence of current coverage at times
other than initial application and renewal. All required insurance shall be required to
provide coverage for the Premises and Building where a liquor license is maintained,
and also to any Permitted Area for any Sale of Alcoholic Liquors (including any
outdoor seating area or the area where any Outdoor Special Event, Caterer Event,
Nonprofit Special Event or similar event is to be conducted).
A. For purposes of this Section, the required insurance shall be defined to include:
a. Dram shop insurance with policy limits at or in excess of the statutory minimum
required under Illinois law.
b. Comprehensive General Liability insurance with policy limits of not less than one
million dollars per person/per occurrence.
B. In addition to the foregoing requirements, applicant and Licensees are also required to maintain
workers compensation, automobile liability and any other insurance required under applicable
Illinois law as a condition of being eligible to obtain or maintain a liquor license. The Village may
demand proof of such coverage, in the form of a current certificate of insurance or other proof of
insurance acceptable to the Village, at any time a license is in place, or at any time while
processing a license application or renewal application.
C. Both the comprehensive general insurance policy and the dram shop insurance policy required
hereunder shall name the Village as additional primary and non-contributory insured, without
right of subrogation, and without any limiting clauses other than those which may be acceptable to
the Village. Upon request, the policy and any endorsements must be tendered to the Village.
(Ord. O-19-19, 3/11/19)
(14) Previous year’s State of Illinois Liquor License number.
(15) Any other requested information that is listed in 235 ILCS 5/7-1, or as requested by Village
Manager.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-12
(16) A statement as to whether any federal, state, county or local official or law enforcement public
official owns any interest in the applicant.
Upon issuance of a state liquor license, Licensee shall submit proof of said issuance to the Village of
Palatine within thirty (30) days of issuance of the State Liquor License. Failure to file proof of issuance of the
state license within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the Village of Palatine license shall constitute a violation
of Section 3-44(b) of this Code.
Sec. 3-28(B). Incomplete or Inaccurate Applications
(1) Applications for liquor licenses which are incomplete, inaccurate or fail to contain the statements or
information required by this Chapter shall be rejected by the Village. The Village shall issue a written
rejection of such application, setting forth the deficiencies in said application within sixty (60) days of
its receipt. Prior to such rejection, the applicant may submit the additional information or statements
required to complete such application.
(2) Administrative or legal expenses incurred in reviewing incomplete or inaccurate liquor license
applications, advising the applicant of such deficiencies, and rejecting such applications shall be paid
by the applicant exclusive of the $250.00 application fee. A bill or invoice shall be submitted to the
applicant specifying the additional administrative or legal expenses incurred in processing the
applicant’s incomplete or inaccurate liquor license application, which shall be paid by the applicant,
together with the annual license fee prior to the issuance of such license.
Sec. 3-29. Examination of applicant for local license.
The local liquor control commission shall have the right to examine, or cause to be examined, under
oath, any applicant for a local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation
or suspension has been served as provided by statute, and to examine or cause to be examined the books and
records of any such applicant or licensee, to hear testimony and take proofs for the information of the members
of the commission in the performance of their duties, and for such purpose any member of the commission may
issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the
information desired by the local liquor control commission, under this section, it may authorize its agent to act
on its behalf, as provided by statute.
Each applicant as determined by the Village Manager shall submit his or her fingerprints to the
Palatine Police Department in the form and manner prescribed by the Department of State Police or Palatine
Police Department. These fingerprints shall be checked against the fingerprint records now and hereafter filed
in the Department of State Police and Federal Bureau of Investigation criminal history records databases. The
Village shall charge a fee for conducting the criminal history records check. The Palatine Police Department
shall furnish pursuant to positive identification, records of conviction to the local liquor control commissioner.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-13
Sec. 3-30. Restrictions.
No such license shall be issued to:
(1) A person who is not a resident of the Village of Palatine;
(2) A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides or
operates a business;
(3) A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
(4) A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or of any
other state or of the United States;
(5) A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is keeping a house of ill fame;
(6) A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to
decency and morality;
(7) A person whose license issued under this Code has been revoked for a cause;
(8) A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not
be eligible for such license under a first application;
(9) A copartner, if any general partner thereof, or any limited partner thereof, owning more than
five (5) per cent of the aggregate limited partner interest in such copartner would not be
eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than residence within the Village.
(10) A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders
owning in the aggregate more than five (5) per cent of the stock thereof, would not be eligible
to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the
political subdivision;
(11) A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is
qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation Act to transact business in Illinois;
(12) A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless said manager or
agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee;
(13) A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the
manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, subsequent to January 31, 1934 or shall
have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation;
(14) A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does
not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued;
(15) Any federal, state or local law enforcing public official, any Mayor of the Village, any
member of a Village council, or any president or member of a county board; and no such
official shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or
distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that a license may be granted to such official in relation
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-14
to premises that are not located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if
the issuance of such license is approved by the State Liquor Control Commission
(16) Any person, association, or corporation not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer's license.
(17) A person who does not submit proof that all coin operated amusement devices in the
establishment have been licensed by the Village of Palatine and the fee paid. Failure to
submit said proof as required will be grounds for denying the issuance of the license or the
renewal of the same.
(18) A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee.
(19) A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any of subsections
(a) (3) through (a) (11) of Section 28-1 of, or as proscribed by Section 28-1.1 or 28-3 of, the
Criminal Code of 1961, or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory
provisions.
(20) A person or entity to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal
government, unless the person or entity is eligible to be issued a license under Illinois State
Law.
(21) A person or corporation that has outstanding, past due financial obligations owed to the
Village, including but not limited to fines, fees, utility charges and property taxes.
(22) Any person or entity where the owner of the proposed licensed premises or any person from
whom the licensee derives the right of possession of such premises or the agent or corporate
officer of such person or owner is ineligible to hold a liquor license.
In the event there is a violation of any of the foregoing restrictions by a person, corporation or
partnership holding a license or any officer, manager, director, stockholder, or partner thereof, while said
license is in effect, such license may be revoked by the local liquor control commission upon proof of such
violation established at a hearing called by the local liquor control commission in the manner hereinafter
provided.
Sec. 3-31. Conditions to the issuance of liquor licenses.
(a) All new licensees shall be required to comply with section 3-27 as a condition to the issuance of
any new liquor license. A copy of the Alcoholic Beverage Seller and Server Permit of all such employees shall
be kept on the premises of the establishment at all times and made available to the Village for inspection upon
demand. Upon request, a licensee shall provide a list of all employees which required to hold an Alcoholic
Beverage Seller and Server Permit. Included on the list shall be the employee’s date of hire and the expiration
date of the Alcoholic Beverage Seller and Server Permit. The Village Manager shall make available to the
retail dealer liquor license holder or the Alcoholic Beverage Seller and Server Permit holder a duplicate
original copy of the license.
(b) In addition to any other requirements in this Chapter or conditions associated with the type of
license obtained, the local liquor control commission may impose reasonable conditions on the issuance or
renewal of a liquor license. Such conditions may be based on the past operating history of the establishment,
the neighborhood or environs in which the establishment is located and may include additional limitations on
the hours otherwise permitted in the license classification sought by the applicant.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-15
(c) At all times when the premise is open, the licensee shall have no less than one manager or assistant
manager on duty with an alcoholic beverage seller and server permit issued by the Village.
(d) A licensed establishment shall have on file with the Liquor Commission a current site plan of the
premises indicating the location of the display, selling, and serving of alcoholic beverages, including but not
limited to bars, lounges, shelving, and registers. (Ord. No. 0-34-10, §1, 4/19/10)
Sec. 3-32. Term; prorating fee.
Each license shall terminate on June 30 next following its issuance, excepting a temporary license
provided that this section shall not affect the period of termination of any license issued before the effective
date of this article. The fee to be paid shall be reduced in proportion to the full calendar months which have
expired in the fiscal year prior to the issuance of the license.
Sec. 3-33. Failure to operate; lapse of license.
ln the event that the operation of any business for which a liquor license is granted hereunder shall
close down, terminate or cease for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days, such license shall forthwith lapse
and be of no further force, effect or validity.
The Village Manager may grant a grace period for failure to operate related to construction,
remodeling, or other circumstances deemed to be beyond the control of the liquor establishment.
Sec. 3-34. Acquisition of more than five per cent of licensee's stock; report.
Each corporation holding a liquor license and each person who shall acquire in excess of five (5) per
cent of the total issued and outstanding stock of the corporation shall report to the local liquor control
commission in writing, not less than thirty (30) days prior to such acquisition, the name and address of the
proposed stockholder together with a completed application form and disclosure statement containing the
information and statements required under section 3-28 of this Code, together with the intended date of such
acquisition.
In the event the proposed stock acquisition will result in a change of stock ownership of the
corporation of fifty (50) per cent or more of the total issued and outstanding stock of the corporation as it
existed at the time the corporation's existing license was first issued, the acquisition shall be deemed and is
hereby declared to be a transfer of the license, and if completed shall cause the license to cease and terminate
unless, prior to such completion, an application for a new license if filed with, and a new liquor license is
issued by, the local liquor control commission.
In the event the proposed stock acquisition will result in a change of stock ownership of the
corporation in an amount less than fifty (50) per cent of the total issued and outstanding stock of the
corporation as it existed at the time the corporation's existing license was first issued, following receipt of such
application and disclosure statement, the local liquor control commission shall have the same rights with
respect to the proposed stockholder as are set forth in section 3-29 of this Code. On or before the expiration of
the aforesaid thirty-day period, the local liquor control commission shall complete their review of the
qualifications of the proposed stockholder and advise the proposed stockholder and the corporation in writing
as to whether they have determined that any grounds exist for revocation of the corporation's liquor license in
the event the proposed transfer is consummated.
Failure to report to and file the required application and disclosure statement with the local liquor
control commission as above required, or any transfer of stock in violation of the determination of the local
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-16
liquor control commission shall be grounds for revocation of the corporation's liquor license by the local liquor
control commission upon proof of such violation established at a hearing called by the local liquor control
commission in the manner hereinafter provided.
In addition to the above requirements, each corporation holding a liquor license shall report the name
and address of any person previously holding in excess of five (5) per cent of the issued and outstanding stock
of the corporation who acquires additional stock in excess of five (5) per cent of the total issued and
outstanding stock of the corporation. The aforesaid report(s) shall be made within five (5) days following such
acquisition. Failure to report to the local liquor control commission, as above required, shall be grounds for the
revocation of the corporation's liquor license by the local liquor control commission upon proof of such
violation established at a hearing called by the local liquor control commission in the manner hereinafter
provided.
Nothing herein shall prevent the local liquor control commission from suspending a license or
imposing a fine upon a licensee for violation of any provision of this section.
Sec. 3-35. Classification; fees
Licenses shall be and are hereby divided into the following classes:
(1) Class "A" License (Tavern) shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor on the premises
designated therein, not operated as a restaurant, for consumption on such premises only;
provided, however, nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the licensee from offering
limited food service, so long as such food service is incidental to and not a major part of the
primary business of the licensee.
It shall be unlawful for a holder of a Class "A" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any
alcoholic liquor in the Village, or to deliver or permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor on
the licensed premises, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Friday,
or during the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday, except between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m. on the first day of January of every year. The annual fee for
such license shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplemental to the Palatine Code of
Ordinances. Except for renewal of existing licenses issued prior to January 1, 2016, there
shall be no further Class “A” license issued.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed as a bartender, server, to manage such an
establishment, or to act as a bouncer or identification checker in such an establishment unless
such person obtains from the Village Manager a license to sell or serve alcoholic beverages.
(2) Class "A-1" License (Sports and Recreation Facilities) shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor on the premises only to Sports and Recreation Facilities, subject to the
provision that a floor plan be submitted prior to issuance of the license, food service must be
available, and that no exterior signage advertising alcohol or the tavern/bar name be
permitted.
It shall be unlawful for a holder of a Class "A-1" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any
alcoholic liquor in the Village, or to deliver or permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor on
the licensed premises, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Friday,
or during the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday, except between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m. on the first day of January of every year. The annual fee for
such license shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplemental to the Palatine Code of
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-17
Ordinances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed as a bartender, server, to manage such an
establishment, or to act as a bouncer or identification checker in such an establishment unless
such person obtains from the Village Manager a license to sell or serve alcoholic beverages.
(3) Class “B” License (package liquor store) shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic
beverages in its original package, not for consumption on the premises where sold. The
establishment shall not have more than ten percent (10%) of its shelf space used for
consumable goods (“consumable goods” does not include tobacco and soft drinks), derive
more than ten percent (10%) of its gross income from consumable goods, and derive more
than ten percent (10%) of wholesale purchases of consumable goods.
In addition to all other applicable requirements, a sign shall be posted on every entrance to the
establishment (the size of said sign and the type size to be prescribed by the Village
Manager’s office) providing that no one under the age of 21 may enter the establishment
unless accompanied by a parent or guardian 21 years of age or older. Said establishment shall
enforce such restriction by denying admittance to any person under the age of 21 unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian 21 years of age or over.
It shall be unlawful for a holder of a Class B license to sell or offer for sale at retail any
alcoholic liquor in the Village, or to deliver or permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor on
the licensed premises, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. The annual fee for
such license shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of
Ordinances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages at the register unless such
person obtains from the Village Manager an Alcoholic Beverage Seller and Server Permit to
sell or serve alcoholic beverages. A point of sale control procedure/policy indicating the
liquor license holder’s procedures and policies to prevent persons under the age of twenty-one
(21) from accessing and purchasing alcoholic beverages and to prevent the sale of alcoholic
beverages outside the permitted hours of the granted liquor license shall be on file with
Liquor Commission.
(4) Class “B-1” License (grocery store with package liquor) shall authorize the retail sale of all
alcoholic beverages in its original package, not for consumption on the premises where sold,
in an establishment whose primary purpose is the sale of groceries, with the sale of alcoholic
beverages as a subsidiary sale. The establishment must have a minimum of fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet of retail floor space, with no more than ten percent (10%) of the floor
area used for the display of alcoholic beverages and no more than ten percent (10%) of its
gross income shall be derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages.
The primary liquor display area shall be located in the designated area as indicated on the
approved floor plan on file with the Liquor Commission. Any change to the primary liquor
display area on the approved floor plan shall require Liquor Commission approval.
In addition to the primary liquor display area, a holder of a Class B-1 license shall be
permitted up to three (3) incidental display areas for beer and wine only subject to the Village
Manager’s review and approval and shall be indicated on a plan on file with the Liquor
Commission.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-18
A point of sale control procedure/policy indicating the liquor license holder’s procedures and
policies to prevent persons under the age of twenty-one (21) from accessing and purchasing
alcoholic beverages and to prevent the sale of alcoholic beverages outside the permitted hours
of the granted liquor license shall be on file with Liquor Commission.
It shall be unlawful for a holder of a Class B-1 license to sell or offer for sale at retail any
alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
The annual fee for such license shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the
Palatine Code of Ordinances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages at the register unless such
person obtains from the Village Manager an Alcoholic Beverage Seller and Server Permit to
sell alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. No. 0-146-10, §2, 12/6/10)
(5) Class “B-2” License (General Merchandise store with package liquor) shall authorize the
retail sale of all alcoholic beverages, in its original package, not for consumption on the
premises where sold, in an establishment whose primary purpose is the sale of household
items, groceries, medicine, health or beauty aids, and clothes, with the sale of alcoholic
beverages as a subsidiary sale. The establishment must have a minimum of fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet of floor area, with no more than five percent (5%) of the floor area used
for the display of alcoholic beverages and no more than ten percent (10%) of its gross income
shall be derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages.
A General Merchandise store holding a B-2 license shall have a valid State of Illinois
Pharmacy license, pursuant to the Pharmacy Practice Act (225 ILCS 85), at the liquor
licensed location and actually employ at least one licensed pharmacist who works at the liquor
licensed premises, and shall provide proof to the Village upon request.
The liquor display area shall be located in the designated area as indicated in the approved
floor plan on file with the Liquor Commission. Any change to the liquor display area on the
approved floor plan shall require Liquor Commission approval.
A point of sale control procedure/policy indicating the liquor license holder’s procedures and
policies to prevent persons under the age of twenty-one (21) from accessing and purchasing
alcoholic beverages and to prevent the sale of alcoholic beverages outside the permitted hours
of the granted liquor license shall be on file with Liquor Commission.
It shall be unlawful for a holder of a Class B-2 license to sell or offer for sale at retail any
alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
The annual fee for such license shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the
Palatine Code of Ordinances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages at the register unless such
person obtains from the Village Manager an Alcoholic Beverage Seller and Server Permit to
sell alcoholic beverages. (Ord. No. 0-159-12, §1, 12/3/12)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-19
(6) Class “B-3” License (Drug store with package liquor) shall authorize the retail sale of all
alcoholic beverages, in its original package, not for consumption on the premises where sold,
in an establishment whose primary purpose is the sale of pharmacy items, prescription drugs,
health and wellness services, with the sale of alcoholic beverages as a subsidiary sale. The
establishment must have a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area, with
no more than five percent (5%) of the floor area used for the display of alcoholic beverages
and no more than ten percent (10%) of its gross income shall be derived from the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
A Drug Store holding a B-3 license shall have a valid State of Illinois Pharmacy license,
pursuant to the Pharmacy Practice Act (225 ILCS 85), at the liquor licensed location and
actually employ at least one licensed pharmacist who works at the liquor licensed premises,
and shall provide proof to the Village upon request.
The liquor display area shall be located in the designated area as indicated in the approved
floor plan on file with the Liquor Commission. Any change to the liquor display area on the
approved floor plan shall require Liquor Commission approval.
A point of sale control procedure/policy indicating the liquor license holder’s procedures and
policies to prevent persons under the age of twenty-one (21) from accessing and purchasing
alcoholic beverages and to prevent the sale of alcoholic beverages outside the permitted hours
of the granted liquor license shall be on file with Liquor Commission.
It shall be unlawful for a holder of a Class B-3 license to sell or offer for sale at retail any
alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
The annual fee for such license shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the
Palatine Code of Ordinances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages at the register unless such
person obtains from the Village Manager an Alcoholic Beverage Seller and Server Permit to
sell alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. No. 0-34-10, §2, 4/19/10; Ord. No. 0-146-10, §3, 12/6/10)
(7) Class "C" License (Club) shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor on the premises
designated therein, for consumption on the premises only, by a club as defined in this chapter.
It shall be unlawful for a holder of a Class "C" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any
alcoholic liquor in the Village, or to deliver or permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor on
the licensed premises, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. Monday through
Friday, or during the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday, except between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 3:00 a.m. on the first day of January of every year. The
annual fee for such license shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine
Code of Ordinances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed as a bartender, server, to manage such an
establishment, or to act as a bouncer or identification checker in such an establishment unless
such person obtains from the Village Manager an Alcoholic Beverage Seller and Server
Permit to sell or serve alcoholic beverages.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-20
(8) Class "D" License (Restaurant) shall authorize the retail sale, in restaurant establishments
only, of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold. Such licenses shall be
issued and retained by those restaurant establishments which:
(a) Are in fact operated as restaurants; and
(b) Offer their patrons full and complete meals, including dinner menu. The holder of a
Class “D” license may modify the menu of the food to be served after 10:00 p.m. Sunday
through Thursday and 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday, provided such modified menu
includes a variety of sandwiches of similar hot and cold foods and hot and cold non-alcoholic
beverages. The establishment’s full menu and limited menu shall be on file with the Liquor
Commission. Food Service (taking orders, making and serving prepared foods) may end no
earlier than one (1) hour prior to the establishment’s closing time. (Ord. No. 0-64-13, §1,
6/3/13)
No such license shall be granted to or retained by any establishment in which the facilities for
food preparation and service are not primarily those of a restaurant. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, limited food service such as provided by luncheonettes, diners,
coffee shops, drive-ins, etc., does not satisfy the requirements for this license classification.
It shall be unlawful for a holder of a class "D" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any
alcoholic liquor in the Village, or to deliver or permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor on
the licensed premises, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. Monday through
Friday, or during the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday, except between
the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m. on the first day of January of every year. The annual fee
for such license shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of
Ordinances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed as a bartender, server, to manage such an
establishment, or to act as a bouncer or identification checker in such an establishment unless
such person obtains from the Village Manager an Alcoholic Beverage Seller and Server
Permit to sell or serve alcoholic beverages.
Waiters and waitresses aged 19 and 20 shall be permitted to serve alcoholic beverages at the
table within the dining room, provided that said waiters and waitresses hold a valid Alcoholic
Beverage Seller and Server Permit pursuant to Section 3-27; and that the establishment has a
manager and/or an assistant manager and a bartender, all of whom must be at least 21 years of
age, present on the premises at all times, all of whom have obtained the requisite an Alcoholic
Beverage Seller and Server Permit from the Village Manager pursuant to Section 3-27.
(9) Class "D-1" License (Restaurant with extended hours) shall authorize the retail sale, in
restaurant establishments only, of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where
sold. Such licenses shall be issued and retained by those restaurant establishments which:
(a) Are in fact operated as restaurants; and
(b) Offer their patrons full and complete meals, including dinner menu. The holder of a
Class “D-1” license may modify the menu of the food to be served after 10:00 p.m.
Sunday through Thursday and 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday, provided such
modified menu includes a variety of sandwiches of similar hot and cold foods and hot
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-21
and cold non-alcoholic beverages. The establishment’s full menu and limited menu
shall be on file with the Liquor Commission. Food Service (taking orders, making
and serving prepared foods) may end no earlier than one (1) hour prior to the
establishment’s closing time. (Ord. No. 0-64-13, §1, 6/3/13)
No such license shall be granted to or retained by any establishment in which the facilities for
food preparation and service are not primarily those of a restaurant. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, limited food service such as provided by luncheonettes, diners,
coffee shops, drive-ins, etc., does not satisfy the requirements for this license classification.
It shall be unlawful for a holder of a Class "D-1" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any
alcoholic liquor in the Village, or to deliver or permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor on
the licensed premises, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Friday,
or during the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday, except between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m. on the first day of January of every year. The annual fee for
such license shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of
Ordinances.
Holder of a Class “D-1” License which contain and use banquet facilities as an incidental use
may serve and sell at retail alcoholic liquor for consumption in said banquet hall facilities (as
defined in section 3-35 (14) by invited guests. Such restaurants shall not be required to
purchase a Class "H" license.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed as a bartender, server, to manage such an
establishment, or to act as a bouncer or identification checker in such an establishment unless
such person obtains from the Village Manager an Alcoholic Beverage Seller and Server
Permit to sell or serve alcoholic beverages.
Waiters and waitresses aged 19 and 20 shall be permitted to serve alcoholic beverages at the
table within the dining room, provided that said waiters and waitresses hold a valid Alcoholic
Beverage Seller and Server Permit pursuant to Section 3-27; and that the establishment has a
manager and/or an assistant manager and a bartender, all of whom must be at least 21 years of
age, present on the premises at all times, all of whom have obtained the requisite an Alcoholic
Beverage Seller and Server Permit from the Village Manager pursuant to Section 3-27.
(10) Class "E" License (Temporary Special Event) shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
on the premises designated therein, for consumption on said premises only, by a civic,
fraternal, other not-for-profit organization, or holder of valid Palatine liquor license, for a
specific function or occasion and for a limited period of time to be set by the local liquor
control commission; provided, however, that the hours shall be no later than 12:00 midnight
on any night and begin no sooner than 11:00 am Sundays. As used in this paragraph (11)
"premises" shall mean the entire premises designated in the Class "E" license even though
such premises may extend beyond the interior of a building.
In the event the Village Manager receives an application for a Class "E" license, complete in
all respects and accompanied by a detailed sketch and letter from the Police Department as
required under section 3-27(11) of this Code, and because of unavoidable conflicts or other
reasons beyond the control of the commission, the application cannot be acted upon in timely
fashion by the full local liquor control commission, a Class "E" license may be issued upon
the signatures of any four (4) commissioners, with a report of said approval and copies of the
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-22
application and all supporting documents being mailed or delivered promptly to each
commissioner.
Temporary licenses may be issued by the local liquor control commission to holders of any
licenses, for operations away from the licensed premises for special events. The events, for
which such special licenses away from the licensed premises shall be granted, shall be subject
individually to the approval of the local liquor control commission. Such special licenses shall
be issued for a period not to exceed seven (7) days in any one year for any license holder.
Each individual site for such sale away from licensed premises shall be subject to approval by
the local liquor control commission.
It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Class "E" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any
alcoholic liquor in the Village other than as is specifically permitted in the license.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or serve alcoholic liquor unless the seller or server
has satisfactorily completed the Village of Palatine Liquor Ordinance Compliance Training
Course.
(11) Class "F" License (Park District) shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor at or from
buildings and other facilities located on the premises designated therein, for consumption on
premises and also from beverage carts operating solely on golf course premises owned by
Park Districts, duly established under the Park District Code. The holder of a Class "F"
license shall upon issuance and renewal of the license, submit to the Village a list showing
those hours at which alcoholic liquor will be sold, offered for sale at retail, served or
permitted to be consumed at each respective Park District site; provided, however, the holder
of a Class "F" license may sell or serve alcoholic liquor on such premises for special events at
hours other than those contained on the aforesaid list upon at least forty-eight (48) hours prior
notice to the Village Manager.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed as a bartender, server, to manage such an
establishment, or to act as a bouncer or identification checker in such an establishment unless
such person obtains from the Village Manager an Alcoholic Beverage Seller and Server
Permit to sell or serve alcoholic beverages.
(12) Class "G" License (Beer and Wine) shall authorize the retail sale in restaurants only, of beer
and wine for consumption on the premises where sold. Such licenses shall be issued to and
retained by only those establishments which:
(a) Offer their patrons food service during all hours that the sale of alcohol is permitted.
The establishment’s full menu shall be on file with the Liquor Commission.
(b) No such license shall be granted to or retained by any establishment in which the
facilities for food preparation and service are not primarily those of a restaurant.
It shall be unlawful for a holder of a Class "G" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any
alcoholic liquor in the Village, or to deliver or permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor on
the licensed premises, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. Monday through
Friday, or during the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday. The annual fee
for such license shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-23
Ordinances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed as a bartender, server, to manage such an
establishment, or to act as a bouncer or identification checker in such an establishment unless
such person obtains from the Village Manager an Alcoholic Beverage Seller and Server
Permit to sell or serve alcoholic beverages.
(13) Class "G-1" License (Seasonal Beer and Wine) shall authorize the retail sale in restaurants
only, of beer and wine for consumption on the premises where sold and in conjunction with a
sidewalk café license agreement between the restaurant and Village of Palatine. Such licenses
shall be issued to and retained by only those establishments which:
(a) Offer their patrons food service during all hours that the sale of alcohol is permitted.
The establishment’s full menu shall be on file with the Liquor Commission.
(b) No such license shall be granted to or retained by any establishment in which the
facilities for food preparation and service are not primarily those of a restaurant.
(c) Have a valid Outdoor Seating License Agreement with the Village of Palatine
allowing for the use of Village right of way for the purpose of food service.
It shall be unlawful for a holder of a Class "G-1" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any
alcoholic liquor in the Village, or to deliver or permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor on
the licensed premises, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. Monday through
Friday, or during the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday. The license shall
be valid only during the dates allowed by the Outdoor Seating License Agreement. The
annual fee for such license shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine
Code of Ordinances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed as a bartender, alcohol server, or to manage
such an establishment, or to act as a bouncer or identification checker in such an
establishment unless such person obtains from the Village Manager an Alcoholic Beverage
Seller and Server Permit to sell or serve alcoholic beverages.
(14) Class “H” License (Banquet Hall) shall authorize the serving and retail sale of alcoholic
liquor for consumption on the premises designated therein in establishments containing
banquet hall facilities and authorized for banquets as a principal use; provided that alcoholic
liquor under this license may be served and sold only to invited guests. The annual fee for
such license shall be provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of
Ordinances.
"Banquet hall facility" shall mean a business conducted on premises at which the exclusive
activity is the catering of private parties whereat there is service for consumption at tables of a
full multiple course meal at a prearranged fixed unit price, or hors d'oeuvres, buffet or
smorgasbord, and at which alcoholic liquor may be served or sold as an incident to such food
services; provided that each of such private parties is prearranged under the sponsorship of a
particular person or organization.
It shall be unlawful for a holder of a Class "H" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-24
alcoholic liquor in the Village, or to deliver or permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor on
the licensed premises, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Friday,
or during the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday, except between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m. on the first day of January of every year. The annual fee for
such license shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of
Ordinances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed as a bartender or to manage such an
establishment, or to act as a bouncer or identification checker in such an establishment unless
such person obtains from the Village Manager an Alcoholic Beverage Seller and Server
Permit to sell or serve alcoholic beverages.
(15) Class "K" License (Hotel) shall authorize the retail sale in hotel rooms on the licensed
premises of alcoholic liquor for consumption only in the hotel rooms on said premises and for
special events in hotel meeting rooms. A Class K licensee shall be required to install cabinets
for the storage of liquor for the use of room guests in each room provided each such cabinet
shall be securely locked with a separate key from the room key. Only guests 21 years or older
at the time of registration shall be issued the separate cabinet key.
A Class “K” license shall authorize a hotel to serve alcoholic beverages to registered guests
between the hours of five o’clock (5:00) p.m. and ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. Hors d’oeuvres or
other food shall be continuously available during the hours when alcoholic beverages are
served. Service of the alcoholic beverages and food shall take place in a room (reception
lounge) or area separated from the lobby of the hotel.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed as a bartender or to manage such reception
lounge unless such person obtains from the Village Manager an Alcoholic Beverage Seller
and Server Permit to sell or serve alcoholic beverages. (Ord. #0-21-09, §1, 3/2/09)
The annual fee for such license shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the
Palatine Code of Ordinances.
(16) Class “M” License (Institutional Conference Center) shall authorize the serving and sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises designated therein in an Institutional
Conference Center establishment; provided that alcoholic liquor under this license may be
served and sold only to invited guests that are utilizing the services and facilities of the
Institutional Conference Center for educational, cultural, philanthropic, governmental,
business and/or training activities and said alcoholic liquor is incidental to such activities.
Service and sale of alcoholic beverages shall be restricted to only those events in an
Institutional Conference Center.
“Institutional Conference Center” shall mean an event on premises at William Rainey Harper
College at which the exclusive activities are those events associated with educational, cultural,
philanthropic, governmental business or training activities, and said alcoholic liquor is
incidental to such activities. The sale or serving of alcohol at weddings, receptions or other
events not involving the educational, cultural, philanthropic, governmental programming or
training activities is prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for a holder of a Class "M” license to sell or offer for sale at retail any
alcoholic liquor in the Village, or to deliver or permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor on
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-25
the licensed premises, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. The annual fee for
such license shall be $10.00.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed as a bartender, server, to manage such an
establishment, or to act as a bouncer or identification checker in such an establishment unless
such person obtains from the Village Manager a license to sell or serve alcoholic beverages.
(17) Class "N" License (Microbrewery) shall authorize establishments dispensing alcoholic liquors
for consumption on the premises and engaged in the actual brewing and production of beer on
the premises and for the dispensing of beer that has been brewed and produced on site for
consumption off the premises and in packaged form only. Holders of a Class N license shall
offer their patrons full and complete meals, including dinner menu. The holder of a Class
“N” license may modify the menu of the food to be served after 10:00 p.m. Sunday through
Thursday and 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday, provided such modified menu includes a
variety of sandwiches of similar hot and cold foods and hot and cold non-alcoholic beverages.
The establishment’s full menu and limited menu shall be on file with the Liquor Commission.
Food Service (taking orders, making and serving prepared foods) may end no earlier than one
(1) hour prior to the establishment’s closing time. This license shall be issued only to
establishments with a microbrewery, having meal service, and a restaurant capacity of not less
than 100 seats. (Ord. No. 0-64-13, §1, 6/3/13)
It shall be unlawful for a holder of a Class "N" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any
alcoholic liquor in the Village, or to deliver or permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor on
the licensed premises, between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Friday,
or during the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday, except between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m. on the first day of January of every year. The annual fee for
such -license shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of
Ordinances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed as a bartender, server, to manage such an
establishment, or to act as a bouncer or identification checker in such an establishment unless
such person obtains from the Village Manager an Alcoholic Beverage Seller and Server
Permit to sell or serve alcoholic beverages.
(18) Class “O” License (Temporary Commercial Special Events, Daily Fee)
Authorizes the retail sale of wine and/or beer only, on the premises specified, for consumption
on said premises at a business event, grand opening or similar function. Such temporary
licenses are to be granted to local businesses promoting a common object rather than the sale
of wine and/or beer. Such licenses may also contain further restrictions or conditions which
are deemed necessary to ensure that the events are properly supervised and otherwise
conducted such that the health, safety and welfare of the general public will be protected.
These restrictions or conditions may include, but are not limited to, the event’s hours of
operation or specific operational conditions.
Such licenses shall be authorized on a day to day basis, but for not more than three (3)
consecutive days. Such licenses shall permit not more than twenty (20) days of events per
calendar year. Such licenses shall only be authorized to a single user premises.
In conjunction with the license application a list of event(s) shall be submitted to the Village.
Any proposed changes to the approved event(s) following the issuance of a license shall be
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-26
submitted in writing to the Village Manager at least seven (7) days prior to the proposed
event. The Village Manager shall be authorized to either approve or deny any proposed
changes to the event(s) following the issuance of the license.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed as a bartender or to manage such event
unless such person obtains from the Village Manager an Alcoholic Beverage Seller and
Server permit to sell or serve alcoholic beverages.
The fee for such licenses shall be two hundred and fifty dollars ($250) for five (5) event days
or less, or five hundred dollars ($500) for six (6) event days or more.
(Ord. #0-28-09, §1, 3/9/09)
(19) Class “P” License (Caterer) shall authorize an establishment to provide catering services. A
“Caterer” means a person or business that provides food and/or alcoholic beverage service to
private events within the Village of Palatine. Holders of a Class “P” license may sell,
dispense, and serve alcohol beverages as part of a private event within the Village of Palatine.
Such licenses shall be issued and retain by those establishments which:
(a) The primary business is located in the Village’s corporate limits.
(b) Hold a valid Food Dealer Permit issued by the Village.
(c) Demonstrate the ability to store, handle, prepare, transport and serve food in a safe
and sanitary manner, in accordance with the standards promulgated pursuant to
Village Code of Ordinances. The Department of Community Services shall inspect
an applicant’s license premises for compliance with this Code and shall report its
findings to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
1. “Outside Caterer” which means a caterer whose primary business is located outside
of the Village’s corporate limits, may register with the Village by supplying the
following information to the Village Manager for approval:
a. Location, date, and time of the Catering Event; and
b. Proof of a valid license for the preparation of food for service of the licensed
premises, issued by the appropriate licensing authority of the jurisdiction of
where the applicant’s catering business is located; and
c. Proof of its ability to store, handle, prepare, transport and serve food in a
safe and sanitary manner in accordance with the standards no less stringent
than those imposed by the Village Code of Ordinance; and
d. Proof of a valid license for the sale of alcoholic liquor issued by the
appropriate licensing authority; and
e. Proof of dram shop insurance in an amount equal to that required by the
license under this Chapter; and
Proof of completion of a state-certified beverage alcohol sellers and servers
educational and training (BASSET) program meeting the minimum
curriculum requirements of the Department of Human Services (DASA) 77
Adm. Code 3500.101 et seq. or its equivalent for any person employed by an
Outside Caterer as a bartender, server, to manage such an establishment, or
to act as a bouncer or identification checker for the Catering Event.
f. Any additional information as required by the Village Manager.
A registered outside caterer may engage in the sale and service of alcoholic liquor on the same
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-27
terms and conditions as the holder of the caterer’s liquor license under this Code. The
registration period for each Outside Caterer shall be on a per event basis, with no event
exceeding five (5) consecutive days.
Any person desiring an Outside Caterer registration shall file an application therefor with, no
less than fourteen (14) days before the intended date of the event, to the Village Manager or
his designee, upon a form provided by him. The Village Manager may include additional
restrictions or conditions to the approved registration.
The annual fee for Class “P” license and registration fee for Outside Caterer shall be as
provided in the fees schedule supplement of the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
Every person engaged in the sale of alcoholic liquor as a caterer shall keep a record of each
event catered by that person. The record shall indicate the place and time of the event and
include the name of the person hiring the caterer; the compensation paid to the caterer; the
types of alcoholic liquor and the quantity of each type sold at the event. All such records shall
be kept at the caterer’s place of business and available for inspection by any authorized
representative of the Village for at least three (3) years after the event.
A caterer shall sell alcoholic liquor only to the client or sponsor of a catered event, and only
by the full, unopened container.
Either the caterer, or an employee of the caterer, shall be present at all times during a catered
event where alcoholic liquor is dispensed. The caterer or caterer’s employee shall have on his
person a copy of the caterer’s liquor license or Outside Caterer’s registration.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed by a holder of a Class “P” License as a
bartender, server, bouncer, identification checker, manager, unless such person obtains an
Alcoholic Beverage Seller and Server Permit to sell or serve alcoholic beverages from the
Village Manager. (Ord. No. 0-45-10, §1, 5/3/10)
(20) Class “LC” License (Late closing License). For holders of an unconditional Class “LC”
License issued prior to January 05, 2005, it shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail
any alcoholic liquor in the Village, or to deliver or permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor
on the licensed premises, between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., however, that these
hours do not exceed those permitted by the Cook County late closing liquor license, in which
case the hours will automatically be decreased to be the same. Any Class “LC” license issued
prior to January 05, 2005, may not be transferred to any new operator.
The holder of a Class “LC” license may modify the menu of the food to be served after 10:00
p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday, provided such modified
menu includes a variety of sandwiches of similar hot and cold foods and hot and cold nonalcoholic
beverages. The establishment’s full menu and limited menu shall be on file with the
Liquor Commission. Food Service (taking orders, making and serving prepared foods) may
end no earlier than one (1) hour prior to the establishment’s closing time. (Ord. No. 0-64-13,
§1, 6/3/13)
Except for renewal of existing licenses issued prior to January 5, 2005, there shall be no
further new Class “LC” licenses issued.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-28
The annual fee for such permit shall be provided in the fee schedule supplement to the
Palatine Code of Ordinances.
(21) Class “PS” License (Product sampling) shall authorize product sampling. Only those
establishments holding a Class B and Class B-1 liquor license may apply for the Class PS
license. (Ord. 0-148-06, §1, 8/21/06)
Holders of a Class “PS” License may conduct product sampling for consumption at the
licensed retail location only. Up to 10 samples, consisting of no more than (i) 1/4 ounce of
distilled spirits, (ii) one ounce of wine, or (iii) 2 ounces of beer may be served to a consumer
in one day.
Holders of a Class “PS” license may conduct product sampling for consumption outside the
licensed retail premises for offsite events in accordance with the following conditions:
a. Approval to conduct product sampling outside the licensed retail premises must be
granted by the Village Manager in writing with whatever conditions the Village
Manager deems appropriate. In addition, the granting of this license shall not give
the establishment the right to conduct samples or sales of products it would not
otherwise be entitled to provide under the establishment’s B or B-1 license. Request
for approval must be submitted in writing to the Village Manager not less than
fourteen (14) days prior to the event.
b. All sampling must be held within the corporate limits of the Village of Palatine.
c. All servers at the events must have a valid Palatine Beverage Servers and Sellers
license.
Any violation of the Class “PS” license or any conditions related thereto shall also be
considered a violation of the B or B-1 liquor license held by the licensed establishment and
shall be grounds for the revocation, suspension, or other action pursuant to the Village Code
of Ordinances, related to all Village licenses held by the establishment.
(Ord. No. 0-122-08, §1, 9/2/08)
Any holder of a Class A, Class A-1, Class C, Class D, Class D-1, Class G, Class H, and Class N permit shall
be entitled to weekend hours on the day before Thanksgiving, and St. Patrick’s Day of every year when such
days fall on a Monday through Friday, upon request, provided that two weeks notice be given to the Village
Manager.
Sec. 3-36. Disposition of fees.
All license fees shall be non-refundable and paid, annually in advance of July 1 in each year on or
before the specific date set forth by the Village Manager in the license renewal information. Failure to pay by
the specific date set forth shall result in a late payment fee of $75. The license holder may elect to pay in equal
semi annual installments on or before the renewal date set forth above and January 1 in each year. This
method of payment is subject to a $100.00 administration fee on the second installment. Failure to tender good
funds for full payment for the proportionate amount due by January 1 shall constitute grounds for suspension
or revocation of the license under Section 3-44. (Ord. O-19-19, 3/11/19)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-29
A service charge in the amount of $100.00 shall be assessed for all checks for license fees that are
returned for insufficient funds. Failure to tender good funds for full payment of the license fee within twentyfour
(24) hours of notice from the Village of the returned check shall constitute grounds for suspension or
revocation of the license under Section 3-44.
If a new license is issued during a term of the license period, the fee shall be only the proportionate
amount due based on the remaining number of months during the term of the license.
Sec. 3-37. Number.
There shall be in force in the Village of Palatine, no more of each classification of Liquor License as
designated by Village ordinance from time to time, a complete listing of which shall be maintained at all times
by the Village Manager's office and the Village Clerk's office, and no license shall be issued in excess of these
limitations. Nothing in the Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any such ordinance and all
such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at
length in this Code.
Sec. 3-38. List required.
The Village Manager shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such licenses issued, and
shall furnish the clerk and chief of police each with a copy thereof; upon the issuance of any new license, or the
revocation of any old license, the Village Manager shall post notice of such action.
Sec. 3-39. Transfer.
(a) A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance,
unless sooner revoked or terminated as in this chapter provided, and shall not constitute
property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be
alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but
it shall cease upon the death of the licensee, provided that executors or administrators of the
estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when
such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale or
manufacture of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the
privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent,
or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license but not longer than six
months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee.
(b) Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided he is then qualified to
receive a license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for
such purpose; and provided further that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be
construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the Mayor and Village Council
from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within its jurisdiction. No retailer's
license shall be renewed if the Department of Revenue has reported to the Illinois Liquor
Control Commission that such retailer is delinquent in filing any required tax returns or
paying any amounts owed to the State of Illinois until the applicant is issued a certificate by
the Department of Revenue stating that all delinquent returns or amounts owed have been
paid by guaranteed remittance or the payment agreement to pay all amounts owed has been
accepted by the Department. No retailer's license issued by the local liquor control
commissioner shall be renewed unless the applicant provides documentation that any tax
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-30
owed to by the applicant has been satisfied by payment in the form of a cashier's check,
certified check, money order, or cash.
Sec. 3-40. Live entertainment on the premises.
Issuance of a retail liquor dealer's license under the terms of this article shall not carry with it the right
or privilege for any form of live entertainment as defined in this Chapter to be conducted or performed on the
premises described in the application and license. Authorization for any such live entertainment shall be
obtained separately pursuant to the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the Village of Palatine, by securing
any necessary zoning relief as well as a live entertainment license pursuant to section 11-63 and upon payment
of the annual fee as provided in Section 11-63 of Article II, Division 2 of Chapter 11. For those establishments
that have a liquor license, only those portions of the premises in which the consumption of alcohol is permitted
may seek approval for live entertainment. (Ord. 0-1-10, §2, 1/11/10)
Sec. 3-41. Change of location.
A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in
the application and license. Such location may be changed only upon the written permit to make such change
issued by the Liquor Commission. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location
is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the law of this state, provisions of this Code and
other ordinances of the Village.
Sec. 3-42. Renewal of license.
(a) In all establishments seeking renewal of their existing liquor license(s), all renewal licenses shall be
required to comply with all applicable sections of this Chapter including but not limited to Secs. 3-27, 3-28 and
3-30. A copy of the Alcoholic Beverage Seller and Server Permit of all such employees shall be kept on the
premises of the establishment at all times and made available to the Village for inspection upon demand. The
Village Manager shall make available to the retail dealer liquor license holder or the Alcoholic Beverage Seller
and Server Permit holder a duplicate original copy of the license or permit.
(b) In addition to any other requirements in this ordinance or conditions associated with the type of
license obtained, the liquor control commission may impose reasonable conditions on the issuance of a renewal
liquor license. Such conditions may be based on the past operating history of the establishment, the
neighborhood or environs in which the establishment is located and may include additional limitations on the
hours otherwise permitted in the license classification sought by the applicant.
Sec. 3-43. Prohibited licenses.
(a) No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any
store or other place of business where the majority of customers are minors of school age.
(b) No license shall be issued to any establishment which also delivers gasoline for automotive
vehicles on the same premises.
Sec. 3-44. Revocation or suspension of license.
No person holding a license issued by the local liquor control commission shall, in the conduct of the
licensed premises or upon the licensed premises:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-31
1. Violate or suffer or permit a violation of any Federal or State statutes regulating the sale of
alcoholic liquors or any other Federal or State statute.
2. Violate or suffer or permit a violation of any Village, county, or other local ordinance or
resolution regulating the sale of alcoholic liquors or any other such ordinance or resolution.
3. Violate or suffer or permit a violation of the conditions of the license or of any other
ordinance of the Village.
4. Commit any fraud or misrepresentation or make a false statement in the application for the
license
5. Be convicted of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
6. Fail to pay any fee, tax, fine or penalty owing to the Village
7. Refuse to permit an inspection of or interfere with a duly-authorized Village officer or
employee while in the performance of his duties in making such inspections as provided in the
Village of Palatine Code of Ordinances
8. Cause nuisance or danger to public health, safety or welfare
9. Suffer or permit disorderly conduct on the premises or in the parking lot, serving the premises
or for such other acts that occur on adjoining land or in any other area within the control of
the licensee attributable to patrons or employees of the license holder.
10. Commit fraudulent or unfair business practices
11. Cessation of business for more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
12. Failure to hold a valid Palatine Business License
13. Failure to hold a valid State of Illinois Liquor License
14. Failure to carry valid Dram Shop insurance
A license may be revoked or suspended if the licensee violates any of the above provisions of this
chapter, or any applicable rules or regulations established by the local liquor control commission or the Illinois
Liquor Control Commission which are not inconsistent with law. However, no such license shall be so revoked
or suspended except after a public hearing in the manner hereinafter provided.
License revocation and suspension hearings provided for hereunder shall be conducted by a local
liquor control hearing committee consisting of three (3) members appointed by the local liquor control
commission, but who need not be members of the local liquor control commission. The local liquor control
hearing committee shall elect a chairman to preside at all its meetings and hearings. Any two (2) members of
the local liquor control hearing committee shall constitute a quorum. When a quorum is present, any decision,
recommendation, fine, penalty, revocation, suspension or other action by the local liquor control hearing
committee shall require a majority vote of those present. In cases of hearings on violation charges, a majority
vote of those present shall be required for a finding of guilty.
All hearings shall be held after not less than a five-day written notice to the licensee, served either
personally or by registered or certified mail, affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. A
count reporter shall be present at all hearings and shall record all proceedings. The expenses of such court
reporter shall be paid for by the Village, except that the cost of any copies of the record as transcribed by the
court reporter which are desired by a party to the proceedings shall be paid for by that party.
Upon the conclusion of any hearing, the local liquor control hearing committee shall issue written
findings and an order with respect to the evidence presented at the hearing, signed by all members on the
prevailing side of the decision and participating in the hearing. A copy of said findings and order shall be
delivered as promptly as possible to the Village Manager for transmission to all members of the local liquor
control commission, and also shall be sent by registered or certified mail or served personally upon the licensee
within five (5) days of the termination of the hearing. If the local liquor control hearing committee determines
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-32
that the licensee is guilty of any violation charged, the order shall state the penalty to be imposed upon the
licensee. The local liquor control hearing committee may revoke the license of any licensee found guilty of any
charges brought before it.
If the license is not revoked, the local liquor control hearing committee may impose any one or any
combination of the following penalties:
(a) Suspension of the liquor license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
(b) Require that the licensee and any or all of its employees as designated by the committee
(including the authority to designate job types) obtain certification from a state-certified
beverage alcohol sellers and servers educational and training (BASSET) program meeting the
minimum curriculum requirements of the Illinois Public Health Department of Alcoholism
and Drug Abuse (DASA) title 77, chapter 10, section 2056 or its equivalent (to be determined
by the Palatine Police Department) and obtain a seller's or server's license from the Village
Manager as a condition to the continued operation of the establishment.
(c) Require the submission of written procedures, reasonably satisfactory to the local liquor
control hearing committee established by the licensee for the training of his employees in
proper age identification evaluation.
(d) Require that appropriate signs be posted with respect to age requirements on the premises.
This may be in addition to any signs that may be required under section 3-12 of this chapter.
(e) The payment of a fine not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation for a first
violation within a 12 month period, ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for a second violation,
and fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) for a third or subsequent violation within a 12
month period.
Any appeal from a decision of the local liquor control hearing committee shall be made in
accordance with the Illinois Liquor Control Act shall be based on the record made at the
hearing before the Local Liquor Control Hearing Committee.
Twenty-four (24) hours before the commencement of any suspension or revocation, the Police
Department shall have the right to post on all entrances to the licensed establishment a notice
that the premises is prohibited from selling or delivering alcoholic beverages by order of the
Village of Palatine Local Liquor Control Hearing Committee.
(f) In the event that the licensed establishment and/or employee of the licensed establishment is
charged with selling to a person under the age of 21, the Village Manager shall have the
authority to issue a letter to the licensed establishment offering to settle the matter for payment
of a $500.00 fine in lieu of an appearance before the Liquor Control Hearing Committee. In
the event the licensed establishment does not agree to pay the pay the fine or requests a
hearing, said hearing shall proceed in accordance with the procedure set forth in this Section.
This provision shall only apply to a licensed establishment charged for the first time with
unlawful sale to a person under the age of 21.
(g) In the event that the Mayor or a majority of the Liquor Control Commission has reason to
believe that the continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately
threaten the welfare of the community, the Mayor shall have the power to issue a written order
requiring the licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the Licensee
an opportunity to be heard during that period by the Local Liquor Control Hearing
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-33
Committee.
(h) Any additional section or conditions deemed appropriate by the Local Liquor Control Hearing
Committee.
The notice shall be in letters not less than one-half inch high and shall, in the case of a suspension,
give the times of the suspension and in the case of a revocation state the exact time which the revocation goes
into effect.
The removal of such notice before the suspension ends by any person is prohibited and shall subject
the person to a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
Sec. 3-45. Commission rules.
The local liquor control commission may promulgate such rules of procedure from time to time to
govern hearings and other proceedings as it deems appropriate.
Sec. 3-46. Owner of Premises Permitting Violation – Penalty.
If the owner of the licensed premises or any person from whom the licensee derives the right to
possession of such premises, or the agent of such owner or person, shall knowingly permit the licensee to use
said licensed premises in violation of the terms of this Ordinance, said owner, agent or other person shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this Ordinance to the same extent as said licensee and be subject to the same
punishment and restrictions on issuance of any new licenses to the same extent as said licensee.
Sec. 3-47. Acts of Agent or Employee – Liability of Licensee – Knowledge.
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this
Ordinance, by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee, shall be deemed and
held to be the act of such employer or licensee, and said employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same
manner as if said act or omission had been done or omitted by him personally.
Sec. 3-48. Granting Licenses after Revocation; Waiting Period; Discretion.
When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to any person for
the period of one year thereafter for the conduct of the business of manufacturing, distributing, or selling
alcoholic liquor in the premises described in the revoked license unless the revocation order has been vacated,
unless relief is given by the Local Liquor Control Commission.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 4 - AMBULANCE, ETC.
4-1
Chapter 4 AMBULANCE AND MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE UNITS
Art. I. In General, §§4-1--4-15
Art. II. Ambulance Service Licenses, §§4-16--4-30
Art. III. Mobile Intensive Care Unit Services Licenses, §§4-31--4-35
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 4-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless their
context clearly requires otherwise:
Ambulance means a motor vehicle maintained, operated or used on the streets, alleys, or public ways
of the village, exclusively for the purpose of responding to calls of an emergency nature or a non-emergency
nature for the transportation of persons who are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless at
the time of the dispatch of the vehicle. Each ambulance shall have at least two ambulance technicians in
attendance. "Ambulance" does not include a vehicle specially equipped for the care and treatment of premature
and high-risk infants and does not include a vehicle specially equipped with a device capable of transmitting to
the nearest State of Illinois-approved Trauma Center facility electrocardiograms via telemetry and other similar
equipment. An ambulance may be used by prior appointment for the transportation of persons sick, injured,
incapacitated, or non-ambulatory invalid individuals not requiring medical emergency care in transit. An
ambulance may also render services within the village in case of accidents, calamities or other extreme
emergencies as a backup vehicle if insufficient numbers of mobile intensive care units are available or if
requested by a private individual or his relative or guardian for strictly his private use. An ambulance may also
render services in case of accidents, calamities, or other emergencies anywhere in the village if requested to do
so by the state or local public officer or official having responsibilities in connection with the emergency.
(Ord. #0-7-12, §1, 1/9/12)
Ambulance service means a person who is engaged in the business or service of operating ambulances
within the village.
Ambulance technician or technician means a trained and qualified registered emergency medical
technician, certified by the National Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians of Columbus, Ohio, and
responsible for the interim care of the patient during transit and at the origin of transit. Evidence of such
certification, or capability of being certified within three (3) months shall be presented to the License Officer
prior to employment as an ambulance technician by an ambulance or M.I.C.U. Service.
Certified emergency mobile intensive care technician or registered emergency medical technician--II
means an individual who has completed all training required by and is certified as a mobile intensive care
technician by the Illinois Department of Public Health. Such an individual shall present to the license officer a
letter of recommendation from the Medical Coordinator of the nearest State of Illinois M.I.C.U. project prior to
being employed as a certified mobile intensive care technician by an ambulance or M.I.C.U. service.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 4 - AMBULANCE, ETC.
4-2
License officer means the village manager.
Mobile Intensive Care Unit (M.I.C.U.) means any motor vehicle specially designed or constructed,
equipped and intended to be used for, and maintained or operated for, the transportation of sick or injured
persons in emergency medical situations which meets the following requirements:
(1) Twenty-four (24) hour coverage.
(2) A minimum of one advanced emergency medical technician--II (i.e., "certified emergency
mobile intensive care technician") and one ambulance technician, as defined by this article in
attendance.
(3) Capable of arriving at an emergency location within four (4) to six (6) minutes after dispatch
and committed to a predetermined geographical area of response.
(4) Equipped with all communications, telemetry and medical equipment and supplies required
by the Division of Emergency Medical Services, Illinois Department of Public Health and the
coordinator of the nearest M.I.C.U. project.
(5) Meeting the requirements and specifications promulgated from time to time by the U. S.
Department of Transportation for M.I.C.U.'s or ambulances.
(6) Approved as a M.I.C.U. by the Illinois Department of Public Health and the Village
Department of Health and the medical coordinator of the nearest M.I.C.U. project.
(7) An M.I.C.U. vehicle can be used for an ambulance, but an ambulance cannot be used as a
M.I.C.U. vehicle.
Mobile Intensive Care Unit Service means a person who is engaged in the business or service of
operating M.I.C.U.'s within the village.
Patient means an individual who is sick, injured, wounded, or otherwise incapacitated or helpless.
Sec. 4-1.1. Regulations applicable to both ambulance services and mobile intensive care unit services.
(a) The following regulations shall apply to all ambulance services and M.I.C.U. Services licensed by
the village:
(1) Any change of ownership of a licensed ambulance service or M.I.C.U. Service shall terminate
the license and shall require a new application and a new license and conformance with all the
requirements of this chapter as upon original licensing.
(2) No ambulance service or M.I.C.U. Service license may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or
otherwise transferred without the approval of the license officer and a finding of conformance
with all the requirements of this chapter as upon original licensing.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 4 - AMBULANCE, ETC.
4-3
(3) Each ambulance or M.I.C.U. its equipment and the premises designated in the application and
all records relating to its maintenance and operation as such, shall be open to inspection by the health officer or
his designated representatives during usual hours of operation.
(4) No official entry made upon a license may be defaced, removed or obliterated.
(b) No license shall be issued under this chapter, nor shall such license be valid after issuance, nor
shall any ambulance or M.I.C.U. be operated in the Village unless there is at all times in force and effect
insurance coverage issued by a solvent and responsible insurance company licensed to do business in the State
of Illinois, for each and every ambulance or M.I.C.U. owned or operated by or for the applicant or licensee,
providing for the payment of damages:
(1) For injury to or death of individuals in accidents resulting from any cause for which the owner
of said vehicle would be liable on account of liability imposed on him by law, regardless of
whether the ambulance or M.I.C.U. was being driven by the owner or his agent; and
(2) For the loss of or damage to the property of another, including personal property under like
circumstances, in such sums as follows for each ambulance or M.I.C.U.:
a. At least twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for property damage and the amount of
at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injuries to or death of any
one (1) person, and at least three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injuries
to or death of more than one (1) person in any one (1) accident.
Every insurance policy or contract for such insurance shall provide for the payment
and satisfaction of any final judgment rendered against the owner, or any person
driving any insured vehicle; and that suit may be brought in any court of competent
jurisdiction upon such policy or contract by any person having claim arising from the
operation or use of such ambulances or M.I.C.U.'s. Every insurance policy or contract
shall contain a description of each ambulance or M.I.C.U. vehicle insured,
manufacturer's name and serial number, the state license number, and the ambulance
or M.I.C.U. license number.
In lieu of an insurance policy or contract, a surety bond or bonds with a corporate
surety or sureties authorized to do business under the laws of Illinois may be accepted
by the License Officer for all or any part of such insurance, provided that each bond
shall be conditioned for the payment and satisfaction of any final judgment, in
conformity with the provisions of an insurance policy required by this section.
All insurance policies, contracts or surety bonds required by this section or copies
thereof, certified by the insurers or sureties, shall be filed with the clerk and no
insurance or bond shall be subject to cancellation, except on thirty (30) days previous
notice to the clerk. If any insurance or bond is cancelled or permitted to lapse for any
reason, the clerk shall suspend the license for the ambulance service or M.I.C.U.
service affected for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, to permit the insurance or
bond to be supplied in compliance with the provisions of this section. If such other
insurance or bond is not supplied within the period of suspension of the license, the
president shall revoke the license for such ambulance or M.I.C.U. service.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 4 - AMBULANCE, ETC.
4-4
Every ambulance service or M.I.C.U. service licensee shall pay each judgment or
award for the loss or damage in the operation for use of an ambulance or M.I.C.U.
rendered against such licensee by any court or commission of competent jurisdiction
within ninety (90) days after its judgment oar award shall have become final, and not
stayed by supersedeas. If any such judgment shall not be so paid, the president shall
revoke the license of the ambulance or M.I.C.U. service concerned.
(3) Said insurance policies shall be submitted to the license officer for approval prior to the
issuance of each ambulance service or M.I.C.U. service license. Satisfactory evidence that
such insurance is at all times in force and effect shall be furnished to the license officer in
such form as he may specify by all licensees required to provide such insurance under the
provisions of this section.
(4) Every insurance policy required hereunder shall contain a provision for a continuing liability
thereunder to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon, that the liability
of the insurer shall not be affected by the insolvency or the bankruptcy of the assured, and that
until the policy is revoked, the insurance company will not be relieved from liability on
account of non-payment of premium, failure to renew license at the end of the year, or any act
or omission of the named assured. Such policy of insurance shall be further conditioned for
the payment of any judgments up to the limits of said policy recovered against any person
other than the owner, his agent or employee, who may operate the same with the consent or
acquiescence of the owner.
(5) Every insurance policy required hereunder shall extend for the period to be covered by the
license applied for.
(c) The business name used by licensee operating a privately owned ambulance or M.I.C.U. service
shall neither include the name of the village, nor imply any connection with the village.
(d) Every ambulance service and M.I.C.U. service shall maintain records relating to the maintenance
and operations of its vehicles and the qualifications and training of Technicians and Mobile Intensive Care
Technicians. Standard call reports required by the Illinois Department of Public Health must also be
maintained. (Ord. No. O-8-74, 1, 10-14-74)
Sec. 4-2. Duties of license officer.
(a) The license officer shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application for an ambulance
service or M.I.C.U. service license as provided for herein, cause such investigation as he deems necessary to be
made of the applicant and of his proposed operations.
The license officer shall issue a license hereunder to be valid for a period of one (1) year, unless earlier
suspended, revoked or terminated, when he finds:
(1) That each ambulance or M.I.C.U., its required equipment and the premises designated in the
application, as provided for herein; (Ord. #0-7-12, §1, 1/9/12)
(2) That only duly certified ambulance technicians or certified mobile intensive care technicians
are employed in such capacities;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 4 - AMBULANCE, ETC.
4-5
(3) That all the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable laws and ordinances have
been met.
(Ord. No. O-8-74, § 1, 10-14-74; Ord. #0-7-12, §1, 1/9/12)
Sec. 4-3. Reserved.
(Ord. #0-7-12, §1, 1/9/12)
Sec. 4-4. Consent of sick or injured person.
No sick or injured person shall be conveyed against his will by any ambulance or M.I.C.U. from the
place where he was overcome by sickness or from the scene of the accident in which he was injured, nor
having been placed in an ambulance or M.I.C.U. shall he be conveyed to a place to which he is unwilling to go.
If such sick or injured person is unable to give any direction in his own behalf and there is no immediate
relative present to direct where he shall be taken, such sick or injured person shall be conveyed to the nearest
regularly licensed hospital that will receive him. (Ord. No. O-8-74, 1, 10-14-74)
Sec. 4-5. Obedience to traffic laws, ordinances and regulations.
(a) The driver of an ambulance or M.I.C.U. when responding to an emergency call or while
transporting a patient, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein
stated, and only when such driver has reasonable grounds to believe that an emergency in fact exists requiring
the exercise of such privileges.
(b) Subject to the provisions of subsection (a) hereof, the driver of an ambulance or M.I.C.U. may:
(1) Park or stand, irrespective of the otherwise applicable provisions of law, ordinance or
regulations;
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be
necessary for safe operation;
(3) Exceed the maximum speed limits permitted by law, this Code or other ordinance or
regulation so long as he does not endanger life or property; and
(4) Disregard laws, ordinances or regulations governing direction or movement or turning in
specified directions.
(c) The exemptions herein granted shall apply only when such ambulance or M.I.C.U. is making use of
audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of law, this Code or other ordinance or regulation.
(d) The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an ambulance or M.I.C.U. from the duty to
drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. (Ord. No. O-8-74, 1, 10-14-74)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 4 - AMBULANCE, ETC.
4-6
Sec. 4-6. Fair employment practice--Discrimination.
There shall be no discrimination against any person employed or seeking employment with an
ambulance or M.I.C.U. service licensed under this chapter on account of race, color, religion, national origin,
or ancestry; likewise, it shall be unlawful for any such service or an employee thereof to refuse aid or
transportation to any patient on account of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry. (Ord. No. O-8-74,
1, 10-14-74)
Secs. 4-7--4-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSES*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Licenses generally, Ch. 11.
----------
Sec. 4-16. Required.
(a) No person, either as owner, agent or otherwise shall furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise,
or otherwise be engaged in or profess to be engaged in the business or service of operating an ambulance upon
the streets, alleys or public ways of the village unless the owner of the ambulance is currently and validly
licensed as an ambulance service pursuant to this article. An ambulance operated by an agency of the State of
Illinois or the United States shall not be required to be licensed hereunder.
(b) No license shall be required for an ambulance which:
(1) Is rendering assistance in the case of a major catastrophe or emergency with which the
ambulance services and M.I.C.U. services licensed by the village are insufficient or unable to
cope, or
(2) Is operated from a location or headquarters outside of the village in order to transport patients
who are picked up beyond the limits of the village to locations within the village, however, no
such outside ambulance shall be used to pick up patients within the village.
(Ord. No. O-8-74, 1, 10-14-74)
State law reference(s)--Power to license and regulate the operation of ambulances, 65ILCS5/11-5-7.
Sec. 4-17. Application.
(a) Applications for ambulance service licenses hereunder shall be made in writing upon such forms as
may be prepared or prescribed by the license officer, and shall be sworn to by the applicant, or, if applicant is a
corporation, by its duly authorized agent, and shall contain:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 4 - AMBULANCE, ETC.
4-7
(1) The name and address of the applicant and of the owner of the ambulances operated by the
service.
(2) The trade or other fictitious name, if any, under which the applicant does business and
proposes to do business.
(3) The training and experience of the applicant in the transportation and care of patients.
(4) A description of each ambulance, including the make, model, year of manufacture, motor and
chassis number; the length of time the ambulance has been in use; and the color scheme,
insignia, name, monogram or other distinguishing characteristics to be used to designate
applicant's ambulance.
(5) The location and description of the place or places from which it is intended to operate.
(6) Such other information as the license officer shall deem reasonably necessary to a fair
determination of compliance with this article, including, but not limited to, evidence that a
sufficient number of employees are certified as ambulance technicians as required by this
article to allow operation of the service.
(7) An accompanying fee of:
General license fee, $100.00
Inspection fee, $25.00
to be applied to the cost of issuing such license, without being limited to, the investigations
and supervision necessary therefor, and the cost of regulating all operations of ambulance
vehicles, as provided herein. Nothing herein shall affect the right of the village to impose or
collect a vehicle tax or any occupational tax as authorized by Illinois law, in addition to the
license fee.
(8) Licenses shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance and shall be
renewable for successive periods of one (1) year. Applications for renewal of licenses shall be
as prescribed by the license officer. (Ord. No. O-8-74, 1, 10-14-74)
Sec. 4-18. Standards.
(a) Each ambulance operated by an ambulance service shall, at all times when in use as such:
(1) Be suitable for the transportation of patients from the standpoint of health, sanitation and
safety, and be maintained in suitable premises;
(2) Contain equipment conforming with the standards, requirements and regulations provided for
herein, which equipment shall be in proper and good condition for such use;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 4 - AMBULANCE, ETC.
4-8
(3) Currently comply with all applicable laws and local ordinances relating to health, sanitation
and safety;
(4) Be equipped with such lights, sirens and special markings to designate it as an ambulance as
may be prescribed in reasonable regulations promulgated by the license officer, the State of
Illinois and the United States;
(5) Be equipped with approved safety belts for the driver and for a passenger in the front seat if
such seat is provided;
(6) Not bear the "Mobile Intensive Care Unit" or M.I.C.U. identification or insignia or letters
unless it meets all requirements of this article for a Mobile Intensive Care Unit and is operated
by a Mobile Intensive Care Unit Service licensed under this article;
(7) Meet all State of Illinois and United States vehicle licensing requirements and regulations;
(8) Be equipped with a two (2) way communication system, and equipment and supplies
designated by the village health officer for dressing wounds, splinting fractures, controlling
hemorrhage, providing oxygen and emergency resuscitation and airway maintenance; and
(9) Be maintained when not in service in a fully enclosed building complying with village and
state building codes and regulations.
(b) Every ambulance service shall comply with such other and further regulations as may be
promulgated from time to time by the license officer and with all applicable terms of this article.
(c) Every ambulance service shall meet all State of Illinois and United States licensing requirements
for ambulances or ambulance services. (Ord. No. O-8-74, 1, 10-14-74)
State law reference(s)--Condition for operation of an ambulance, 625ILCS5/11-1421.
Sec. 4-19. Renewal.
Renewal of any license hereunder, upon expiration for any reason, or after revocation, shall require
conformance with all the requirements of this article as upon original licensing. (Ord. No. O-8-74, 1, 10-14-
74)
Sec. 4-20. Suspension; revocation.
(a) The license officer may, and is hereby authorized to, suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder
for failure of a licensee to comply and to maintain compliance with, or for his violation of any applicable
provisions, standards or requirements of this chapter, or of regulations promulgated hereunder, or of any other
applicable laws or ordinances or regulations promulgated thereunder, but only after warning and such
reasonable time for compliance as may be set by the license officer. Within fourteen (14) days after a
suspension, the licensee shall be afforded a hearing, after reasonable notice. The license officer shall, within
thirty (30) days after conclusion of such hearing, issue a written decision (which shall include written findings)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 4 - AMBULANCE, ETC.
4-9
as to the suspension of said license. Such written decision shall be promptly transmitted to the licensee to
whom it refers.
(b) The initial, semi-annual and other ambulance or M.I.C.U. equipment and premises inspection
reports of the health officer herein provided for shall be prima facie evidence of compliance or noncompliance
with, or violation of, the provisions, standards and requirements provided herein, and of the regulations
promulgated hereunder, for the licensing of ambulance or M.I.C.U. services.
(c) Upon suspension, revocation or termination of an ambulance or M.I.C.U. service license hereunder,
such service shall cease operations as such and no person shall permit such ambulance or M.I.C.U. service to
continue operations as such. (Ord. No. O-8-74, 1, 10-14-74)
Secs. 4-21--4-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE UNIT SERVICES LICENSES*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Licenses generally, Ch. 11.
----------
Sec. 4-31. Required.
No person, either as owner, agent or otherwise, shall furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or
otherwise be engaged in or profess to be engaged in the business or service of operating a M.I.C.U. upon the
streets, alleys or public ways of the village unless the owner of the M.I.C.U. is currently, validly licensed as a
Mobile Intensive Care Unit Service pursuant to this article. A M.I.C.U. operated by an agency of the State of
Illinois or the United States shall not be required to be licensed hereunder. (Ord. No. O-8-74, 1, 10-14-74)
Sec. 4-32. Application.
The application for an M.I.C.U. license shall be the same as that for ambulance service as prescribed in
section 4-17; provided that wherever the words "ambulance service" appear it shall be construed as "M.I.C.U.
Service." Provided also that the following fees shall prevail:
General license fee, $200.00.
Inspection fee, $50.00.
(Ord. No. O-8-74, 1, 10-14-74)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 4 - AMBULANCE, ETC.
4-10
Sec. 4-33. Standards.
(a) Each M.I.C.U. operated by a M.I.C.U. Service shall, at all times when in use as such:
(1) Comply with all the standards set forth for ambulances in paragraph 4-18, with the exception
of (a)(6).
(2) Comply with all other provisions of this article applicable to M.I.C.U.'s.
(b) Every M.I.C.U. Service shall comply with such other and further regulations as may be
promulgated from time to time by the license officer.
(c) Meet all State of Illinois and United States licensing requirements and regulations for M.I.C.U.'s
and M.I.C.U. Services. (Ord. No. O-8-74, 1, 10-14-74)
Sec. 4-34. Renewal.
The provisions of section 4-19 regarding the renewal of licenses shall apply to M.I.C.U.'s.
Sec. 4-35. Revocation; suspension.
The provisions of section 4-20 regarding the revocation and suspension of licenses shall apply to
M.I.C.U.'s.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 5 - ANIMALS
5-1
Chapter 5 ANIMALS*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--For provisions regarding powers and duties of board of health in relation to
-346.
State law reference(s)— Animal Control Act, 510ILCS5/1. Illinois Dangerous Animals Act 720
ILCS 585 Humane Care for Animals Act 510ILCS 70
County law reference—Cook County Code of Ordinances –Animals –Chapter 10
-----------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 0-8-11, passed on February 7, 2011, replaced Chapter 5 in its entirety.
-----------
Art. I. In Gen §§5-1--5-19
Art. II. §§5-20--5-25
Art. III. §§5-26--5-54
§§5-26--5-35
§§5-36--5-54
Art. IV. §§5-55--5-57
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Purpose:
? Protecting citizens from rabies by specifying such preventive and control measures as may be
necessary;
? Protecting animals from abuse, neglect, inhumane treatment and health hazards, particularly
rabies; Providing security to residents from annoyance, intimidation, and injury from cats, dogs,
and other animals;
? Encouraging responsible pet ownership;
? Providing for the assessment of penalties for violators and for the enforcement and
administration of this Ordinance.
Sec. 5-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless their
context clearly requires otherwise:
Abandoned means a domesticated animal that an owner has forsaken entirely or neglected or refused
to provide care and support.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 5 - ANIMALS
5-2
Bite means seizure of a person or domestic animal with the jaws or teeth of any cat, dog or other
animal capable of transmitting rabies so that the person so seized has been wounded or pierced and further
includes contact of the saliva of cat, dog or other animal with any break or abrasion of the skin.
Cat shall mean all members of the feline family.
Cat of licensing age shall mean any cat which has attained the age of four (4) months.
Confined means the restriction of the cat, dog or other animal at all times by the owner in a
manner that will isolate the cat, dog or other animal from the public and other cats, dogs or other animals.
Control means any owned animal that is either secured by a leash or lead, or within the premises
of its owner, or confined within a crate or cage, or confined within a vehicle, or within the premises of
another person with the consent of that person.
Dangerous dog means any individual dog when unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its owner or
custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses a serious and unjustified
imminent threat of serious physical injury or death to a person or a companion animal. (Cook Co. Chapter 10
Article III sec 10-77)
Dog shall mean all members of the canine family.
Dog of licensing age shall mean any dog which has attained the age of four (4) months.
Domestic animal shall mean any dog, cat, or other animal that is permitted to remain on or about
the premises of any residence or business, or is cared for or provided food by an owner on a regular basis.
(Ord. No. 0-44-03, §1, 2/10/03)
Dangerous animal means a lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot, jaguar, cheetah, margay, mountain lion,
lynx, bobcat, jaguarundi, bear, hyena, wolf or coyote, or any poisonous or life-threatening reptile. (720
ILCS 585)
Enclosure ---- means a fence or structure of at least six feet in height, forming or causing an
enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine an animal in conjunction
with other measures that may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the animal, within the
enclosure. The enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top, and
bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. If the enclosure is a
room within a residence, the door must be locked. (Cook County Chp 10 Article III sec 10-77 ; 510 ILCS
5/2.11a)
Ferret means all members of the classification, Mustela putorius furo .
Feral Cat means a cat that:
(1) Is born in the wild or is the offspring of an owned or feral cat and is not socialized;
(2) Is a formerly owned cat that has been abandoned and is no longer socialized; or
(3) Lives on a farm.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 5 - ANIMALS
5-3
Feral Cat Caretaker means any person other than an owner who provides food, water or shelter to, or
otherwise cares for, a feral cat.
Feral Cat Colony means a group of cats that congregate, more or less, together as a unit. Although not
every cat in a Colony may be feral, any nonferal cats that congregate with a colony shall be deemed to be a part
of it.
Feral Cat Colony Caretaker means any Feral Cat Caretaker who is approved by a Sponsor to care for a
Feral Cat Colony. (Cook County Chp. 10 Article IV )
Guard dog means a dog used in a commercial business or by a municipal or police department for
the purposes of patrol and protection.
Hospital shall mean any establishment under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian where animals
are taken for treatment of disease, boarding, surgery, shots, treatment of injury, cremations, baths, grooming,
haircuts, pedicure or training.
Impounded means taken into the custody of the public animal control facility in the city, town, or
county where animal is found.
Kennel shall mean and include any establishment or premises where more than three (3) dogs or three
(3) cats or any combination thereof over four (4) months of age are boarded or kept for any purpose
whatsoever, with the exception of regularly established veterinary hospitals, pet shops, pounds or shelters.
Kennels should only be allowed when in conformance with the Palatine Zoning Ordinance.
.
Muzzle means a fastening or covering for the mouth of an animal used to prevent biting and eating.
Other animals shall mean any male or female domesticated or wild animal other than dogs or cats.
Owner shall mean any person having a right of property in a dog, cat, or other animal or who keeps or
harbors a dog, cat, or other animal or has it in his care or acts as its custodian or who knowingly permits a dog,
cat, or other animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
Pet shop shall mean any room or group of rooms, cage or pen, not part of a kennel, pound, shelter
or veterinary hospital wherein dogs, cats or other animals are kept or displayed for sale.
Pet shop operator shall mean any person who sells, offers to sell, exchange or offer for adoption, with
or without charge or donation, dogs, cats or other animals, provided that a person who sells only dogs or cats
that he has produced or raised shall not be considered a pet shop operator hereunder, and further provided that
a person who sells only dogs or cats that he has owned for a period of ninety (90) days or longer shall not be
considered a pet shop operator hereunder.
Physical injury means the impairment of physical condition.
Scratch means a wound, usually superficial, inflicted by nails, claws, or something pointed pulled
across the skin, etc.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 5 - ANIMALS
5-4
Serious physical injury means a physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes
death, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, impairment of the function of any bodily organ, or
injury requiring plastic surgery, or injury or injuries that when viewed by a reasonable person are considered
significant and substantial.
Police animal means an animal owned or used by a law enforcement department or agency in the
course of the department's or agency's work.
Pound shall mean an enclosure established for the confinement of dogs, cats or other animals under the
provisions of this chapter, a facility licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture.
Rabies is a virus transmitted by the inoculation of infectious saliva through the skin as in, bite
wounds, open cuts or mucous membranes. It attacks the central nervous system and is present primarily in
the saliva, brain tissue and spinal fluid of a rabid animal.
Service animal means any guide dog, signal dog, or other animal individually trained to do work
or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including, but not limited to, guiding
individuals with impaired vision, alerting individuals with impaired hearing to intruders or sounds,
providing minimal protection or rescue work, pulling a wheelchair, or fetching dropped items.
Stray animal means any owned animal that is not controlled. The stray animal owner is
responsible for all costs relating in the apprehension and impoundment of the animal found not under
control.
Tethering means to restrain a dog by tying the dog to any object or structure, including without
limitation a house, tree, fence, post, garage, shed, clothes line by any means, including without limitation a
chain, rope, cord, leash or running line. (Cook Co. Chp 10 Article 1 10-2)
TNR means Trap, Neuter and Return.
TNR Program means a program pursuant to which feral and stray cats are trapped, neutered or spayed,
microchipped, vaccinated against rabies, and returned to the location where they congregate, in accordance
with the Cook County ordinance. (Cook Co. Chp 10 Article IV sec. 10-95., Ord. No. 07-0-72, 10-16-2007)
Shelter shall mean any establishment where dogs, cats or other animals are received, housed, and
distributed with or without charge.
Stray animals shall mean those animals which are running at large in the public way or on private
property other than that of the owners or keepers of such animals.
Vaccination shall mean the injection subcutaneously or otherwise as approved by the Illinois
Department of Agriculture of anti-rabies vaccine approved by the Illinois Department of Agriculture for the
prevention of rabies.
Vicious animal means an animal that, without justification, attacks a person or domestic animal, and
causes physical injury, serious physical injury or death or any individual animal that has been found to be
"dangerous" upon three separate occasions. (Cook County Chp 10 Article III sec 10-78) (Code 1961,
§16.101)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 5 - ANIMALS
5-5
Sec. 5-2. Cruelty/Neglect of Animals
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully and cruelly to injure or kill any animal by any mode or
means causing it unnecessary fright or pain, and it shall further be unlawful for any person, by neglect or
otherwise, to cause or allow any animal to endure pain, suffering, or injury, or to fail or neglect to aid or
attempt alleviation of any pain, suffering or injury so caused to any animal. §16.102)
(a) No owner shall fail to provide his or her animals with sufficient wholesome food and
water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to
prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment.
(b) No person shall beat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal.
(c) No person shall own, keep, harbor, or otherwise maintain within the village, any breeds of
fowl that are or will be used in the pursuit of and staging of cockfighting on any premises.
(d) No person shall promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct, or carry on any animal fight or any
other type of contest, game or fight of a similar nature, nor any simulated version of same
that involves baiting or inciting an animal toward intent to fight.
(e) No person shall be permitted to keep animals in violation of the Humane Care for Animal
Act (510 ILCS 70/1 et seq.) or the Animal Welfare Act (225 ILCS 605/1 et seq).
(f) No owner may abandon any animal where it may become a public charge or may suffer
injury, hunger or exposure.
(g) No person shall kill or wound, attempt to kill or wound, or take the nest or eggs or young of
any bird that is protected by Federal or State law
(h) No person shall keep or permit to be kept or display for exhibition purposes any wild animal
contrary to Federal, State and local laws or regulations.
(i) No person shall leave any animal unattended in a motor vehicle or enclosed trailer when the
outside temperature shall exceed 30 degrees Celsius (86 degrees Fahrenheit) or contain any
animal in such manner that the animal does not have proper air circulation while confined in a
motor vehicle, trailer, kennel, dog house, or any type of container or structure in which an
animal may be confined. (Cook County Chp 10 Article I sec. 10-8)
(j) Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes an animal shall stop at once and
render such assistance as may be possible; or shall immediately report such injury to the
animal owner, if known; or the appropriate law enforcement agency; or to the local humane
society.
State law reference(s)--Power of municipality to prohibit cruelty to animals, 510 ILCS 70
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 5 - ANIMALS
5-6
Sec. 5-3. Leaving or exposing poison to animals unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to lay out or expose any kind of poison or to leave exposed any
poison, poisoned food or poisoned drink for animal or fowl on the premises of another, or in any unenclosed
§16.103)
Sec. 5-4. Killing when dangerous.
The members of the police department, health department or other authorized person may kill any
animal of any kind when it is necessary for the immediate protection of any person or property. All such
animals shall have entire brain submitted to recognized laboratory for rabies examination. (Code 1961,
§16.104)
Sec. 5-5. Diseased.
No domestic or wild animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be allowed to be
shipped or removed from the premises of the owner thereof, except under the supervision of the health
department. It is hereby made the duty of the health department to secure such disposition of any diseased
animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication and spread of the contagion or
infection except as otherwise provided by law. (Code 1961, §16.105)
Sec. 5-6. Control of animals.
It shall be unlawful:
(1) To permit any dog or other animal, whether licensed or not, to run at large within the village.
A dog or other animal shall be deemed to be running at large when off the premises of its
owner, or not on a leash, tether, chain, rope or the like, the overall length of which, including
the hand grip, shall not exceed six (6) feet, held by its owner or other person able to control
such dog or other animal. (Ord. No. 0-85- §1, 10/14/74)
a) Tethered dogs must have access at all times to water, adequate shelter and dry
ground. Multiple dogs should not be tethered together and have their own water and
shelter.
b) Tethers must be at least 10ft long and in a manner to prevent injury or strangulation.
It must be attached to a properly fitting collar/harness with a rotating toggle
attachment. Pinch, prong or choke collars should not be used. The tether should not
wrap directly around the dog’s neck.
c) No dog may be tethered in cases of extreme weather conditions.
d) No dog shall be tethered within 200 yards of a school.
e) No person shall permit a tethered dog to bark, whine, howl or make excess noises so
as to cause a nuisance. ( Cook County Chp 10 Article I sec 10-8)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 5 - ANIMALS
5-7
(2) To permit any animal, whether licensed or not, to enter any public body of water, pond,
fountain, or stream.
(3) To permit any animal to enter any place where food is stored, prepared, served or sold to the
public, or any other public building or hall, provided, however, that this section shall not
apply to any disabled person with a support dog to veterinary offices or hospitals, or to animal
shows or exhibitions where at least twenty-four (24) hours advance notice has been given to
the health department.
(4) To permit any animal to trespass on private or public property without the consent of the
property owners.
(5) To permit any dog to chase, run after or jump at vehicles using the public thoroughfares.
(6) To permit any dog to habitually snap, growl, snarl, jump upon or otherwise threaten persons
lawfully using any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park, or
any place where people congregate or walk.
(7) To keep, harbor, or maintain any vicious animal or animal with vicious propensities in a
manner which may or does endanger the safety of persons or property off his premises or
lawfully on his premises.
(8) To own, harbor, keep, or be in charge of any dog, cat, or other animal, which has been
declared vicious by the local health or police authorities or to permit such dog, cat or other
animal to be upon a public street or highway, or upon any premises other than those of the
person owning such dog, cat or other animal or those of a person who has given permission to
said owner to keep or harbor such dog, cat or other animal on his premises unless such dog,
cat or other animal wears a muzzle securely fastened about its mouth in such a manner that it
cannot bite and is on a leash, tether, chain, rope or the like, the overall length of which,
including the hand grip, shall not exceed six (6) feet held by its owner or other person able to
control such dog, cat or other animal and while on the premises of the owner, shall not be
allowed to come in contact with any person who is not a member of the immediate household.
(9) To permit any dog, cat, or other animal to howl, yelp, whine, or meow or bark or make noise
in such a manner as to disturb any person or neighborhood.
(10) To allow any place where any animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unsanitary.
(11) To harbor, keep or raise any live cattle, swine (including pot-bellied pigs), sheep, goat,
chickens or other fowl anywhere in the village.
(12) To harbor or be in charge of any dog, cat, or other animal, or cause, suffer, or allow such dog,
cat, or other animal to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any common
thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, or any place where people congregate
or walk, or upon any public property whatsoever, or upon any private property without the
permission of the owner of said property unless:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 5 - ANIMALS
5-8
(a) The person who so curbs such dog, cat, or other animal, shall immediately remove all
feces deposited by such dog, cat, or other animal by any sanitary method approved by
the health department.
(b) The feces removed shall be disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping, or
in charge of any dog, cat, or other animal curbed in accordance with the provisions of
this ordinance, in a sanitary manner approved by the health department.
(13) To fail to report animal bite.
(a) To fail to report an animal bite, whether to a human or another domestic animal
within twenty four (24) hours. This includes bites of a family pet to a family member.
(Cook Co. Chp. 10 Article II 10-42)
(b) Fail to comply with the mandated rabies observation period. All biting animals must
be observed by a licensed veterinarian within 24 hours of the bite. (510 ILCS 5/13)
(c) It shall be unlawful for the owner of a biting animal to euthanize, sell, give away or
otherwise dispose of, or have inoculated against rabies the biting animal until it has
been released from the rabies observation confinement by the veterinarian. (Cook Co
Chp. 10 Article II sec. 10-42)
(14) Up to three (3) rabbits may be kept on any single-family residential lot within a residential
district as defined in Appendix A, Zoning Ordinance, of this Code. Rabbits must be kept in
hutches or cages that are available for inspection by the health department. No cage or hutch
shall be located within ten (10) feet of any lot line.
§16.301; Ord. No. O-73- §1, §2, 7/11/77)
(15) To permit any dog, cat, or other animal to bite, scratch, or in any other manner, break the
skin of any person within the Village of Palatine. (Ord. 0-44-03, §2, 2/10/03)
(16) To permit any dog, cat, or other animal to bite, scratch, or in any other manner, break the
skin of any other domestic animal within the Village of Palatine. (Ord. 0-44-03, §2,
2/10/03)
(17) No person shall have a right of property in, keep, harbor, care for, act as custodian of or
maintain in his possession any dangerous animal except at a properly maintained
zoological park, federally licensed exhibit, circus, scientific or educational institution,
research laboratory, veterinary hospital, hound running area, or animal refuge in an
escape-proof enclosure. "Dangerous animal" means a lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot,
jaguar, cheetah, margay, mountain lion, lynx, bobcat, jaguarundi, bear, hyena, wolf or
coyote, or any poisonous or life-threatening reptile. (720 ILCS 585/1)
It is no defense to a violation that the person violating such has attempted to domesticate
the dangerous animal. If there appears to be imminent danger to the public, any
dangerous animal found not in compliance with the provisions of this Act shall be
subject to seizure and may immediately be placed in an approved facility. Upon the
conviction of a person for a violation of such, the animal with regard to which the
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 5 - ANIMALS
5-9
conviction was obtained shall be confiscated and placed in an approved facility, with the
owner thereof to be responsible for all costs connected with the seizure and confiscation
of such animal. Approved facilities include, but are not limited to, a zoological park,
federally licensed exhibit, humane society, veterinary hospital or animal refuge. (720
ILCS 585/2)
Sec. 5-7. Animal bites.
Whenever any dog, cat, or other animal bites a person, or another domestic animal the owner of said
dog, cat, or other animal shall immediately notify the police department and the health department who shall
order the dog, cat, or other animal to be held on the owner's premises, if vaccinated, or shall have it confined
and observed in a veterinary hospital, if not vaccinated, for a period of ten (10) days. The dog, cat, or other
animal shall be examined immediately after it has bitten anyone and at the end of the ten (10) day period. If at
the end of the ten (10) day period of observation a veterinarian is convinced that the dog, cat, or other animal is
free from rabies, he shall order the dog, cat, or other animal released from quarantine. The owner of said dog,
cat, or other animal shall be responsible for all fees and charges incurred to meet the requirements of this
§16.302)
Owners of caged rabbits, guinea pigs, gerbils, rats and mice owned over thirty (30) days are not
required to submit it for a vet exam when it bites someone. They must report the animal’s health status to the
Cook County Department of Rabies and Animal Control on the first and tenth day after the bite.
State law reference(s)--Similar provisions, 510ILCS5/13.
a) Animal attacks or injuries. If a dog or other animal, without provocation, attacks, attempts to
attack, or injures any person who is peaceably conducting himself or herself in any place
where he or she may lawfully be, the owner of such dog or other animal is liable in civil
damages to such person for the full amount of the injury proximately caused thereby. This
shall include injury to a person’s domestic animal. (510 ILCS 5/16)
Sec. 5-8. Public nuisance--Declared.
Any dog, cat, or other animal doing any of the acts prohibited in section 5-6 is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and such animal may be seized and impounded as provided herein. (Code 1961, §16.401)
Sec. 5-9. Same--Abatement.
(1) Any vicious dog, cat or other animal constituting a public nuisance as provided in this chapter may be
referred to the Animal Safety Commission (Article II of this Chapter) for public hearing and
disposition upon receipt by the Commission of certified copies of the judgment and sentence showing
one (1) citation and conviction of an owner (convictions to include unpaid tickets, with proof of
service, sent for collection) for violations of section 5-6 and no finding was entered by the court
showing that the owner will be able to provide restraints to protect the public.
(2) In all instances in which an owner of a dog, cat or other animal is convicted of one violation of section
5-6 of this Code and such conviction involves a case in which the animal has bitten or attacked a
person, the matter may be referred to the Animal Safety Commission (Article II of this Chapter) for
public hearing and disposition. The chairman of the commission, in his sole discretion, may also
convene the commission to conduct public hearings as a result of one or more written complaints filed
with him concerning an animal housed within the Village.
(Ord. 0-44-03, §4, 2/10/03)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 5 - ANIMALS
5-10
Sec. 5-10. Impoundment.
The police department and health department are authorized to enforce the provisions of section 5-8 by
impounding any animals found in violation thereof. After such animal is impounded, the police department or
health department shall ascertain whether they are licensed, and if so, shall within a reasonable time notify by
letter or telephone the person to whom the license was issued that said animal has been impounded and may be
redeemed. Any animal impounded pursuant to this section shall be held for the owner up to seven (7) days. In
case any animal is not redeemed, it shall be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of, provided that none
of said animals shall be used for experimental purposes. Any animal may be impounded by the Chief of Police
for a period of time deemed by the Chief of Police necessary to protect the public health. (Code 1961,
Sec. 5-11. Same--Notice.
(a) In the event that any dog or cat seized for running at large wears a collar or harness having
inscribed thereon and attached thereto the name and address of any person, or a license tag identifying the
owner or person keeping or harboring said cat or dog or any other animal, the police department or health
department shall forthwith serve on the person whose name or address is given on the collar or is determined
from the dog or cat license records of the village, a citation in writing stating that the dog, cat or other animal
has been seized and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven (7) days after
service of the citation.
(b) A citation under this section may be served either by delivering it to the person on whom it is to be
served or by leaving it at the person's usual or last known place of abode or at the address given on the collar of
the animal impounded or by forwarding it by certified letter addressed to that person at his usual or last known
place of abode or to the address given on the collar. (Code 1961, §§16.501, 16.502)
Sec. 5-12. Same--Wild animals.
In the event of an animal bite from wildlife, every attempt will be made to capture and humanely
euthanize it. The brain shall be preserved and sent to a recognized laboratory for rabies examination. (Code
1961, §16.406)
Sec. 5-13. Redemption.
Any dog, cat or other animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article may be redeemed
upon payment of the redemption fee as provided herein. The redemption fee for dogs, cats and other animals
shall be as set out in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances for each dog, cat or
other animal, plus the total boarding fee incurred during the time which such dog, cat or other animal is
§16.405; Ord. No. O-47-80, §1; 5-27-80 Ord. No. 0-5- §5, 2-14-
94)
Sec. 5-14. Interference with authorized officer.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or empowered to perform any duty
§16.403)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 5 - ANIMALS
5-11
Sec. 5-15. Enforcing authorities saved from liability.
In carrying out the enforcement provisions of this chapter, no member of the police department or
health department or other authorized person shall be held responsible for any accident or disease that may
§16.505)
Sec. 5-16. Penalties.
(1) Any person, firm, or corporation violating section 5-42 of this chapter shall be fined not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), nor more than $750.00.
(2) Any person, firm, or corporation violating section 5-6(15) and 5-6 (16) of this chapter shall be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first such offense and not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second and all subsequent offenses with a mandatory court
appearance required.
(3) Any person, firm, or corporation violating any other provision of this chapter shall be fined
not less than twenty dollars ($20.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
the first such offense; and shall be fined not less than thirty dollars ($30.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the second such offense; and shall be fined not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the third
such offense and all subsequent offenses within a one-year period. (Ord. No. O-87- §1,
12-8-75; Ord.No.0-5- §7,1-26-98)
(4) Nothing in this ordinance shall limit the Animal Warden’s discretion to require a mandatory
court appearance for any violation cited under this ordinance.
(Ord. No. O-87- §1, 12/8/75; Ord.No.0-5- §7,1/26/98, Ord. 0-44-03, §5, 2/10/03)
Secs. 5-17--5-19. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ANIMAL SAFETY COMMISSION*
----------
*Editor's note--Ord. No. 0-62- §1, adopted Aug. 11, 1975, amended the 1961 Code by adding
the provisions in -20--5-23.
----------
Sec. 5-20. Creation; composition and chairman.
There is hereby created an Animal Safety Commission consisting of the following three (3) members:
The chairman of the Administration, Technology and Community Health Committee of the Palatine Village
Council, the Palatine Chief of Police and the Environmental Director of the Palatine Health Department. The
chairman of the health, safety and welfare committee shall act as chairman of the commission. (Ord. No. O-
62-75, §1, 8-11-75, Ord. 0-44-03, § 6, 2/10/03)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 5 - ANIMALS
5-12
Sec. 5-21. Quorum.
Two (2) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote shall be required for
all decisions of the commission. (Ord. No. O-62- §1, 8/11/75)
Sec. 5-22. Duties.
The commission shall conduct public hearings and dispose of cases involving alleged vicious animals
in accordance with the procedures hereinafter set forth. (Ord. No. O-62- §1, 8/11/75)
Sec. 5-23. Procedures.
Hearings shall be held not less than five (5) nor more than thirty (30) days after the commission has
received notification of a conviction, as described in Section 5-9, or after receipt by the chairman of a written
complaint or complaints upon which he bases his decision to convene a public hearing. The owner of the
animal involved shall be given not less than five (5) days prior notice of said hearing, served upon such owner
either personally or by certified or registered mail.
The purpose of the hearing shall be to determine whether the dog, cat or other animal is a vicious
animal constituting a public nuisance which should be abated, destroyed or removed from the village or
whether another appropriate means of resolving the controversy exists.
All hearings shall be conducted in accordance with rules formulated and established by the
commission.
At the conclusion of said hearing, the commission may enter such order as it determines appropriate to
resolve the controversy, and in the event that it finds the dog, cat or other animal constitutes a public nuisance
which should be abated, destroyed or removed from the village, it shall so order and it shall notify the owner of
the animal of its findings and it shall serve a copy of said order upon the Palatine Health Department.
Thereupon the Palatine Health Department shall direct the animal owner and assure that the owner of said dog,
cat or other animal abates, destroys or removes the same from the village within ninety-six (96) hours from the
date of the notice. If such dog, cat or other animal is found to be within the confines of the village after said
ninety-six-hour period shall have elapsed, said dog, cat or other animal shall be destroyed or removed by the
Palatine Health Department. Said owner shall be responsible for all expenses incurred as to the abatement,
removal and/or euthanasia of the animal.
The procedures and remedies provided in this Article II shall be separate from and in addition to the
penalties and abatement procedures elsewhere provided in this Chapter 5. (Ord. No. O-62- §1, 8/11/75,
0-44-03, §7, 2/10/03)
Secs. 5-24, 5-25. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 5 - ANIMALS
5-13
ARTICLE III. DOGS AND CATS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 5-26--5-35. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. LICENSES*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Licensing generally, Ch. 11.
----------
Sec. 5-36. Required.
All dogs and cats harbored, kept or maintained in the village shall be licensed annually, provided,
however, that dogs kept in pet shops, pounds, shelters, hospitals or kennels need not be licensed annually while
kept at such pet shop, pound, shelter, hospital or kennel while such establishment is duly licensed as provided
§16.201)
Sec. 5-37. Applications.
Applications for dog and cat licenses shall be on forms provided by the village and shall include a
statement of the owner's name, address and telephone number as well as information concerning the breed, sex,
age, color and markings of the dog or cat for which the license is sought and whether it is of a long or shorthaired
variety. (Code 1961, §16.202) A copy of the current rabies vaccine certificate should accompany the
application.
Sec. 5-38. Fee.
The annual license fee for dogs and cats shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the
§16.203; Ord. No. 0-20- §1, 3/8/82; Ord. No. 0-75- §1,
8/23/82; Ord. No. 0O-48- §1(9), 8/8/83)
Sec. 5-39. Period.
The license period shall be for one year commencing July 1st and expiring on June 30th of the
§16.204; Ord. No. 0-75- §1, 8/23/82)
Sec. 5-40. Display required.
A license tag issued by the village upon proper application and payment of fee shall be securely
affixed to a substantial collar which shall be worn by each dog or cat at all times. A current rabies tag must
also be affixed to the collar. §16.205)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 5 - ANIMALS
5-14
Sec. 5-41. Removal prohibited; exceptions.
No persons except an officer in the performance of his duties under this chapter shall remove a
license/rabies tag from the collar of any dog or cat without the consent of the owner, nor shall any person attach
a license/rabies §16.404)
Sec. 5-42. Vaccination required.
All dogs or cats or ferrets (as per Cook County Ordinance Amendment) four (4) months of age and
older shall be vaccinated against rabies with an approved rabies vaccine. Rabies vaccines shall be recognized
for either a one (1) year or a three (3) year immunization period as follows:
(1) Three (3) year immunity: Low egg passage chicken embryo origin modified live virus Flury
strain rabies vaccines (safe for use on dogs only) will be recognized for three (3) years;
provided the dog is at least one (1) year of age at the time of vaccination. If dogs under one
(1) year of age are vaccinated with this type of vaccine, the immunity will be recognized for a
period of one (1) year.
(2) One (1) year immunity: All other rabies vaccines currently licensed by the veterinary
biologics program United States Department of Agriculture are recognized for a one (1) year
immunization period.
Animals required to be inoculated against rabies as specified in this chapter shall be re-vaccinated
within the time period specified for the particular vaccine used, except as provided above in regard to dogs
under one (1) year of age. The certificate of vaccination issued shall specify the duration of immunity.
If a licensed veterinarian determines in writing that a rabies inoculation would compromise an animal's
health, then the animal shall be exempt from the rabies shot. A copy of such shall accompany the village
animal license application. (510 ILCS 5/8)
Sec. 5-43. Guide dogs exempted.
All service dogs used for support by disabled individuals shall be licensed as other dogs hereinabove
provided, with the exception that the license fee will be waived. §16.207)
Sec. 5-44. Guard Dogs
All guard dogs shall be registered with the Cook County Department of Animal Rabies and Control
each and every year. They must have a current rabies vaccine and be microchipped for identification purposes.
Secs. 5-45--5-54. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 5 - ANIMALS
5-15
ARTICLE IV. BEEKEEPING
Sec. 5-55. General restriction.
No person shall keep bees in the village unless such person has filed a copy of his or her State of
Illinois beekeepers permit with the village clerk of the village. Copies of renewal licenses shall be filed with the
village clerk promptly after the issuance thereof. (Ord. No. 0-105- §1, 11/27/78)
Sec. 5-56. Location of beehives.
No beehive shall be located less than twenty-five (25) feet from any property line. No beehive shall be
mounted on a habitable structure, excepting a single-family residence occupied by the licensed beekeeper,
provided such single-family residence is located at least twenty-five (25) feet from any other habitable building
or structure. (Ord. No. 0-105- §1, 11/27/78)
Sec. 5-57. Fencing required.
All beehives in the village, whether ground positioned or elevated, shall be enclosed by a fence, all
parts of which shall be at a distance of at least twenty (20) feet from the beehive. All fence openings or points
of entry into the beehive shall be equipped with gates. The fence shall be no less than five (5) feet in height and
shall be constructed of a minimum number nine (9) gauge woven wire mesh corrosion-resistant material or
approved equivalent determined by the director of community development. All gates shall be equipped with
self-closing and self-latching devices placed at least four (4) feet above ground level. All fence posts shall be
decay- and corrosion-resistant and shall be set in concrete bases. (Ord. No. 0-105- §1, 11/27/78)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-1
Chapter 6 BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Director of public works, 2-171 et seq.; director of community development,
§ 2-191 et seq.; electrical inspector, § 2-194; plumbing inspector, § 2-195; environmental committees, §
2-306 et seq.; director of environmental health, § 2-326 et seq.; board of health, § 2-341 et. seq.; plan
commission, § 2-421 et seq.; board of zoning appeals, § 2-431 et seq.; fire protection and prevention, Ch.
7; garbage and refuse, Ch. 8; health and sanitation, Ch. 9; existing structures' maintenance and occupancy
Ch. 10; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 16; water and sewer services, Ch. 19; zoning ordinances, App. A;
subdivision regulations, App. B.
----------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance No.0-9-99 replaced Art. I through V of Chapter 6, Building Codes and
Regulations. This ordinance was passed on February 22, 1999 with an effective date of 5/1/99.
-----------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 0-2-00, passed on January 3, 2000, created a new Article IV
Architectural Design Guidelines
-----------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-84-02, replaced Chapter 6 in it’s entirety. This Ordinance was
passed on May 28, 2002 with an effective date of July 1, 2002.
-----------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-250-05, passed on December 19, 2005, effective January 1, 2006,
deleted Secs. 6-1.5 through 6-1.7 in their entirety, and replaced with a new Sec. 6-1.5)
-----------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-58-06, passed on March 20, 2006, effective June 1, 2006, replaced
Article I in its entirety.
------------
Art. I. Building Codes and Amendments, §§ 6-1.1--6-15
Art. II. Reserved
Art. III. Building Operations, §§ 6-31--6-40
Art. IV. Architectural Design Guidelines, §§ 6-41--6-55
Art. V. Public Improvements, §§ 6-56--6-69
Art. VI. Nonconforming Buildings and Structures, §§ 6-70--6-79
Art. VII. Condominium Conversion, §§ 6-80--6-91
Art. VIII. Enforcement and Penalties, §§ 6-92—6-93
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-2
ARTICLE I. BUILDING CODES AND AMENDMENTS
Sec. 6-1.1 Minimum standards.
(a) The following list of codes and Palatine amendments are hereby adopted by reference:
(1) International Residential Code, 2015 Edition (with amendments).
(a) Appendix A, Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping
(b) Appendix B, Sizing of Venting Systems Serving Appliances Equipped
with draft Hoods
(c) Appendix C, Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-Vent
Venting Systems,
(d) Appendix E, Manufactured Housing used as Dwellings
(e) Appendix F, Passive Radon Gas Control Methods
(f) Appendix H, Patio Covers
(g) Appendix J, Existing Buildings and Structures
(h) Appendix K, Sound Transmission
(i) Appendix M, Home Day Care R-3 Occupancy
(2) International Building Code, 2015 Edition (with amendments).
(a) Appendix I, Patio covers
(3) International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition (with amendments).
(4) International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition.
(5) Illinois Title 71: Part 600, Illinois Energy Conservation Code, 2018 International
Energy Conservation Code with Illinois Amendments
(Ord. No. 0-29-13, §1, 4/8/13; Ord. No. 0-21-15, §1, 3/16/15)
(6) National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition (with amendments).
(7) Illinois Plumbing Code, Latest Edition.
(8) Illinois Accessibility Code, Latest Edition.
(9) International Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition
(10) International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2015 Edition
(Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11; Ord. O-93-18, 08/13/18 eff. 01/01/19;
Ord. O-72-19, 08/12/19)
Sec. 6-1.2 Discretionary powers.
(a) Wherever in this article and the codes adopted by this article reference is made to the
building director or the building official, they shall mean the Director of Community Services. (Ord. No.
0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11, Ord. O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-3
Sec. 6-1.3. Building Director
(a) Qualifications. To be eligible for appointment by the village manager to the office of
building director, the qualifications of an applicant shall include an understanding of the quality and
strength of building materials and prevailing methods of construction for safety, comfort and
convenience.
Sec. 6-1.4. Permits and Administration
(a) Survey. After the foundation of a new building or any addition to an existing building
has been completed, the applicant shall furnish a survey prepared by a registered Illinois surveyor
showing the dimensional location of such foundation and including the following required information:
(1) Accurate dimensions of front yard, side yards and rear yard setbacks;
(2) United States Geographical Survey (USGS) elevations of top of foundation at all
corners and top of curb or crown of street.
The above required information may be shown upon a recertification of the plat filed at the time
the building permit was secured. No further work is to proceed until the plat (spotted plat) is filed and
approved. Such plats must be filed within ten (10) business days from the date of the foundation
inspection.
When required, a final topographical survey shall be furnished by the applicant after the final grading
is completed. No final grade inspection shall be conducted until this survey is reviewed and approved.
The final topographical survey shall indicate the finished grade elevations at the identical points shown
on the approved grading plan. (Ord. #0-204-07, §1, 12/10/07, effective 1/1/08)
All required surveys shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a surveyor in good standing licensed by
the State of Illinois.
Sec. 6-1.4.1. Section R105.1 of the 2015 International Residential code and section 105.1 of the 2015
International Building code shall be amended to add the following:
(a) No permit shall be issued for the erection of any building or structure which is not
completely in conformity with the applicable provisions of the Village of Palatine Code of Ordinances.
(b) No permit shall be issued hereunder for any premises unless the sanitary sewer mains and
water mains of the village shall have been extended within right of ways or easements to the furthest
property line of the premises if readily accessible within 250 feet from the property line or unless a
temporary permit shall have been issued pursuant to authorization by the corporate authorities of the
village for the installation on the premises of facilities other than modern plumbing facilities properly
connected with the water distribution and sanitary sewer systems of the village, and unless there shall
have been installed or unless provision is made in the plans and specifications for the installation on the
premises of facilities for provision of potable water and the disposal of human waste and excreta and
other similar sewage in accordance with the ordinance of the village. (Ord. No. 0-30-10 §1, 4/5/10)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-4
(c) No building permit shall be issued hereunder for the erection of a building for residential
purposes on any tract or parcel of real estate unless the condition or all of the conditions, as the case may
be, mentioned or enumerated in one of the following exist:
1. Water and sanitary sewer facilities, which are in good working order and available for
the satisfactory servicing of the premises, shall have been extended to the farthest property line of the
premises. Also, some street upon which the premises borders shall have been satisfactorily improved with
a paved roadway surface which extends in such condition from the premises to an Illinois State highway
or to another street or streets extending in such condition to such a highway. Also, adequate storm sewer
facilities shall have been installed in the vicinity of the premises to prevent the flooding of the premises
by surface waters;
2. The building is to be constructed on a lot or parcel of real estate bordering upon a
section of a street over which travel extends for ingress and egress purposes between a residence already
erected at the time of the enactment of this condition and an existing improved public street or highway;
or
3. Provision is made under contract entered into with the village by some person,
persons, co-partnership, trust or corporation for the installation of water and sanitary sewer facilities,
surface drainage facilities and street improvements, such as are provided for in subsection ( c ) 1. above,
in the block upon which such lot or parcel of real estate is located, supported by a performance and
indemnity bond or bonds in favor of the village and duly filed with the village in such amount or amounts
and with such company or companies as may be approved by the corporate authorities and in
conformance with section 9.02 and 9.03 of the Village Subdivision Code; Site Development and
Floodplain Regulations Code; provided, however, that no occupancy permit shall be issued for any
building for which a building permit shall have been issued pursuant to this subsection c. until all of the
improvements provided for by the aforesaid contract shall have been fully installed and duly approved
and accepted by the corporate authorities and each building permit issued pursuant to this subsection c.
shall so recite.
(d) No permit shall be issued for the erection of any commercial or industrial building or
structure until a crime prevention analysis has been performed upon the plans of such building or
structure.
Sec. 6-1.4.2 Section R105.1 of the 2015 International Residential code and section 105.1 of the 2015
International Building code shall be amended as follows:
Add the following at the end of the section:
Any of the work previously described in this section which has been started or completed without a
permit and for which notice has been given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner’s agent
or to the person doing the work shall make application for the required permit within 10 business days of
such notice. (Ord. No. 0-30-10, §1, 4/5/10; Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11, Ord O-93-18;
8/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-5
Sec. 6-1.4.3 Section R105.5 of the 2015 International Residential code and section 105.5 of the 2015
International Building code shall be amended as follows:
Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11, O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
Replace the reference to 180 days with 90 days.
Add the following sections:
(a). Expiration. An issued building permit under which the work is not completed within one (1)
year from the date of issuance shall expire by statute of limitation, and all permit fees shall be forfeited to
the village, unless the owner or his duly appointed representative requests an extension in writing thirty
(30) calendar days before the above-described expiration dates. (Ord. #0-204-07, §2, 12/10/07, effective
1/1/08)
(1) Express Permit Expiration: An express permit under which the work is not
completed within three (3) months from the date of issuance shall expire by
statute of limitation, and all permit fees shall be forfeited to the village, unless the
owner or his duly appointed representative request an extension in writing thirty
(30) calendar days before the above-described expiration dates. (Ord. No. 0-69-
11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11)
(2) Demolition Permit: All demolition permits for which the work is not completed
within three (3) months from the date of issuance shall expire by statute of
limitation, and all permit fees shall be forfeited to the village, unless the owner or
his duly appointed representative request an extension in writing thirty (30)
calendar days before the above-described expiration dates. (Ord. #0-204-07, §3,
12/10/07, effective 1/1/08)
(Ord. No. 0-30-10, §1, 4/5/10; (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11)
(b) Removal of Above Ground Improvements / Restoration of Site. Within thirty (30) days after
the expiration of a permit pursuant to the provisions of Subsections (a) and (a-1) above, the owner or
applicant shall cause any above ground improvements, constructed pursuant to the permit, to be removed
and the site restored to either its original condition or a condition acceptable to the building official.
(c) Approved Permits: Approved permits will be held for thirty (30) days after the notice of
approval has been made to the applicant. Failure to pay for the approved permit within thirty (30) days of
such notice will result in a forfeiture of said permit. All fees incurred by the Village up to that date will be
charged to the applicant. (Ord. #0-204-07, §3, 12/10/07, effective 1/1/08)
Sec. 6-1.4.4 Section R106.1 of the 2015 International Residential code and section 107.1 of the 2015
International Building code, the first line shall be amended to read:
(Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11, Ord. No O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff. 1/1/19))
Construction documents, special inspection, plat of survey (or site plan), structural calculations,
and other data shall be submitted in three (3) sets with each application for a permit. For commercial,
industrial and multi-family projects, six (6) sets of such information shall be submitted with each
application for a permit. All plans, excluding detached single family construction shall be prepared and
sealed by an Architect or Engineer licensed in the state of Illinois.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-6
Sec. 6-1.4.5 Section R105.2 - Work exempt from permit, of the 2015 International Residential
code shall be amended as follows:
(a) Under the heading of Building, line one shall be amended to read as follows: One Story
detached temporary structures used for tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar temporary uses,
provided the floor area does not exceed 64 square feet or a maximum height of 10 feet and located in
accordance with zoning regulations. (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11)
(b) Under the heading of Building: lines numbered two, five and ten shall be deleted in their
entirety. (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11, O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
(c) Under the heading of Building, line seven shall be amended to read as follows: Storable
or prefabricated swimming pools that are disassembled in their entirety and put into storage between the
dates of September 15 and May 15 of each year. (Ord. 0-58-03, §1, 3/10/03; (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1,
6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11)
(d) Under the heading of Building, line three shall be amended to read as follows: Retaining
walls that are not over 4 feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall or
have an exposed wall height less than 3 feet, unless supporting a surcharge. Surcharges include, but are
not limited to, sloping retained soils, structure footings supported by the retained soil, adjacent vehicular
or other loads whether permanent or temporary that are supported by the retained soils, fences that are
attached or directly adjacent to a retaining wall where wind pressures can act upon it and tiered walls
where the offset of the walls is less than two times the exposed wall height of the lower wall. (Ord. No.
0-30-10, §1, 4/5/10; (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11)
(e) Under the heading of Building, add the following: Tents less than 800 square feet in area
for three or less days.
(f) Under the heading of Building, add the following to the end of line 9: Nor infringe upon
the required zoning setbacks.
(Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11, Ord. No. 0-30-13, §1, 4/8/13, O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff.
01/01/19)
Sec. 6-1.4.6 Section 105.2 - Work exempt from permit, of the 2015 International Building code
shall be amended as follows:
(a) Under the heading of Building, line one shall be amended to read as follows: One Story
detached temporary structures used for tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar temporary uses,
provided the floor area does not exceed 64 square feet or a maximum height of 10 feet and located in
accordance with zoning regulations. (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11)
(b) Under the heading of Building, lines numbered two, six and ten shall be deleted in their
entirety. (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11)
(c) Under the heading of Building, line nine shall be amended to read as follows: Storable or
prefabricated swimming pools that are disassembled in their entirety and put into storage between the
dates of September 15 and May 15 of each year. (Ord. 0-58-03, §1, 3/10/03; (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1,
6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-7
(d) Under the heading of Building, line four shall be amended to read as follows: Retaining
walls that are not over 4 feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall or
have an exposed wall height less than 3 feet, unless supporting a surcharge. Surcharges include, but are
not limited to, sloping retained soils, structure footings supported by the retained soil, adjacent vehicular
or other loads whether permanent or temporary that are supported by the retained soils, fences that are
attached or directly adjacent to a retaining wall where wind pressures can act upon it and tiered walls
where the offset of the walls is less than two times the exposed wall height of the lower wall. (Ord. No. 0-
30-10, §1, 4/5/10)
(e) Under the heading of Building, add the following: Tents and less than 800 square feet in
area for three or less days.
(f) Under the heading of Building, add the following to the end of line 12: Nor infringe upon
the required zoning setbacks.
(Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11, Ord. O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 6-1.4.7 Section R105.3.2 of the 2015 International Residential code and section R105.3.2 of the
2015 International Building code shall be amended as follows:
(Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11, Ord. O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff. 1/1/19)
Replace all references to 180 days with 90 days. Add the following line to the end of the section:
Where application for permit is in response to the issuance of a stop work order, such application
shall be deemed to have been abandoned in 30 days after the date of filing unless such application has
been pursued in good faith. (Ord. No. 0-30-10, §1, 4/5/10, Ord. O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 6-1.5. Fees. Section R108 of the 2015 International Residential code and section 109 of the 2015
International Building code shall be amended as follows:
(a) Section R108.2 of the 2015 International Residential code and section 109.2 of the 2015
International Building code shall be amended to add the following:
(Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11, Ord. O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
Schedule of fees. Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee, as provided in the
fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances, computed according to the following
schedule. All reference to fees in the adopted codes is hereby amended to the following:
(1) Plan Examination: See the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of
Ordinances for the fees for examining each set of plans submitted with
applications for a building permit in accordance with the following schedule:
a. Single-family detached dwellings, single-family detached dwelling
additions, alterations, remodeling or detached structure having an
estimated valuation of work as follows:
1. $5000.00 or less
2. $5001.00 or more
b. Necessary repairs due to deterioration, accidents or acts of God, any
value. Replacement must be identical to existing conditions, providing
codes are still met.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-8
c. All other types of construction, based on an estimated valuation of work
as follows:
1. $100,000.00 or less
2. $100,001.00 or more
d. Any additional and exceptional expenses incurred by the village for plan
review not covered by the above fees shall be reimbursed to the village
on a one-to-one ratio by the applicant.
(2) Preliminary plan review services shall be performed for a fee, as provided in the
fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances, per hour per person.
Any fees paid for the preliminary review shall not be credited toward the cost of
the final plan review.
(3) Building Permit: See the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of
Ordinances for the fee for issuance of a building permit with an estimated
valuation of work as follows:
$5000.00 or less
$5001.00 or more
a. Building Permit Extension: When requested in writing at least 30 days
prior to expiration and justifiable cause demonstrated, a building permit
extension shall be granted. A fee for a 90 day permit extension shall be
determined as follows:
1. Detached Single Family Residential: 10% of the building permit
fee as determined by section 6-1.5(b)(3) but no less or more than
identified in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of
Ordinances.
2. All Other: 10% of the building permit fee as determined by
section 6-1.5(b)(3) but no less or more than identified in the fee
schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. #0-204-07, §5, 12/10/07, effective 1/1/08)
(4) Certificate of Occupancy: A per unit fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be
charged in accordance with the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of
Ordinances.
a. Temporary Certificate of occupancy: When requested in writing and
justifiable cause demonstrated, a temporary certificate of occupancy shall
be granted. A temporary certificate of occupancy shall be valid for 30
days under normal conditions or valid to June 1st for winter conditions. A
fee shall be determined as follows:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-9
1. Detached Single Family Residential: 10% of the building permit
fee as determined by section 6-1.5(b)(3) but no less or more than
identified in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of
Ordinances.
2. All Others: 10% of the building permit fee as determined by
section 6-1.5(b)(3) but no less or more than identified in the fee
schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. #0-204-07, §6, 12/10/07, effective 1/1/08)
(5) Demolition and Wrecking Buildings: See the fee schedule supplement to the
Palatine Code of Ordinances for the fee for a permit to demolish a building.
(6) Moving of Building: See the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of
Ordinance for the fee for moving a building in accordance with the following
schedule:
a. Using public right-of-way:
b. Not using public right-of-way.
(7) Plumbing and Sanitation: See the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code
of Ordinances for the fee for a permit to install plumbing and sanitation fixtures
in accordance with the following schedule:
a. First five (5) fixtures, min. fee.
b. In excess of five (5) fixtures, per fixture.
(8) Automatic fire sprinkler System: See the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine
Code of Ordinances for the fee for a permit to install sprinkler system equipment
in accordance with the following schedule:
a. First one hundred (100) sprinkler heads or less, min. fee.
b. Each additional one hundred (100) sprinkler heads or fraction thereof in
excess of one hundred (100).
(9) Electrical: See the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances
for the fee for electrical inspection in accordance with the following schedule:
a. For the inspection of original installations in new and existing residential
occupancies per unit, including all circuits, fixtures, receptacles and
equipment:
1. 1,000 sq. ft. or less
2. 1,001 sq. ft. or more
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-10
b. In other than residential occupancies or any other building the inspection
fee of each circuit, shall be in accordance with the following:
Circuits:
42 circuits or less, per circuit.
43 circuits or more, for each additional circuit.
(10) Inspections. Every new building or structure and every remodeling, repair or
alteration of an existing building or structure shall be charged a minimum
inspection fee as provided in the fee supplement to the Village of Palatine code
of Ordinances for each required inspection. Types and number of required
inspections shall be determined by the Building Official based on the scope of
work being permitted.
a. Re-inspections. If a contractor calls for an inspection and the work is not
ready, incomplete, or is otherwise failed, a re-inspection will then be
required. In addition to the fee paid for the failed inspection, the
contractor shall be charged a re-inspection fee as provided in the fee
supplement to the Village of Palatine Code of Ordinances.
b. Cancelled Inspection fee. No fee shall be charged for a cancelled
inspection provided the cancellation occurs by 4:00 PM on the previous
day for inspections scheduled for the next morning and by 11:00 AM on
the day of for afternoon inspections. Inspections not cancelled in this
manner shall be charged a cancelled inspection fee as provided in the fee
supplement to the Village of Palatine Code of Ordinances.
c. Saturday Inspections: Non-emergency type inspections requested by
contractors for Saturday shall be charged at a rate three (3) times the
minimum inspection fee as provided for in the fee schedule supplement
to the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
d. Elevator inspection/re-inspection fee: The fee for semi-annual elevator
inspections, new elevator installations and required re-inspections shall
be as provided for in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of
Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11, Ord. No. O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff. 1/1/19)
(b) Section R108.3 of the 2015 International Residential code shall be amended to read as
follows:
Building Permit Valuations. The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit
value at time of application. Permit valuations shall include total value of work, including materials and
labor, for which the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and
permanent systems. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation is underestimated on the
application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the
approval of the building official. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the building official. (Ord.
No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11, Ord. O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-11
(c) Forfeiture of permit applications. Permit applications which have expired by limitation
or withdrawn shall pay all fees incurred by the Village up to that date. (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11,
effect. 7/18/11)
(Ord. No. 0-127-09, §1, 11/16/09; Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11)
(d) Forfeiture by limitation. Fees for permits which have expired by limitation shall be
forfeited to the village.
(e) Return of fee upon surrender of permits. If a permit is surrendered within the calendar
year of the date of issuance, and no work has been commenced, the applicant will be refunded permit fees
minus any costs incurred by the Village.
(f) Special fees. For individual residential unit owners applying for express permits, there
shall be a flat permit fee as set out in the fee schedule supplement to the Code of Ordinances for the
following express permit types: (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11, Ord. O-93-18; 8/13/18
eff. 01/01/19)
(1) Residential fence installation.
(2) Residential shed installation.
(3) Residential driveway installation.
(4) Residential patio and private walk installation. (Ord. #0-204-07, §7, 12/10/07, effective 1/1/08)
(5) Residential tear-off roof and reroof installation.
(6) Residential deck installation.
(7) Residential aboveground swimming pool.
(8) Residential ventilating and central air conditioning (HVAC) replacement.
(9) Residential sewer/water service repair or replacement. (Ord. No. 0-21-15, §1, 3/16/15)
(10) Residential lawn sprinklers.
(11) Residential electric service revision. Including generators. (Ord. No. 0-21-15, §1, 3/16/15)
(12) Dumpster/screening enclosure
(13) Residential Water heater replacement
(g) Special technical problems. When applications for permits are filed for buildings or
structures of such unusual technical design or magnitude of construction that they may not be fully
covered by this article, the code official may refer such plans and specifications to an appropriate,
authoritative technical agency, or he may retain a properly qualified licensed engineer or registered
architect for analysis and recommendations as to safety of design and compliance with this article. The
expense involved in obtaining a licensed engineer or architect to review the special conditions shall be
reimbursed to the village on a one-to-one ratio.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-12
Sec. 6-1.6. Inspections. Section R109 of the 2015 International Residential code and section 110 of
the 2015 International Building code shall be amended to add the following:
Scheduling required inspections. All inspections must be requested for scheduling twenty-four
(24) hours prior to inspection. It is the responsibility of the person requesting the inspection to know the
address (number and street name), permit number and lot number (if applicable) when calling for an
inspection. An inspection shall not be granted without this information. (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11,
effect. 7/18/11, Ord. O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 6-1.7. Certificate of Occupancy. Section R110 of the 2015 International Residential code and
section 111 of the 2015 International Building code shall be amended to add the following:
Within ten (10) working days from the time an applicant submits a request and upon confirmation
by the Building Official that all work has been completed and approved in accordance with all applicable
codes and ordinances, a certificate of occupancy for the permitted work will be issued. (Ord. #0-204-07,
§8, 12/10/07, effective 1/1/08; (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11, Ord. O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff.
01/01/19)
Sec. 6-1.8. Floodplain Regulation
See Section 6.08 of Appendix B of the Village of Palatine Code of Ordinances for floodplain
regulation. (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11)
Sec. 6-1.9. Erosion and Sediment Control
See Section 6.09 of Appendix B of the Village of Palatine Code of Ordinances for regulations
concerning erosion and sediment control. (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11)
Sec. 6-1.10. Water Conservation Fixtures
Pursuant to 17 Ill. Adm. Code 3730.307 4) and subject to the Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill.
Adm. Code 890) and the Lawn Irrigation Contractor and Lawn Sprinkler System Registration Code (77
Ill. Adm. Code 892), be it hereby ordained that in the Village of Palatine, all new plumbing fixtures and
irrigation controllers installed after the effective date of this ordinance shall bear the WaterSense label (as
designed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency WaterSense Program), when such labeled fixtures
are available. (Ord. No. 0-102-15, §1, 9/8/15)
Sec. 6-2. International Residential Code, 2015 Edition
The International Residential Code, 2015 Edition is hereby adopted with the following
amendments:
Sec. 6-2.1 Board of Appeals
Section R112.0 shall be deleted. (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11)
Sec. 6-2.2. Climatic and geographical design criteria
Table R301.2(1) shall be amended to add the following:
(a) Ground Snow Load: 25 psf
(b) Wind Speed: 115 mph – 3 second gust
(c) Seismic Category: B
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-13
(d) Weathering: Severe
(e) Frost Line Depth: 3’-6”
(f) Winter Design temp: -4? F
(g) Ice Barrier Underlayment Required: Yes
(h) Air freezing Index: 2000
(i) Mean Annual temp: 50
(Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11, Ord. O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 6-2.3 Garages and Carports
Section R302.5.1 shall be amended to add: The door shall have a hinge type self-closer. Any attic
access scuttle located in a garage ceiling, where such garage attic space is contiguous to the main
dwelling attic shall have a minimum 20-minute fire-rating label. (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect.
7/18/11)
Sec. 6-2.4 Fire Resistant Construction
Section R302 shall be amended as follows; delete footnote a. in table R302.1(1) and footnote b. in
table R302.1(2) (Ord. O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 6-2.5 Wood Foundations and Pressure Preservative Treated Wood Floors (on Ground).
Wood foundations are not permitted. Therefore, Section R402.1, all references to wood
foundations in section R403, R404.2 through R404.2.6, R405.2 through R405.2.3, R406.3 through
R406.3.4, and R504 shall be deleted. (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11)
Sec. 6-2.6 Concrete Floors (on Ground)
Section R506.1 shall be amended to read as follows:
General. Concrete slab-on-ground floors shall be a minimum 4 inches thick except as otherwise
noted below. (for expansive soils, see Section R403.1.8)
1. Walks and Patios. Public concrete walks shall be constructed with at least 5 inches of
concrete and private walks and patios shall be constructed with at least 4 inches of
concrete. Wire mesh is not allowed in the public walk area.
2. Driveway. Concrete driveways shall be constructed with at least 5 inches of concrete and
concrete driveway aprons in the Village right of way (parkway) shall be constructed with
at least 5 inches of concrete. Wire mesh is not allowed in the parkway (apron).
3. Garage Floor. Garage floors shall be constructed with at least 4 inches of concrete. Install
a thickened concrete edge at overhead door 14 inches down and 20 inches wide. This 14
inch measurement includes the 4” for the concrete floor. Install (2) #5 5/8 inch diameter
rebar approximately in bottom of thickened edge at overhead door approximately 3
inches from bottom along the full length.
(Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11)
Section R506.2.2 shall be amended to read as follows:
Base. A 4 inch thick base course of clean graded compacted gravel or crushed stone material shall
be placed on the prepared subgrade.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-14
Sec. 6-2.7 Duct Construction
Sec. M1601.1.1 numbers 5 and 7 shall be substituted with the following:
(5) Gypsum products shall not be used as ducts or plenums.
(7) Wood floor joist and stud spaces shall not be used to convey conditioned supply
air or return air in forced air heating/cooling systems.
[Editor’s Note: Secs. 6-2.8 – 6-2.11 were added by Ord. No. 0-21-15, approved on 3/16/15)
Sec. 6-2.8. Smoke Alarm Power Source
Section R314.6 shall be amended to add; Smoke alarms shall not be connected to a dedicated
circuit. (Ord. O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 6-2.9. Exterior Decks
Section R507.2.4 shall be amended to add; When the deck floor height is less than 30 inches
measured vertically to the floor or grade below at any point within 36 inches horizontally to the edge of
the deck, lateral load connections are not required. (Ord. O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff.01/01/19)
Sec. 6-2.10. – 6-2.11, Reserved
Sec. 6-3. International Building Code, 2015 Edition.
The International Building Code, 2015 Edition is hereby adopted with the following
amendments: (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11, Ord. O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 6-3.1. Board of Appeals
Section 113.0 shall be deleted.
Sec. 6-3.2 Roof Access
Section 1011.12 shall be amended to read:
Stairway to roof. In buildings with roof surfaces three (3) or more stories in height above grade
and with two (2) or more stairways, two (2) of those stairways shall extend to the roof surfaces, unless the
roof has a slope steeper than four (4) units vertical in twelve (12) units horizontal (33-percent slope). In
buildings without an occupied roof, access to the roof from the top story shall be permitted to be by
alternating tread devices. (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11, Ord. O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff,
01/01/19)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-15
Section 1011.12.2 (exception) shall be amended to read:
Exception: In buildings without occupied roofs, access to the roofs shall be permitted to be a roof
hatch or trap door not less than 16 square feet in area and having a minimum dimension of three (3) feet
(914mm). (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11)
Sec. 6-3.3. Foundations and Footings
Section 1807.1.4 Permanent Wood Foundations Systems and Section 1809.12 Timber Footings
shall be deleted as they are not permitted. (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11)
Sec. 6-3.4 Elevator Pit Plumbing
Section 3002.9 Plumbing and mechanical systems; shall be amended to add the following:
At a minimum, at the bottom of every elevator pit there shall be a floor drain directly
connected to an (18) inch x (30) inch deep covered sump pit. Should soil reports indicate a high
level of ground water, the elevator shaft shall be waterproofed to prevent the intrusion of water
and/or provided with a sump pump piped to an open site drain or mop basin. (Ord. No. 0-69-11,
§1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11)
Sec. 6-3.5 Machine Rooms
Section 3005.1 Access; shall be amended to add the following:
This means of access is not to be used as a passageway through the machine room to
other areas of the building or roof.
Sec. 6-4. National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition.
NFPA 70 National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby adopted with the following
amendments: (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11, Ord. O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 6-4.1. Article 210 – Branch Circuits
Table 210-21(B)(3). Receptacle Ratings for Various Size Circuits; shall be amended as follows:
Receptacle rating for a 20 ampere circuit rating shall be 20 amperes.
Sec. 6-4.2. Garages.
Section 210-52(g) shall be amended to add the following:
(1) In addition to the receptacle required by Sec. 210-52, a minimum of one (1) duplex receptacle
outlet shall be installed in the ceiling of all garages in the immediate area of and for the purpose
of providing electrical means for automatic garage door opening device.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-16
(2) All detached garages shall have a three (3)-way switch arrangement from the dwelling to a
light fixture outside the garage service door.
Sec. 6-4.3. Services.
Section 230.50 Service-Entrance Conductors Protection; shall be amended as follows:
Delete sections 230.50(B)(1)(3), 230.50(B)(1)(4), 230.50(B)(1)(5),
Add the following exceptions:
Exception 1. In temporary services flexible metal conduit and liquid-tight metal conduit may be
used for necessary flexibility at the termination of conduit runs in lengths six (6) feet or less.
Where approved by the authority having jurisdiction.
Exception 2. Service entrance conductors shall be allowed in rigid non-metallic conduit
underground, where covered in not less than two (2) inches of concrete.
Section 230.9(A) Clearances; the reference to 3 feet shall be replaced with 5 feet.
Sec. 6-4.4. Article 240 - Overcurrent Protection;
Add the following: All circuit breakers used for commercial and/or industrial building types shall
be bolt-on type.
Sec. 6-4.5. Wiring Methods.
Sec. 300.1 Scope shall be amended to add the following:
(c) All conductors that may carry electrical current rated at fifty (50) volts or greater shall be
installed in rigid heavy-wall galvanized steel conduit, intermediate metallic conduit, or electrical
metallic tubing except as otherwise herein stated.
(d) All conduit systems that are installed outside of a building or structure and exposed to any
type of weather conditions and/or in contact with the earth shall be rigid heavy-wall galvanized
steel conduit, unless hereinafter stated.
Exception 1. Rigid non-metallic conduit may be permitted for installations only in areas such as
below concrete slabs or in locations where conduit systems will be in contact with the earth.
Exception 2. Rigid non-metallic conduit shall not be less than schedule forty (40) unless approved
by special permission.
Sec. 6-4.6. Conductors for General Wiring
Sec. 310.106(B) Conductor Material; shall be amended to read as follows:
Only copper conductors shall be used for all residential and commercial branch circuits, from the
load side of the metering device to the main service disconnect, for all feeder panels, service
entrance conductors, neutral conductors, and the like.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-17
Exception: Compressed aluminum wire shall be allowed for service entrance conductors and
feeders in commercial, non-residential applications. Compressed aluminum wire shall be limited
to number 2 or larger in size and series AA-8000 type electrical grade aluminum alloy conductor
material only.
(Ord. No. 0-60-14, §1, 5/12/14)
Sec. 6-4.7. Water Meters Wiring.
In all new construction electrical metallic tubing shall be installed from the water meter location
to an outside wall at a point approved by the Building Inspector for low-voltage wiring to a remote reader
for the water meter. This shall be in place at the time of rough inspections.
Sec. 6-4.8. Deleted Articles. The following articles in NFPA 70, 2017 Edition, shall be deleted:
Article 398. Open wiring on insulators.
Article 396. Messenger support wiring.
Article 394. Concealed knob and tube wiring.
Article 332. Mineral-insulated, metal-sheathed cable.
Article 362. Electrical non-metallic tubing except herein stated.
Article 334. Non-metallic sheathed cable.
Article 338. Service entrance cable.
Article 352. Sections 352.10(A) and 352.10(F)
(Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11, Ord. O-93-18;8/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
Sec.6-4.9. Reserved
Sec. 6-5 Use of Public Utilities.
All buildings that require plumbing fixtures as stated within this code, are required to connect to
public utilities if such utilities are located within 250 feet, measured in any direction from the
property line.
(Ord. No. 0-21-15, §1, 3/16/15)
Sec. 6-5.1. Water Supply Control.
Water Supply Control. A main shut off valve and B-box on the water service pipe shall
be provided in the public right-of-way between the curb and public walkway or property line. The water
service shall not be located under driveways or parking areas, or sidewalks. In addition thereto, an
accessible shut off valve shall be provided inside near the entrance of the water service pipe into the
building. A pit or similar type installation less than 5'-0" below the ground is prohibited for potable water
and shut off valves or water meters. (Ord. No. 0-21-15, §1, 3/16/15)
Where it is not feasible to locate the control valve and B-box in the municipal right-of-way it may
be located on private property if its location is approved and it meets the following criteria.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-18
1. Control valve shall be in a location accessible from the exterior.
2. An access easement shall be granted to the Village to go on private property for
the purpose of shut off for non-payment of sewer and water fees.
Sec. 6-5.2 Sewer Repair Cleanout
Whenever an outside sewer that connects to a sewer main is repaired, a full size clean out (6")
shall be installed within 5 feet of the foundation wall, either inside or outside the building. (Ord. No. 0-
21-15, §1, 3/16/15)
Sec. 6-6. International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition.
The International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, is hereby adopted with the following
amendments:
(Ord. #0-204-07, §15, 12/10/07, effective 1/1/08; (Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11,
Ord. O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 6-6.1 Scope and Administration
Chapter 1, Part 2 Administration and Enforcement shall be deleted.
Sec. 6-6.2 Gypsum Ducts.
Sec. 603.5.1 shall be deleted. Gypsum ducts are not permitted to transmit conditioned or nonconditioned
air.
(Ord. No. 0-69-11, §1, 6/20/11, effect. 7/18/11)
Sec. 6-7 International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition.
The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, is hereby adopted with the following
amendments: (Ord. O-93-18; 8/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 6-7.1 Scope and Administration
Chapter 1, Part 2 Administration and Enforcement shall be deleted.
Sec. 6-7.2 Combustion Air Ducts.
Sec. 304.11(1) The exception shall be deleted. Stud and joist spaces are not permitted to transmit
combustion air, conditioned or non-conditioned air.
(Ord. #0-204-07, §18, 12/10/07, effective 1/1/08; Ord. #0-6-09, §2, 1/5/09,)
Sec. 6-8. Driveways, parking, private and public.
Sec. 6-8.1. Regulations of private and public parking facilities.
(a) Design. All parking facilities shall be designed in accordance with App. A - Zoning
Ordinances, Article VII.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-19
(1) Surfacing. All off-street parking areas and access driveways shall be fully
improved with a hard-surface pavement approved by the code official and shall
be graded so that all surface water is drained to storm sewers within the parking
facilities and discharging to a municipal storm sewer or waterway. If the paving
of any parking area, except those serving individual single-family residence's,
will increase the concentration of stormwater runoff to any street, public sewer
drainage channel or waterway, the plans and specifications shall be submitted to
the village engineer for review. Site run-off rate reduction (detention) or volume
control (retention) measures may be necessary to reduce negative impacts of the
increased storm water run-off. Water quality control practices are encouraged or
may be required if the discharge is determined to potentially have a negative
impact to the receiving waterway. The pavement surface shall be concrete or
asphalt and the total pavement section shall be designed for the existing subgrade
soils and to accommodate the expected vehicular volumes and loads but in
no case shall the structural number be less than two (2). All materials and
methods of construction shall conform to the current edition of the State of
Illinois Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. Pavement
design as defined by the State of Illinois Design Manual shall be required for all
construction and is to be calculated by a State of Illinois-licensed architect or
professional engineer and shall be reviewed and approved by the code official.
Separate analyses shall be submitted for parking areas comprised of storage and
circulation areas and driveways, access lanes or approaches. (Ord. No. 0-30-10,
§1, 4/5/10)
(2) Curbs. All newly constructed open off-street parking areas covered under this
article shall provide a continuous curb around its perimeter. The curbing shall be
located a minimum of three and one-half (3 1/2) feet from adjacent property or
right-of-way lines. (Ord. No. 0-30-10, §1, 4/5/10)
(3) Illumination. All open off-street parking areas covered under this article shall be
illuminated and such illumination shall be so shielded or otherwise optically
controlled so as to provide glareless illumination in such manner as not to create
a nuisance on adjacent properties or roadways. (Ord. No. 0-30-10, §1, 4/5/10)
a. Illumination of parking areas shall limit light spillage onto adjacent
property to a maximum horizontal footcandle value at the perimeter of
the property that is being illuminated in accordance to the following:
Adjacent Property Use
Maximum Footcandles at Perimeter
Single-family residential.... 0.1
Multiple-family residential.... 0.2
Business.... 2.0
Industrial.... 5.0
Park, school and institutional.... 5.0
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-20
b. Illumination of parking areas shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
Property Use
Minimum Average Footcandles
Single-family residential....
None
Multiple-family residential....
0.05--0.2
Business....
0.15--0.6
Industrial....
0.10--0.4
(b) Driveway Paving: See Chapter 16, Article III
Sec. 6-8.2. Residential Grading and Drainage:
Cross reference Appx. B Article VI
(a) Grading and Drainage:
(1) Grading or drainage or both shall be performed so that water will drain away
from the building on all sides and off the lot in a manner which will provide
reasonable freedom from erosion and pocketed surface water. Construction
such as additions, detached garages, patios, walks, driveways and retaining
walls shall be installed so that they will not interfere with drainage.
(2) Lots in approved subdivisions shall have a final grade and drainage plan to
reflect the approved engineering for that subdivision. It shall be at the discretion
of the code official to request a topographical survey to verify that the final
conditions in effect meet the requirements of the approved engineering. (Ord.
No. 0-30-10, §1, 4/5/10)
(3) The final grade shall mean that the yard is ready for the installation of sod or
seeding and free of large imperfections.
(b) Grade of attached garages. No residential building shall be constructed with its
attached garage floor below the grade of the existing or proposed public sidewalks
adjacent to the subject lot (or below the grade of the front lot line if no sidewalk is
required) unless the location of such garage and the grade of such public sidewalks (or
lot line) conform to the following:
(1) The driveway entrance to the garage of such building shall be located a
minimum of seventy (70) feet from any low point (sag) drainage structure in
the gutter or in the roadway ditch. Such seventy-foot measurement shall be the
distance from the drainage structure to the side of the driveway which is nearest
thereto and such measurement shall be made along the pavement; and
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-21
(2) The public sidewalk (or front lot line if no sidewalk is required) immediately
adjacent to the driveway leading to such garage or the summit of the driveway
pavement shall be constructed such that its elevation is not less than fifteen (15)
inches above the elevation of the cover of any drainage structure located in a low
point (sag).
Sec. 6-8.3. Waivers.
a) Request for Waiver. A request for a waiver from one or more of the provisions of this
Section 6-8, but not any other section referenced in Section 6-8, must be in writing to the Village
Manager or his designee. The request shall identify each provision of this Section 6-8, but not any other
section referenced in Section 6-8, from which a waiver is requested and the reasons supporting the request
for waiver.
b) Conditions for Granting of Waiver. The Village Council may authorize a waiver only if
the petitioner requesting the waiver has demonstrated that:
1) One or more conditions creates a special situation that would make enforcement of the
provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
2) All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities, not the subject of the waiver,
will conform to the Village Code provisions.
c) Additional Conditions for Granting of a Waiver. As a condition for authorizing a waiver,
the Village Council may require the petitioner requesting the waiver to meet reasonable standards and
conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this Section 6-8, but which carry out the
purposes of this Section 6-8, in light of the waiver to be granted. (Ord. No. 0-232-03, §6, 10-20-03)
Sec. 6-9. Antenna towers and satellite dishes.
Sec. 6-9.1. All antenna towers and satellite dishes shall comply with the requirements of App. A - Zoning
Ordinances, Article VI and the following sections of this code.
Sec. 6-9.2. Construction Standards.
(a) The following standards are applicable to antenna towers:
(1) All antenna towers shall be embedded in a concrete foundation. Such foundation
shall meet the requirements of this article and the applicable codes referenced in
Section 6-1.1. (Ord. No. 0-29-13, §2, 4/8/13)
(2) All antenna towers shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable codes
referenced in Section 6-1.1. (Ord. No. 0-29-13, §2, 4/8/13)
(3) All steel in antenna towers shall be constructed in accordance with the
applicable codes referenced in Section 6-1.1 but not less than one-fourth inch in
thickness. All aluminum shall be not less than one-eighth inch in thickness when
used structurally. Where towers are constructed of tubing, the minimum wall
thickness of the tubing shall be no less than one-sixteenth inch, and such tubing,
if steel, shall be galvanized. (Ord. No. 0-29-13, §2, 4/8/13)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-22
(b) The following standards are applicable only to satellite dishes:
(1) All ground level (pedestal type) satellite dishes shall be embedded in a concrete
foundation two (2) feet by two (2) feet by four (4) feet deep.
(2) All satellite dishes shall be constructed to withstand a minimum wind velocity of
ninety (90) miles per hour.
(3) All metal structures supporting satellite dishes shall be permanently and
effectively grounded without splices or connection in the grounding conductor
and in compliance with the applicable codes referenced in Section 6-1.1. (Ord.
No. 0-29-13, §2, 4/8/13)
Sec. 6-10. Foundation sump pumps and roof drainage discharge.
Sec. 6-10.1 Foundation sump pump
All new and existing basement or foundation sump pumps shall discharge onto front, rear or side
yards of the property from where the discharge originates. Sump pumps shall discharge onto a splash
block or similar impervious surface located below the point of discharge. The sump pump discharge pipe
shall extend through an exterior wall to the outside and be provided with an elbow to direct the discharge
onto an impervious surface. The discharge pipe shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the impervious
surface nor shall extend more than two (2) feet from the foundation or exterior wall. Sump pumps may
also discharge into a properly constructed rain garden located entirely on the property from where the
discharge originates. (Ord. No. 0-30-10, §1, 4/5/10)
Sec. 6-10.2 Roof water
All rain water run-off from all building or structure roofs shall be collected by an adequate system
of gutters or drain pipes which discharge into downspouts. Downspouts shall be brought to a grade not
higher than eight (8) inches above the ground surface on an outside building wall and shall have a proper
elbow and leader not to exceed two (2) feet from the foundation or exterior wall discharging onto a splash
block of concrete or other hard surface material. (Ord. No. 0-30-10, §1, 4/5/10)
Sec. 6-10.3 Discharge into sewer or ditch
Storm water run off from roofs, direct connection of downspouts or sump pump discharges shall
not be drained in any way into the plumbing system of the building, nor shall any connection be arranged
so as to drain storm water directly into a public sanitary sewer. Sump pump discharge may discharge
directly into a roadway ditch or storm sewer where such storm sewers and roadway ditches are deemed
adequate by the Village Engineer and only if a building permit is secured for the connection. If discharge
is to an open ditch, proper erosion control measures shall be used at the point of discharge. Piping used to
convey the discharge to the ditch or storm sewer shall not be placed on the surface of any parkway,
sidewalk or roadway. (Ord. No. 0-30-10, §1, 4/5/10)
Sec. 6-10.4 Excessive accumulation
Discharges shall not cause any excessive accumulation of water on the property or on any other
property or cause a public health or safety hazard on any parkway, roadway or sidewalk. "Excessive
accumulation" shall be defined as any accumulation that has not dispersed within seven (7) days of the
last recorded local rainfall. (Ord. No. 0-30-10, §1, 4/5/10)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-23
Sec. 6-11. Elevators and Conveyances
(Ord., No. 0-127-09, §2, 11/16/09)
Sec. 6-11.1 Elevator and Conveyance Code
The construction, operation, inspection, testing, maintenance, alteration and repair of elevators,
dumbwaiters, escalators, moving sidewalks, platform lifts, stairway chairlifts, and automated people
movers, its associated parts, and its hoist ways shall be conducted in accordance with the State of
Illinois Elevator Safety Act and Village of Palatine ordinances.
Sec. 6-11.2 Elevator and Conveyance Permits.
A permit shall be obtained from the Village of Palatine prior to erecting, constructing,
installing, or materially altering any conveyances governed by the State of Illinois Elevator Safety Act.
Sec. 6-11.3 Fees.
Fees shall be per Section 6-1.5 of this code of ordinances.
Sec. 6-11.4 Required Existing Elevator Inspections.
All existing elevators in the Village of Palatine shall be inspected on a semi annual basis. The
Building Official or his agent shall issue a certificate of elevator inspection or a notice of failure of
compliance to the owner. The owner shall make any changes necessary to ensure compliance within 30
days after receipt of such notice, unless otherwise notified. The owner shall post the current issued
certificate of elevator inspection in a conspicuous place inside the elevator.
Sec. 6-11.5 Elevator Car to Accommodate Ambulance Stretcher
Section 3002.4 of the International Building Code, 2015 Edition shall be amended to read as
follows:
Where elevators are provided in buildings, not fewer than one elevator shall be provided for fire
department emergency access to all floors. The elevator car shall be of such a size and arrangement to
accommodate an ambulance stretcher 24 inches by 84 inches (610 mm by 2134 mm) with not less than 5-
inch (127 mm) radius corners, in the horizontal, open position and shall be identified by the international
symbol for emergency medical services (star of life). The symbol shall be not less than 3 inches (76 mm)
in height and shall be placed inside on both sides of the hoist way door frame.
Sec. 6-12 International Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition
The International Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition, is hereby adopted with the following
amendments:
Sec. 6-12.1 Scope and Administration
Chapter 1, Part 2 Administration and Enforcement shall be deleted.
Sec. 6-13 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2015 Edition
The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2015 Edition, is hereby adopted with the
following amendments:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-24
Sec. 6-13.1 Scope and Administration
Chapter 1, Part 2 Administration and Enforcement shall be deleted.
(Ord. No. O-93-18; 8/13/15 eff. 1/1/19)
Secs. 6-14--6-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II RESERVED
Secs. 6-16--6-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE III BUILDING OPERATIONS
Sec. 6-31. Use of streets.
Cross reference Chapter 16 Streets and Sidewalks, Article I
The use of streets shall comply with the requirements as set forth in Chapter 16 Article I of the
village municipal code of ordinances.
Sec. 6-32. Night operations.
No construction or alteration operations shall be carried on between the nighttime hours of
8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. with the exception of Sundays when said operations may not commence before
12:00 noon, if the same are accompanied by loud or annoying noises except in the event of an
emergency; and any such emergency operations shall not be begun until special permission is secured
-3- -12-79; Ord. No. O-91-
1, 8-25-86)
Sec. 6-33. Sidewalks.
Cross reference Chapter 16 Streets and Sidewalks, Article I
No sidewalk shall be obstructed in the course of building operations without permission from
the code official; and whenever a removal of a sidewalk is required such work shall not be done until
permission is secured from the code official. (
Sec. 6-34 Construction Site Cleanliness
(1) “Construction site” means any or all portion of the real property that is identified as the
location of any excavation or of the erection, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of
any building, structure or structural part thereof within the Village. However, for purposes of this section,
“construction site” does not include a project location where all construction and/or demolition activity,
including the staging of construction materials and storing of debris, is conducted within a completely
enclosed structure, or a project that will be occupied during the construction activity.
(2) All construction sites shall be governed by the following standards:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-25
(a) All construction sites shall be enclosed by a continuous chain link fence six feet in height
which shall be anchored sufficiently to resist wind loads of 30 pounds per square foot without
deflection of more than three inches between top and bottom of fence. The fence shall not
contain any advertisements. Access openings in such fencing shall be protected by gates that
are normally kept closed during the day and secured every night.
(b) The construction site fence shall be placed at the perimeter of the property or, for work in
an area substantially smaller than the entire property, around the site of construction large
enough to ensure sufficient room for movement of tools and workers, storage of waste
receptacles and other items, and the safety of the public.
(c) The general contractor shall immediately repair any damage to the construction site fence
and maintain the integrity and continuity of the fence for the duration of the project.
(d) All dumpsters and debris collection devices shall be stored behind the construction site
fence unless specifically permitted for public way use, and shall be regularly serviced to
avoid overfilling. Where dumpsters are used to directly collect construction debris from upper
floors, chutes shall be used to direct the debris from each floor directly into the dumpster.
Construction wastes shall be separated from any recyclable or organic wastes that shall be
separately contained.
(e) The general contractor shall take all necessary steps to ensure that dirt and debris from
the construction site shall not be transmitted by vehicles leaving the site to the public way.
Mitigation measures shall include, but not be limited to, stoning or paving of haul roads,
wheel wash stations, and street sweepers.
(f) Sealed trash containers for litter and routine construction waste shall be provided
throughout the site and at least one container provided for every floor. All trash shall be
removed daily or more frequently as needed.
(g) Construction materials and materials awaiting disposal shall be gathered daily and piled
in a neat and orderly manner. Where materials are stored for use on floors above grade, they
shall be secured to prevent loosening due to weather conditions or other phenomena.
(Ord. 0-242-05, §2, 12-12-05)
Sec. 6-35 Restoration of vacant lots following demolitions.
(1) On any and all lots where an existing structure(s) has been demolished, either partially or in its
entirety, and no construction or permit activity has started within thirty (30) days following the
completion of the demolition work, all construction debris, fencing and/or equipment shall be
removed and excavated areas shall be backfilled. No fill may be placed on any frozen surfaces.
Do not incorporate snow, ice or frozen earth into the fill. Surface shall be shaped to allow
runoff. Do not allow equipment on the fill areas after the above operations until it is dry enough
so that rutting and remolding of the top eight inches will not occur. After dumping, spread
materials by bulldozers or other acceptable means in appropriate horizontal layers over the fill
areas and cover at an approximately uniform elevation. As soon as practicable after
commencement of construction of any section of fill, grade and crown the section with a
minimum 1.0 percent grade so that the surface of fill will drain freely and this grade shall be
maintained as needed. If compacted surface of any layer of material is determined to be too
smooth to bond properly with the succeeding layer, loosen by scarifying or by other acceptable
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-26
means before the succeeding layer is placed thereon. The property is to be final graded with 4
inches of topsoil and seeded to prevent erosion. In the case of a demolition of a non-residential
structure where the surrounding surface is paved parking and where the area will continue to be
used for parking, the disturbed area is to be restored with pavement of similar construction to
the adjacent surface. (Ord. No. 0-30-10, §1, 4/5/10)
(2) Time extensions. The code official may grant extensions in increments up to ninety (90) days at
one time when the code official determines that such extensions are in the best interest of the
Village and are requested in accordance with section 6-1.4.2 and 6-1.5(b)(3)a.
(3) Village completion of restoration. In the event that the lot is not restored within the specified time
period, the Village has the right, but not the obligation, to enter the said lot and complete the
necessary restoration work. The Village shall bill the property owner for the costs of such work
and, if payment is not received within a standard billing cycle, the Village shall file a lien to
collect payment in accordance with the provisions of applicable law.
(Ord. #0-204-07, §20, 12/10/07, effective 1/1/08)
Secs. 6-36--6-40 Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN GUIDELINES
Sec. 6-41. Detached Single Family Development
Sec. 6-41.1 Monotony:
In developments of two (2) or more units, no detached singlesingle-
family residences located on the same side of the street on the first, second or third lots on either
side of the subject residence (regardless of intervening streets) or directly across the street from the
subject residence.
(a) The subject residence shall be deemed to be of the same or similar design to a residence
to whic
major exterior building materials (excluding wood, masonite, stucco, plaster or other
siding materials which are customarily painted) of a different permanent color, or
different predominant building materials used on it’s exterior (i.e., vertical siding,
horizontal siding, masonry, stone, stucco, wood shingles, asphalt roofing, terra cotta,
slate roofing) than the compared residence, and has at least three (3) of the following
features different from the compared residence:
(1) Primary Roof type (hip, front gable, side gable, hip-on-gable, mansard, etc.)
and/or a difference in roof slope of more than three (3) inches in twelve
(12) inches.
(2) Floor plan footprint and/or orientation (right-hand model vs. left-hand
model )
(3) Site orientation (different elevation facing the street or plane of front
elevation differs by more than 45 degrees from the front elevation plane of
the compared residence)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-27
(4) Front porch (usable porch w/ roof and guardrail vs. stoop or steps with
landing)
(5) Predominant architectural elements (Tudor, neo-colonial, prairie school,
craftsman, neo-french, stick, french eclectic, etc.)
(6) Windows of different size, type, and spacing.
All elevations facing a public street shall have materials other than vinyl or aluminum
siding. The use of EIFS on these elevations is permitted in limited amounts not to
exceed 50% of the elevations’ square footage. When location of the residence requires
that two elevations meet this requirement, the exterior building design and detail on all
elevations shall be coordinated with regard to color, types of materials, number of
materials, architectural form, and detailing to achieve harmony and continuity of
design.
(b) When, in the Building Directors’ opinion such residences or dwelling units as depicted
in plans submitted for building permit approval are not of sufficiently dissimilar design,
the Building Director shall not issue a building permit for erection of such residence or
dwelling unit. Plans for the particular residence or dwelling unit in question may be
resubmitted after they have been modified to accommodate variation in plan, elevation
and use of exterior building materials and color.
Sec. 6-42. Development Other Than Detached Single Family
Sec. 6-42.1 Exterior Building Design:
When rear and side elevations are visible from public streets or neighboring properties, exterior building
design and detail on all elevations shall be coordinated with regard to color, types of materials, number
of materials, architectural form, and detailing to achieve harmony and continuity of design.
Sec. 6-42.2 Screening:
(a) Trash containers and outdoor storage areas shall be screened from public streets,
pedestrian areas, and neighboring properties. The screens should be designed to be
compatible with the architectural character of the development. Trash screens shall also
meet the requirements of Chapter 12 of this code. These screens shall be constructed of
durable materials similar to those of the building and shall have solid (opaque) walls and
doors.
(b) Roof-top equipment screening:
1. New Construction. All mechanical equipment and other similar devices located on any
roof shall be visually and acoustically screened on all sides. Design and detail of such
screening on all elevations shall be coordinated with regard to color, types of materials,
number of materials, architectural form, and detailing to achieve harmony and
continuity of design with the major portions of the building.
2. Alterations, Additions and Repairs. Any new rooftop equipment added as a result of
alterations, additions and/or repairs shall be screened as required for new construction.
When existing rooftop equipment that is currently unscreened is replaced in the same
location and is of generally the same size and weight, screening as required for new
construction shall not be required.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-28
3. Technically Infeasible. When the addition of new equipment screening will be difficult
to accomplish because the existing structural conditions require the alteration of a loadbearing
member that is an essential part of the structural frame, or because other
existing physical or site constraints prohibit modification or addition of elements to
achieve full and strict compliance with the minimum screening requirements for new
construction, relief from full compliance with such requirements may be requested.
(Ord. No. 0-21-15, §1, 3/16/15)
(c) Exterior utility screening: Whenever possible, exterior mechanical systems, transformers,
utility meters and panels should be enclosed and screened from the street and sidewalk views.
Screening should be effective in every season. (Ord. 0-58-06, §2, 3/20/06, eff. 6/1/06)
Sec. 6-42.3 Service Area Locations:
Access for service vehicles, trash collection and storage areas should be located on alleys where alleys
exist. When no alley exists, the access should be provided on the side with the least traffic volume and
the least visual impact to pedestrians and neighboring properties.
Secs. 6-43--6-55 Reserved.
(Ord. No. 0-2- -3-00)
ARTICLE V. PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 16; water and sewer services, Ch. 19; Appx. B
subdivision, site development and floodplain regulations code
----------
Sec. 6-56. Conditions prerequisite to issuance of building permit.
No building permit shall be issued by any village official for the construction of any building,
structure or improvement to the land on any property, whether subdivided or unsubdivided, until all
requirements of this article concerning the installation of public improvements have been fully complied
with. (Code 1961,
Sec. 6-57. Specifications.
All public improvements shall comply with the requirements as set forth in Appendix B Subdivisions,
Site Development and Floodplain Regulations, Article VIII and Chapter 19 Water and Sewer Services,
Articles II and III. (Ord. No. 0-30-10, §1, 4/5/10)
Sec. 6-58. Public improvement bond.
Public improvement bonds shall be deposited as required by Appendix B Subdivisions, Site
Development and Floodplain Regulations, Article IX. (Ord. No. 0-30-10, §1, 4/5/10)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-29
Sec. 6-59. Acceptance of required land improvements.
Acceptance of land improvements shall comply with the requirements as set forth in Appendix B
Subdivisions, Site Development and Floodplain Regulations, Article IX. (Ord. No. 0-30-10, §1, 4/5/10)
Secs. 6-60--6-69. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--See also, App. C, §§ 41.01--41.03.
----------
Sec. 6-70. "Nonconforming building or structure" defined.
A "nonconforming building or structure" shall mean a building or structure designed, constructed or
intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located. (Ord. No. O-116-77, § 1, 11-14-77)
Sec. 6-71. Acquisition of nonconforming buildings and structures.
(a) The Village of Palatine, at any time, and from time to time, by ordinance duly enacted and in
accordance with the authority vested in it by law:
(1) May acquire by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise any nonconforming buildings or
structures;
(2) May remove or demolish all such nonconforming buildings or structures so acquired;
(3) May hold and use any remaining property for public purposes; and
(4) May sell, lease, or exchange such property as is not required for public purposes, subject to
the provisions of this article or any amendment thereto.
(b) No such acquisition by condemnation shall be made until the plan commission, at the request of
the president and board of trustees of the Village of Palatine, or upon its own initiative, has made a study
of the area within which such nonconforming building or structure is located and has held a public
hearing with respect thereto, pursuant to not less than fifteen (15) days' notice by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation within the village, and has filed a written report on such study and public
hearing with the president and board of trustees. (Ord. No. O-116- -14-77)
Secs. 6-72--6-79. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-30
ARTICLE VII. CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION
[Editor’s note: Article VII was replaced in its entirety by Ordinance 0-100-05, passed on 5/16/05]
Sec. 6-80. Intent.
The Mayor and Village Council of the Village of Palatine, having determined that a substantial
number of rental units throughout the village are being converted to condominiums, and that the
applicable laws of the State of Illinois are not in themselves adequate to meet certain problems in the
village, find that it is necessary and appropriate to regulate the various procedures attending the
conversions of rental property so as to guarantee that prospective purchasers are in possession of all
information necessary to make a decision to purchase by requiring inspections to protect the public health,
safety, welfare and property values, that sellers of condominium units provide reasonable notification and
prepare and distribute an engineering report on the property being converted, describing the condition of
the building's individual condominium units and common elements and all other information deemed
relevant to the buyers of this type of property, as herein enumerated. (Ord. No. O-32-80, § 1, 4-14-80)
Sec. 6-81. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them by this section:
(a) Agent: Any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation or any other
entity or combination of entities, who acts for or on behalf of a developer in selling or
offering to sell any condominium unit.
(b) Blanket encumbrance: A trust deed, mortgage, judgment or other lien or encumbrance,
including an option or contract to sell, or a trust agreement affecting a condominium,
including any lien or other encumbrance arising as a result of the imposition of any tax
assessment by a public authority.
(c) Board of managers: The board of managers provided and referred to in the Illinois
Condominium Property Act.
(d) Unit owner: The person or persons whose estates or interests individually or collectively
aggregate fee simple absolute ownership of a unit.
(e) Property report: All that information required by the property report in accordance with
section 6-82 of this Code.
(f) Closing of the sale: The operation of transferring legal or equitable ownership of a
condominium to the prospective purchaser from the developer through a deed of conveyance.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-31
(g) Common elements:
(1) General common elements: Except as otherwise provided in the plat of condominium
subdivision, means all portions of the property except the condominium units,
including limited common elements unless otherwise specified.
(2) Limited common elements: A portion of the common elements so designated in the
declaration as being reserved for the use of certain units to the exclusion of other
units, including but not limited to balconies, terraces, patios and parking spaces or
facilities.
(h) Common expenses: The proposed or actual expenses affecting the property, including
reserves, if any, lawfully assessed by the board of managers of the unit owners association.
(i) Condominium: Real estate, portions of which are designated to separate ownership and the
remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those
portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the divided interests in the common
elements are vested in the unit owners.
(j) Condominium project: A plan by the developer to sell residential condominium units in a
building, through conversion to condominium status.
(k) Condominium unit: A part of the property designed and intended for any type of independent
use.
(l) Conversion: The offering for sale by a developer or developer's agent of condominium units
that were previously rental units.
(m) Co-owners: A person or persons who own a condominium unit in the condominium project.
(n) Developer: Any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture or corporation or any
other entity or combination of entities or successors thereto who at any time after the
effective date of this article undertakes to develop a condominium project by conversion to
condominium status.
(o) Offering: Any inducement, solicitation, advertisement, publication or announcement to the
general public to encourage a person to acquire a condominium unit in a condominium
project.
(p) Parcel: The lot or lots, tract or tracts of land described in the declaration, submitted to the
provisions of this article.
(q) Person: A natural person, corporation, partnership, association, trust, other entity, or any
combination thereof.
(r) Plat of condominium subdivision: A plat prepared by a duly-licensed surveyor establishing
the condominium units, accessory units and common elements.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-32
(s) Property: All the land, property and space comprising the parcel, all improvements and
structures erected, constructed or contained therein or thereon, including the building and all
easements, rights and appurtenances belonging thereto and all fixtures and equipment
intended for the mutual use, benefit or enjoyment of the unit owners, submitted to the
provisions of this article.
(t) Prospective purchaser: A person who visits the condominium project site for the purposes of
inspection for possible purchase or who requests the property report.
(u) Site: Any land area on which a part of the condominium is located.
(v) Unit owners association: The association of all unit owners acting pursuant to the bylaws and
through its duly elected board of managers.
(Ord. No. O-32-80, § 1, 4-14-80)
Sec. 6-82. Procedure.
No developer shall offer rental units for sale as condominium units in any development consisting of
more than four (4) units until a property report is available for and delivered to each prospective
purchaser no later than ten (10) days prior to closing.
If any changes occur between the date at which the property report is delivered to the purchaser and
the closing date, such changes will be void as to that purchaser unless the purchaser has been given
written notice of the changes and agrees to take subject to them.
(a) Review: Prior to making the property report available to prospective purchasers, the
developer shall submit to the village manager five (5) copies of the report. Within twenty (20)
working days after receipt of the report the village manager shall advise the developer
whether the report meets the requirements of this article. The developer shall not make the
property report available to prospective purchasers until the report meets the requirements of
this section 6-82.
(b) Fees:
(1) To cover the costs incurred to the village as a result of reviewing the property report,
a review fee based on one hundred thirty-five (135) per cent of the rate per hour of
the present salary schedule adopted by the village board of those village personnel
participating in the review process, shall be paid to the village clerk.
(2) At the time of filing the property report, the fees (which shall be in addition to the
review fees) shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code
of Ordinances.
(3) Legal fees incurred by the village in its review of all condominium documents
required to be filed hereunder.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-33
(c) New Construction: The applicant shall submit a final site plan, showing the intended locations of
all buildings and other improvements to the property, prior to any development activity.
Designated streets shall also be indicated on the final site plan. The final site plan shall be fully
dimensioned. Development plan review and approval procedures, contained herein, are to be
followed for the final site plan. Upon approval of the final site plan by the Village Council, it
shall be placed on file with the Village Clerk and need not be recorded. Individual condominium
plats required under the condominium act of the state shall be submitted to the Director of
Planning and Zoning for review. The Director of Planning and Zoning shall review the
condominium plat to verify that it is in substantial compliance with the previously approved final
site plan. If the condominium plat is found to be in full/substantial compliance with the final site
plan approved by the Village Council, this Ordinance, and the Condominium Act of Illinois, the
Village Manager or his designee shall issue a letter of approval thereby authorizing the
condominium plat to be recorded. The Village shall also record an ordinance notifying the
potential owners of the units that the property is subject to this ordinance.
(d) Condominium Conversions: Owners of existing structures who are intending to convert their
property to condominium ownership shall submit a final site plan to the Director of Planning and
Zoning, showing the intended locations of all buildings and other improvements to the property,
prior to any development or conversion activity. Designated streets shall also be indicated on the
final site plan. The final site plan shall be fully dimensioned. Development plan review and
approval procedures, contained herein, are to be followed for the final site plan. Upon approval
of the final site plan by the Village Council, it shall be placed on file with the Village Clerk and
need not be recorded. Individual condominium plats required under the condominium act of the
state shall be submitted to the Director of Planning and Zoning Department for review. The
Village shall review the condominium plat to verify that it is in substantial compliance with the
previously approved final site plan. The plat of survey shall be forwarded to the Village Council
for review and acceptance. If the condominium plat is found to be in full/substantial compliance
with the final site plan approved by the Village Council, this Ordinance, and the Condominium
Act of Illinois, the Village Manager or his designee shall issue a letter of approval thereby
authorizing the condominium plat to be recorded. Units may not be sold until said plat is accepted
by the Village Council. Condominium conversions shall be considered, reviewed and approved
according to the same procedural process as a new development and shall be subject to the
development requirements detailed in the Village Code of Ordinances. The Village shall also
record an ordinance notifying the potential owners of the units that the property is subject to this
ordinance.
(1) No unit in a conversion building shall be sold unless and until, as part of the conversion
process, all condominium units and the common areas of the conversion building are
inspected by the Village or a licensed inspector acceptable to the Village, at Developers
sole expense, for compliance with applicable Village ordinances. No conversion shall be
approved by the Village for any unit unless and until all the individual units and the
common areas of the conversion building are in compliance with applicable Village
ordinances.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-34
(2) Conversion buildings, must comply with the sprinkler system design and installation
requirements of NFPA 13.
(3) An automatic fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained fully operational in
conversion buildings, in accordance with NFPA 72.
a. Exception: Conversion buildings, which have code-compliant exits leading
from every condominium unit directly to the outside of the conversion
building and to the public way, are not required to install and maintain
audiovisual devices and manual pull stations in all common areas.
(i) Hardwired smoke detectors in each unit in accordance with Section 7-39 of
this code.
(ii) Fire alarm systems shall be monitored as provided in Section 7-40.7 of this
code.
(4) Conversion buildings shall have adequate driveways for access by the fire department, as
deemed appropriate by the Fire Chief.
(5) Conversion buildings shall comply with the fire prevention code, as set forth in Chapter 7
of this code. In the event that any provision of this section conflicts with the fire
prevention code, the provision of this section shall govern.
(Ord. No. O-32-80, § 1, 4-14-80; Ord. No. O-48-83, § 1(10), 8-8-83)
Sec. 6-83. Property report.
The property report shall be certified by the developer or his agent and shall contain the following:
(a) A statement indicating the following:
(1) The name and address of the developer and legal and beneficial owner of the parcel,
including all general partners of a partnership and officers and directors of a
corporation.
(2) All persons with a direct material financial interest in the property, including interim
and permanent mortgage lenders secured by a blanket encumbrance.
(3) The principal attorneys, accountants, architect, engineer and contractor for the
property.
(b) A description of the property and improvements, including the following:
(1) Map or plat showing size and dimensions of the condominium project, together with
all improvements, including recreational facilities, proposed construction and present
and planned location of streets and roads. The share of ownership of each unit in the
common elements shall be indicated.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-35
(2) Description of the condominium units offered and the nature and extent of individual
ownership in such condominium units, including, to the best of the developer's
knowledge, the percentage of former renters who have purchased or contracted to
purchase a condominium unit as of the date such property report is delivered to each
prospective purchaser. If such units are owned in trust by nominees, the beneficiaries
or principals shall be named.
(3) In the event that the conversion involves multiple buildings, the Developer shall
maintain an umbrella association which will maintain control and be responsible for
the maintenance and repair of all common areas.
Description, nature and ownership of all property and facilities on the site which are
not part of the condominium shall be provided.
(4) Description of all existing and proposed recreational facilities and other such
facilities within the condominium project, including the projected dates of their
completion, and a description of provisions, or lack thereof, made by the developer
for the condominium unit owner's pet.
(5) Location, nature and ownership of streets and roads on and contiguous to the site.
(6) Drawings, architectural plans and other suitable documents setting forth the
necessary information for location, maintenance and repair of all condominium
facilities and condition of equipment. Such items shall be incorporated in the
property report by reference, shall be located at the sales office site or construction
office site and shall be turned over to the board of managers upon transfer of control
by the developer.
(7) Projected starting and completion dates for proposed construction, renovation or
conversion.
(8) Use permitted for individual condominium units by the declaration, bylaws of the
condominium association or organization and applicable zoning provisions.
(9) Statement as to whether or not the condominium units may be rented by the proposed
co-owner.
(10) Statement of title, listing all restrictions of record and the condition of title.
(c) Method and timing of transfer of control over the condominium project to the board of
managers and the nature and extent of any interest retained by the developer.
(d) A statement of all financial aspects of the condominium project, including but not limited to:
(1) Name of construction mortgagor or the interim mortgagor.
(2) Institution offering long-term mortgage financing, if available, and terms and
conditions of such mortgage.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-36
(e) Statement disclosing the existence of penalty if the construction, renovation or conversion or
completion date is not met and the additional costs to be imposed if such date is not met.
(f) Nature and extent of any protection of a purchaser if the developer defaults on a blanket
encumbrance, unless the developer shall have furnished to the purchaser a non-cancellable
bond executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Illinois, which
has consented to be sued in this state, indemnifying a prospective purchaser against the loss
of the deposit or deposits against payment for the unit (earnest money) except by reason of
the purchaser's default. If the developer has made no such arrangement, the following
statement must be inserted, in a type size and style equal to at least ten point bold type:
THE DEVELOPER HAS MADE NO ARRANGEMENTS TO PROTECT THE
PURCHASER OF A CONDOMINIUM UNIT FROM ITS POSSIBLE DEFAULT ON A
BLANKET ENCUMBRANCE. ACCORDINGLY, THERE IS A RISK OF LOSING YOUR
FINANCIAL INTEREST IN THE EVENT OF THE DEVELOPER'S FAILURE OR
BANKRUPTCY.
(g) Statement of any pending litigation which would affect the property, the condominium or the
developer's ability to convey clear title.
(h) Statement of the current taxes and estimated possible changes in the tax situation of the
condominium project which buyers may encounter during the first two (2) years.
(i) Copies of the sales documents and literature, including but not limited to:
(1) Basic purchase contract form being used or proposed for use by developer.
(2) Forms of conveyance.
(3) Deed of trust, mortgage and promissory note.
(4) Statement of sales prices, terms and options.
(5) Statement of terms and conditions of sale, including estimated closing and settlement
costs, taxes and expected special assessments levied either by the condominium or a
governmental entity.
(6) Statement of monthly payments to be itemized as to principal, interest, taxes, utilities
and all other payments for a period of one year from the expected date of closing of
the sale.
(j) Summary of past operating history of the project.
(k) Copies of all the following required documents numbered and indexed in such a manner as
the developer may select, so as to permit ready reference thereto:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-37
(1) The declaration and plat.
(2) The articles of incorporation or charter of the condominium association.
(3) The bylaws and regulations of the condominium association.
(4) Any leases of real or personal property applicable to the condominium of more than
one-year duration.
(5) Any management contract, employment contract, insurance policy or other contract
affecting the use, maintenance or access to all or part of the condominium of more
than one-year duration.
(6) Coverage and amounts of condominium insurance policies.
(l) A statement of management and expected operation costs of condominium, including:
(1) Name and address of management agent, if any, and the services the agent will
perform.
(2) Length of term of any management contract and charges and circumstances, if any,
under which the charges may be increased.
(3) The conditions, if any, under which the contract may be cancelled or terminated.
(4) Statement disclosing any contractual, financial or common ownership relationship
between the developer and the management firm and their respective corporate
officers and controlling interests.
(m) Copy of estimated operating budget, prepared by a certified public accountant for the
condominium project, projected for a period of one year from the expected date that control
of the condominium project would pass to the board of managers, to include monthly
payments to be pro rated to each condominium unit for maintenance and/or management of
condominium property and charges for use of recreational and other facilities. In particular,
the operating budget shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Operation costs:
Utilities;
Heating fuels;
Janitorial services;
Trash and garbage disposal;
Ground and building maintenance;
Security;
Maintenance and operation of recreational and other facilities;
Building insurance;
Elevator maintenance;
Sidewalks and street maintenance;
Other operating costs.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-38
(2) Management costs:
Legal and accounting services;
Bookkeeping services;
Management fees.
(3) Reserve costs:
Reserve for improvements;
Reserve for unexpected repair work;
Reserve for replacement and upkeep of common elements and facilities, including
basis upon which reserves are calculated.
If no reserve is provided for any one or more of the costs listed in this item, the
following statement must be inserted in the property report in a type size and style
equal to at least ten point bold type:
THE DEVELOPER HAS NOT PROVIDED A RESERVE FOR CERTAIN
POSSIBLE FUTURE COSTS ON THE CONDOMINIUM IN HIS BUDGET.
ACCORDINGLY, IT MAY BE NECESSARY TO PROVIDE FOR A SPECIAL
ASSESSMENT TO ALL CONDOMINIUM UNIT OWNERS TO PAY FOR SUCH
COSTS SHOULD THEY OCCUR.
(n) Alternative provisions if an insufficient number of units are sold to cover the proposed
operations and maintenance budget.
(o) In the case of a conversion from rental or other legal status to condominiums, a report from a
qualifying licensed structural engineer or registered architect, not associated with the
developer/builder, stating his opinion concerning the condition and the rated life and expected
useful life of the roof, foundation, external elements and all other common facilities, the
results of inspections required under 6-82(C) and (D),together with an estimate of repair and
replacement costs, at current market prices, which shall indicate what the cost per category of
unit would be if the unit owners were assessed for the estimated cost. This report shall
include the approximate dates of installation of the facilities listed above, and the dates of
major repairs to such facilities. There shall also be attached a list of suspected violations of
the Palatine Code of Municipal Ordinances and as received from the Community Services
Department of the Village of Palatine in the five year period preceding the date of the
Property Report, or, if no notice of such violations has been received, the report shall so state.
(p) If there are any restrictions upon the free sale, transfer, conveyance, encumbrance or leasing
of a unit, then a statement in bold face type or capital letters in substantially the following
form shall be included: THE SALE, LEASE OR TRANSFER OF YOUR UNIT IS
RESTRICTED OR CONTROLLED. Immediately following this statement, there shall appear
a reference to the documents, articles, paragraphs or pages in the disclosure materials where
the restriction, limitation or control on the sale, lease or transfer of units is set forth or
described in detail.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-39
(q) Each property report shall contain on the first page the following warning in capital letters, in
a type size and style equal to at least ten point bold type:
VILLAGE OF PALATINE LAW SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITS ANY REPRESENTATION
TO THE EFFECT THAT THE VILLAGE HAS PASSED UPON THE MERITS OF OR
GIVEN APPROVAL TO MAKE OR CAUSE TO BE MADE TO ANY PROSPECTIVE
PURCHASER ANY REPRESENTATIONS WHICH DIFFER FROM THE STATEMENTS
IN THIS PROPERTY REPORT. ORAL REPRESENTATIONS CANNOT BE RELIED
UPON AS CORRECTLY STATING THE REPRESENTATIONS OF THE DEVELOPER
AND ARE NOT BINDING ON THE DEVELOPER. REFER TO THE PROPERTY
REPORT FOR CORRECT REPRESENTATIONS.
(r) A statement indicating that ”in the event the Association fails to repair, maintain or replace
common elements, the Village shall have the right to repair, maintain or replace any said
common elements and charge the cost thereof back to the Association and the unit owners,
jointly and severally. In addition, the Village shall have the right to place a lien upon the units
and common elements in the event that the Association fails to pay or reimburse the Village for
the costs expended by the Village. In addition, the Village shall have the right to collect its
attorneys fees incurred and enforce the terms and conditions of this Declaration as well as charge
interest on the monies advanced by the Village at a rate of eighteen percent (18%) per annum
from the date incurred until the date paid”.
“The Village is hereby granted the right to enter upon the property to complete for all
lawful purposes including, but not limited to the ability to complete the maintenance,
repair and replacement of the common elements as provided above”.
These statements shall be added to the Condominium Declaration and the provision shall not
be amended without Village approval.
(s) The Declaration shall provide that all amendments or modifications require the prior written
consent of the Village.
(t) The Declaration shall provide that in the event that the Village of Palatine files an action against a
unit owner or the Association for the costs and expense that the Village has incurred to complete
any maintenance work on the property that the Village shall have the right to collect its
reasonable attorneys fees and costs in collection of said amount.
(u) A senior executive officer of the developer shall sign the property report and affirm that it and
any supplements, modifications and amendments are true, full, complete and correct.
(Ord. No. O-32-80, §1, 4-14-80)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-40
Sec. 6-84. Condominium association.
(a) Three (3) copies of the proposed documents relating to the formation and organization of any
condominium owners' association or similar organization which will be responsible for the maintenance
and general care of common areas shall be submitted to the Village Manager for review with the property
report. Upon review of the document the Village Manager shall either approve, approve with
modifications, or disapprove the condominium association document.
(b) The condominium association document shall include, but shall not be limited to the following:
(1) Access easement to the Village of Palatine to maintain and repair streets, curbs, gutters and
sewer and water lines in those areas outside of the buildings, which are designated for
common ownership together with lien rights in the village covering costs incurred in such
maintenance and repair.
(2) Each unit owner shall be a member of the condominium association.
(Ord. No. O-32-80, §1, 4-14-80)
Sec. 6-85. Transfer of control.
Control over the condominium project shall be transferred from the developer to the board of
managers, pursuant to the Illinois Condominium Property Act no later than sixty (60) days after the
conveyance by the developer of seventy-five (75) per cent of the units or three (3) years after the
recording of the declaration, whichever is earlier. (Ord. No. O-32-80, §1, 4-14-80)
Sec. 6-86. Parking facilities.
No developer shall record a declaration of condominium or plat of condominium subdivision unless
parking facilities are in accordance with Village Code on or within the property are included as a part of
the property's common elements, with the temporary use of individual parking spaces being assigned to
condominium unit owners. (Ord. No. O-32-80, §1, 4-14-80)
Sec. 6-87. Management contracts.
It shall be unlawful for developers to enter into a lease of common elements, including exclusive
service contracts relating to the condominium, which expire later than one year from the date on which
the board of managers assumes control of the condominium. (Ord. No. O-32- -14-80)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-41
Sec. 6-88. Notice requirements.
(a) No less than thirty (30) days, nor more than one year prior to recording the declaration, pursuant
to the Illinois Condominium Property Act, the developer shall provide:
(1) Written notice to each tenant of the building, specifying intention to convert, the date on
which the conversion will commence, and whether the tenancy will be renewed or
terminated upon its expiration.
(2) An acknowledged certificate attached to and made a part of the declaration which provides
that the developer has given notice of intent as described in subparagraph (a)(1) of this
section.
(b) The developer shall be required to automatically extend the lease of any tenant which is due to
expire during the notification period to the end of the full one-hundred-twenty-day period of
notification.
(c) The tenant upon receiving the notice of intent may terminate the lease at any time; however, the
tenant must provide the developer with thirty (30) days’ advance notice that the tenant has terminated
the lease.
(d) With regard to the right of first refusal:
(1) Each tenant will have the option to purchase his premises for a period of one hundred
twenty (120) days from the notice of conversion required, on the same terms or better than
the premises will be offered to the general public.
(2) In the event that a discount is offered by the developer, the tenant shall be allowed to
purchase his premises at a discount for a period of forty-five (45) days following
notification of conversion and on the same or more favorable terms at which the premises
will be offered to the general public for the remaining seventy-five (75) days of the
notification period.
(e) Notwithstanding lease provisions to the contrary, the tenant's premises will not be shown to
prospective purchasers without the tenant's permission, unless the lease provides for showing, until the
expiration of the tenant's option to purchase or ninety (90) days prior to the end of the term of the
tenant's lease, whichever is later. (Ord. No. O-32-80, §1, 4-14-80; Ord. No. 0-24-95 §1, 3-27-95)
Sec. 6-89. Enforcement.
It shall be the responsibility of a developer or his agent to provide all information herein required by
this article to each prospective purchaser of a condominium unit directly. The provisions of this article
shall be enforced by the Village Manager or his designee. (Ord. No. O-32-80, §1, 4-14-80)
Sec. 6-89A. Condominium De-Conversion.
It shall be unlawful for any party to de-convert a condominium property pursuant to the terms of the
Illinois Condominium Property Act or any other applicable statute, without first having received prior
approval of a de-conversion plan by the Village Council. Said de-conversion plan shall include, but not
be limited to, a property report identifying any outstanding code violations on the property and a plan for
bringing those violations into compliance and such other information as may be deemed reasonable and
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-42
necessary by the Village Manager or his designate. Any de-conversion that is completed without Village
approval is nullity and of no force and effect.
(a) Fees:
(1) To cover the costs incurred to the Village as a result of reviewing the property report,
a review fee based on one hundred thirty-five (135) per cent of the rate per hour of
the present salary schedule adopted by the Village Council of those Village personnel
participating in the review process, shall be paid to the Village Clerk.
(2) At the time of filing the property report, the fees (which shall be in addition to the
review fees) shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code
of Ordinances.
(3) Legal fees incurred by the Village in its review and implementation of all
condominium de-conversion documents required to be filed hereunder.
(Ord. O-122-17, 12-04-17)
Sec. 6-90. Penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating, or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this article,
except when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not
less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense, and not less than seven hundred and fifty
dollars ($750.00) for the second and each subsequent offense in any one-hundred-eighty-day period;
provided, however, that all actions seeking the imposition of fines only shall be filed as quasi-criminal
actions subject to the provisions of the Illinois Civil Practice Act (735ILCS5/1-101, et seq.). Repeated
offenses in excess of three (3) within any one-hundred-eighty-day period may be also punishable as a
misdemeanor by incarceration in the county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months under the
procedure set forth in Section 1-2-1.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (705ILCS105/1, 705ILCS105/1.1)
under the provisions of the Illinois Code of Criminal Procedure (725ILCS5/101-1) in a separate
proceeding. Each false or misleading statement of fact or omission of fact or each sale of a condominium
unit made in violation of the provisions of the article shall be considered a separate offense. A separate
and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day on which such person shall continue or
permit any such violation. Nothing herein shall be construed to preclude the revocation of any license for
violation of any other provision of this Code. Where violation of this article is found as a matter of law,
attorneys’ fees are to be automatically awarded to the village. (Ord. No. O-32-80, § 1, 4-14-80; Ord. No.
0-5- -26-98)
Sec. 6-91. Severability.
If any provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article or application thereof
to any person or circumstance shall, for any reason, be adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid, said
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this article and the application of such
provision to other persons, firms, corporations, public agencies or circumstances, but shall be confined in
its operation to the provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and to the person, firm, corporation, public
agency or circumstances involved. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the Mayor and
Village Council of the Village of Palatine that this article would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional or invalid provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof not been
included. (Ord. No. O-32-80, § 1, 4-14-80)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-43
ARTICLE VIII. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Sec. 6-92. Stop work order
(a) It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, contractor, subcontractor or builder engaged in
developing property pursuant to a permit issued by the Village to make any departure from or violate:
(i) Any ordinance or code of the Village;
(ii) Any conditions attached to a special use ordinance, planned unit development
ordinance, variation, or annexation agreement;
(iii) Any federal, state or other local law or ordinance;
(iv) Commit any fraud or make any misrepresentation or false statement in an
application for a license or permit; or
(v) Cause a nuisance or danger to the public health, safety or welfare.
Any such departure from or violation of such ordinance, code, condition or threat to the public
welfare or law shall operate to void the permit which has been issued for such work.
(b) The Manager, without delay, shall issue a stop work order directing that all persons
engaged in the work permitted under the permit shall cease and desist immediately until such time as the
Manager has either received satisfactory evidence that the work to be performed will be done in
accordance with such ordinance, codes, conditions, laws or the public welfare until the Corporate
Authorities have acted on the matter pursuant to either paragraph (c) or (d).
(c) The Manager may refer the matter of continuing the stop work order to the Corporate
Authorities for further proceedings. The Corporate Authorities shall have the authority
to:
(i) Continue in effect the stop work order;
(ii) Lift the stop work order;
(iii) Impose additional requirements as conditions to lifting the stop work order;
and/or
(iv) Any other relief consistent with the public welfare.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 6- BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
6-44
(d) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Manager in regard to the issuance of a stop
work order or refusal to rescind the same shall have the right to appeal to the Corporate
Authorities. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Manager, within five days after
receipt of a stop work order or after the Manager's refusal to rescind such an order, a
written statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The
Corporate Authorities shall appoint a hearing body to be composed of the Mayor or the
Mayor's designee and two Council Members who shall thereupon set the time and place
for a hearing of such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant.
The hearing body shall make a recommendation to the Corporate Authorities which shall
render a decision on such appeal which shall be final. Any appeal from a decision of the
Corporate Authorities shall be made directly to the Circuit Court of Cook County
pursuant to the Administrative Review Act (735 ILCS 5/3-101, et seq.).
(e) All costs and expenses including but not limited to court reporters fees and attorneys' fees
incurred by the Village in connection with any appeal of a stop work order shall be taxed
to the appellant and shall be paid by the appellant as a condition to reinstatement of the
permit.
(f) The authority to issue a stop work order shall be in addition to any other relief available
to the Village.
6-93. Penalties
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or
who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this ordinance, shall, upon conviction, be fined
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for such offense,
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or which a violation occurs or
continues.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
7-1
Chapter 7 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Police and fire commission, Ch. 2, Art. XX; police pension board, Ch. 2,
Art. XXI; firemen's pension fund, Ch. 2, Art. XXII; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; garbage
and refuse, Ch. 8; housing, Ch. 10; false fire alarms prohibited, 12-8; firefighting appliances required in
public buildings, 12-116; fire drills required, 12-118.
----------
Editor’s Note: Chapter 7 was replaced by Ord. No. 0-13-99 passed on February 22, 1999.
-----------------------
Editor’s Note: Article III was replaced in its entirety by Ord. No. 0-84-02, passed on May 28,
2002 with an effective date of July 1, 2002.
----------------------
Editor’s Note: A new Article V. Ambulance Service Fees was added by Ord. 0-132-03, passed
on June 2, 2003, effective July 1, 2003
----------------------
Editor’s Note: Chapter 7 was replaced in its entirety by Ord. 0-200-07, passed on December 3,
2007, retroactive to January 1, 2007.
----------------------
Art. I. In General, §§ 7-1--7-15
Art. II. Fire Department, §§ 7-16--7-37
Art. III. Fire Prevention, §§ 7-38--7-66
Div. 1. Codes, §§ 7-41--7-50
Div. 2. Fire Prevention Division, §§ 7-51--7-60
Div. 3. Fire Lanes, §§ 7-61--7-63
Div. 4. Flammable Liquids, §§ 7-64--7-66
Art. IV. Enforcement and Penalties, §§ 7-67--7-68
Art. V. Ambulance and Emergency Response Service Fees, §§ 7-80—7-81; 7-82—7-83
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 7-1. Enforcement of chapter provisions.
It shall be the duty of all police officers of the village to see that provisions of this chapter are
enforced and to arrest on view any person who shall be found violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, or who shall hinder, resist or refuse to obey any officer of the fire department in the discharge of
his duty. Whoever shall willfully or negligently break, deface, or in any manner injure any fire engine,
hose equipment or other fire apparatus belonging to the village or shall remove any such part of such
engine or other fire apparatus or in any manner interfere with the same when being used by fire
department personnel shall be legally charged. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter fire stations or
any place where equipment or apparatus of the fire department is stored at any time, except on business
pertaining to the fire department or other village business. (Ord. No. O-107-76, § 1, 12-13-76)
Editor's note--(Ord. No. O-107-76, § 1, amended Ch. 7 by adding provisions designated as § 7-
29. The editors re-designated such provisions as § 7-1 for purposes of classification.
Sec. 7-2. Reserved.
Editor's note--Ord. No. O-88-91, § 1, adopted June 24, 1991, deleted § 7-2, which pertained to
agreements for fire and paramedic services with state and federal facilities, and derived from Ord. No. O-
180-88, §1, adopted Dec. 27, 1988.
Secs. 7-3--7-15. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
7-2
ARTICLE II. FIRE DEPARTMENT*
----------
*Editor's note--Ord. No. O-107-76, § 1, enacted Dec. 13, 1976, repealed former Art. II, § 7-
16--7-28, relative to the fire department, and enacted in lieu thereof a new Art. II pertaining to the same
subject matter. Formerly Art. II was derived from Code 1961, § 6.107--6.112; Ord. No. O-101-74, § 2,
adopted Dec. 30, 1974; and Ord. No. O-46-76, § 1, adopted April 29, 1976.
Cross reference(s) Fire and police commission, Ch. 2, Art. XX; firemen's pension fund, Ch. 2, Art. XXII.
----------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-16-02 passed on 1/28/02 replaced Secs. 7-16 through 7-18.
----------------------
Sec. 7-16. Creation; composition.
There is hereby created a Fire Department for the Village of Palatine which shall consist of the
Fire Chief and as many employees as the Corporate Authorities may designate from time to time. (Ord.
No. O-107-76, ' 1, 12-13-76) (Ord. 0-16-02, §2, 1/28/02; Ord. 0-210-06, §1, 12/4/06; Ord. 0-200-07,
§1&2, 12/3/07, retroactive to 1/1/07)
Sec. 7-17. Appointment and removal of Fire Chief.
The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the village manager. The Fire Chief shall serve at the
pleasure of the village manager and may be removed by the village manager at any time thereafter. (Ord.
No. O-107-76, ' 1, 12-13-76; Ord. No. O-48-78, ' 1, 6-12-78) (Ord. 0-16-02, §2, 1/28/02; Ord. 0-210-06,
§1, 12/4/06; Ord. 0-200-07, §1&2, 12/3/07, retroactive to 1/1/07)
Sec. 7-18. Supervision and control of the fire chief.
The village manager shall be the immediate supervisor of the fire chief, and all policies, directives and
orders from the village government to the fire chief shall be made by or transmitted through the village
manager as the chief administrative officer of the village government. The chief shall report directly to
the village manager and not to the Corporate Authorities or to individual members thereof. (Ord. No. O-
107-76, ' 1, 12-13-76) (Ord. 0-16-02, §2, 1/28/02)
Sec. 7-19. Powers and duties of the Fire Chief generally.
The Chief shall direct the administration and operations of the fire department, and in addition to
policies transmitted to the Chief by the village manager, shall establish such other policies, directives,
rules and regulations and operations of the department as determined by the Chief, and provided in
written form to all employees. The Chief shall serve as appointing authority for appointment to any
position within the department other than his own, and shall have the power to suspend, demote, or
dismiss any employee, with the concurrence of the village manager, consistent with the provisions of this
Code governing the fire and police commission, Chapter 2, Article XX, and the village work rules. (Ord.
No. O-107-76, § 1, 12-13-76; Ord. No. 0-210-06, §2, 12/4/06; Ord. 0-200-07, §1&2, 12/3/07, retroactive
to 1/1/07)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
7-3
Sec. 7-20. Civil service exempt command positions.
The fire chief, with the concurrence and the approval of the village manager, shall have the
authority to recruit and appoint individuals to civil service exempt command positions within the
department. Civil service exempt command positions will not have certified status and rights. Individuals
appointed to exempt command positions shall serve at the pleasure of the fire chief and may be removed
by the chief at any time with the concurrence of the village manager. If an individual is appointed to such
a position who holds certified status within the department in another position, the individual shall retain
a guaranteed right to return to the former position with the certified status upon termination from the
exempt command position, subject to section 2-380 of this Code. (Ord. No. O-107-76, § 1, 12-13-76)
Sec. 7-21. Dismissals.
No full time, certified member of the fire department shall be dismissed until after a hearing by
the fire and police commission, in accordance with its rules and the provisions of Chapter 13 of this Code.
With the consent of the village manager, the fire chief, without the requirement of a hearing, shall have
the power to dismiss a firefighter who is serving in an original appointment probationary period. (Ord.
No. O-17-76, § 1, 12-13-76)
Sec. 7-22. Rules and regulations.
The fire chief may make or prescribe rules and regulations for the guidance of the members of the
department. Such rules shall be binding on all members of the fire department. (Ord. No. O-107-76, § 1,
12-13-76)
Sec. 7-23. Supervision over department and equipment.
The Fire Chief shall have the control, subject to the order and direction of the village manager, of
the Fire and Emergency Services Department and all fire and emergency services apparatus belonging to
the village. Whenever any fire apparatus needs repair, the Fire Chief shall order repair to be done without
delay. (Ord. No. O-107-76, § 1, 12-13-76; Ord. No. 0-210-06, §3, 12/4/06; Ord. 0-200-07, §1&2,
12/3/07, retroactive to 1/1/07)
Sec. 7-24. Command.
The fire chief and the fire command officers shall rank in order named and the officer of the
highest rank shall take command of the fire department and direct the management thereof in the best
manner possible. The officer in command at a fire may cause buildings to be removed, torn down, or
destroyed when he deems it necessary to do so in the interests of safety.(Ord. No. O-107-76, § 1, 12-13-
76)
Sec. 7-25. Records.
The fire chief shall keep or cause to be kept a record of, the attendance of the members and record
of all fire and emergency medical calls.(Ord. No. O-107-76, § 1, 12-13-76)
Sec. 7-26. Duties of fire department generally.
It shall be the function and duty of the fire department and every member thereof to extinguish
accidental or destructive fires and to prevent the occurrence or spread of such fires. Duty assignments,
including paramedic duties, fire suppression-related duties, public education, and fire prevention, shall be
made for full-time members of the department by the Fire Chief. All such duty assignments shall be at the
discretion of the Chief with concurrence by the village manager, not to exceed an average of fifty-three
(53) hours per week within a three-week cycle without overtime remuneration according to established
rules. (Ord. No. O-107-76, § 1, 12-13-76; Ord. No. O-59-83, § 1, 9-12-83; Ord. No. 0-210-06, §4,
12/4/06; Ord. 0-200-07, §1&2, 12/3/07, retroactive to 1/1/07)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
7-4
Sec. 7-27. Obedience to orders.
Any firefighter in attendance at a fire, or other emergency incident, who shall neglect or refuse to
obey the order of the officer in command at such fire, may be suspended or dismissed by the fire chief,
consistent with the provisions of this Code governing the fire and police commission, Chapter 2, Article
XX. (Ord. No. O-107-76, § 1, 12-13-76)
Secs. 7-28--7-37. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. FIRE PREVENTION*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Burning of refuse, etc. prohibited, § 8-4; open fires prohibited, § 12-4;
Prohibited except in fireplace; § 12-42; Grass fires: permit required, 12-43 Regulations, Chapter 12
Article III, IV and VII, Appendix B 6.06 (c). 12-41; grass fires prohibited, § 12-42.
----------
Editor’s Note: Article III was replaced in its entirety by Ord. No. 0-84-02, §§4-6, passed on
May 28, 2002 with an effective date of July 1, 2002.
----------------------
DIVISION 1. CODES
State law reference(s)--Power to incorporate technical codes by reference, 50ILCS220/1.
Sec. 7-38. Minimum Standards.
(a) The following list of codes, subsequent supplements, and Palatine amendments are
hereby adopted by reference:
(1) Life Safety Code, NFPA 101, 2000 Edition.
(2) International Fire Code, 2015 Edition (with noted amendments). (Ord. 0-57-06,
§1, 3/20/06, eff. 6/1/06; Ord. 0-70-11, §1, 6/20/11, Ord O-94-18; 08/13/18-eff.
01/01/19)
(a) Appendix D, Fire Apparatus Access
(b) Appendix I, Fire Protection Systems – Noncompliant Conditions
(c) Appendix J, Building Information Sign
(3) 2018 NFPA 1 Section 50.7
Sec. 7-39. International Fire Code, 2015 Edition
The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, is hereby adopted with the following amendments:
(Ord. 0-57-06, §2, 3/20/06, eff. 6/1/06, Ord. 0-70-11, §1, 6/20/11, Ord. O-94-18, 08/13/18-eff.
01/01/19)
Sec. 7-39.01. Board of Appeals
Section 108 shall be deleted (Ord. O-94-18, 08/13/18-eff. 01/01/19)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
7-5
Sec. 7-39.1. Open Burning
Section 308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices; shall be deleted in its entirety. (Ord. No. 0-70-13,
§1, 6/10/13)
Sec. 7-39.2. Vacant Premises
Section 311.2.2 Fire protection in vacant buildings; delete all exceptions.
Sec. 7-39.3. Fire Alarm and Detection Systems
Delete the exceptions in the following sections as noted: 907.2.1, delete exception; 907.2.2, delete
exception; 907.2.4, delete exception; 907.2.6, delete exception; 907.2.6.1, delete both exceptions; 907.2.7,
delete exception; 907.2.8.1, delete exception 2; 907.2.9, delete exception 2.
(a) In all buildings where fire sprinklers and/or fire alarms are required interior horn/strobe units,
exterior strobe(s) tied to a smoke detector, and manual pull stations shall be installed. This requirement
includes existing buildings and units of all use classifications when there is a tenant change or interior
build-out. All devices shall be installed per the requirements of NFPA 72. (Ord. 0-57-06, §3, 3/20/06,
eff. 6/1/06)
Section 7 -39.4. Fireworks
Section 5601.1.3 of the 2015 Edition International Fire Code shall be amended to read as
follows: (Ord. 0-57-06, §4, 3/20/06, eff. 6/1/06, Ord. 0-70-11, §1, 6/20/11; Ord O-94-18, 08/13/18 eff.
01/01/19)
5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of fireworks, including
sparklers, are prohibited.
Exceptions:
1. Storage and handling of fireworks as permitted in Section 5604.
2. Manufacture, assembly and testing of fireworks as permitted in Section 5605.
3. The use of fireworks for display as permitted in Section 5608.
4. The possession, storage, sale, handling and use of specific types of Division 1.4g
fireworks where allowed by applicable local or state laws, ordinances and regulations
provided such fireworks comply with CPSC 16 CFR, parts 1500-1507, and DOTn 49
CFR, parts 100-178, for consumer fireworks.
(Ord. 0-98-05, §1, 5/16/05, Ord. O-94-18, 08/13/18-eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 7-39.5 Indoor Pyrotechnic Displays
Indoor pyrotechnic displays shall not be allowed.
(Ord. 0-25-08, §2, 2/19/08)
Sec. 7-39.6. Application for pyrotechnical displays.
Application for permits for the discharge of fireworks or for pyrotechnical displays shall be in
writing to the Fire Prevention Division; submitted thirty (30) days in advance of the show date and shall
include a scaled diagram of the location where the exhibition will be held; drawings to include the
location and distances of all buildings, roadways, overhead wires and obstructions, audience viewing
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
7-6
areas, and projected fall out areas for aerial rocket debris, and a copy of the pyro-technicians State and
Federal licenses.
The fire prevention division shall upon receipt of such applicant's permit refer the same to the
Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire Department who shall have an inspection made of the premises
at the location given in said application where it is proposed to give such public display of fireworks, and
if in the judgment of the Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire Department it would not be hazardous
to surrounding property or dangerous to any person or persons to permit such public display of fireworks
at such location, they shall approve such application and return the same to the Fire Prevention Division,
and in turn the approved application shall be forwarded to the Village Manager for final consideration.
The permit will be issued by the Fire Prevention Division on the day of the event, after an inspection of
the site, equipment, and product has been approved. Such permits shall designate the kinds and quantities
of fireworks to be used at such public display, and no other kinds and no greater quantities of fireworks
than therein specified shall be used at such public display. (Ord. No. 0-69-13 §1, 6/10/13)
Sec. 7-39.7. Insurance requirements.
No pyrotechnical exhibition shall be held unless the proprietor thereof or pyrotechnic company
has in force a public liability insurance policy in the amount of at least five million dollars ( $5,000,000);
a certificate showing such insurance shall be filed with the Clerk at least fifteen days (15)days prior to
such exhibitions. (Ord. No. 0-69-13 §1, 6/10/13)
Sec. 7-39.8. Nitro-glycerine; T.N.T. prohibited; exception; storage limit.
It shall be unlawful to keep or store any nitro-glycerine or the explosive commonly known as
T.N.T. in the village in any quantities, excepting for medicinal or laboratory purposes and for such
purposes no more than one-quarter (1/4) ounce shall be stored in any one (1) building or premises. (Ord.
No. 0-69-13 §1, 6/10/13)
Sec. 7-39.9. Rules of State Fire Marshal to govern.
All explosives must be kept or stored in accordance with the rules of the State Fire Marshal,
subject to the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 0-69-13 §1, 6/10/13)
Sec. 7-39.10. Outdoor pyrotechnical displays
All outdoor fireworks displays shall be electronically fired from an approved electronic firing
unit, and all fireworks displays shall comply with the NFPA 1123, 2014 edition. (Ord. No. 0-69-13 §1,
6/10/13, Ord. O-94-18; 08/13/18-eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 7-39.11. Deleted Articles.
The following articles in NFPA 1123, 2014 edition shall be deleted:
8.1.6.2 Delete this article entirely
8.2.6 Delete this article entirely
8.2.9.2.2 Delete this article entirely
(Ord. No. 0-69-13 §1, 6/10/13, Ord. O-94-18, 08/13/18-effective 01/01/19)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
7-7
Sec. 7-40. Fire Protection
Sec. 7-40.05. Sprinkler Design Safety Factor
Sprinkler systems for NFPA 13 systems shall be designed with a minimum safety factor of 5 psi
provided between the available water supply and the system flow and pressure demand and shall include
hose stream allowances required by NFPA 13, 13D, and 13R. (Ord. O-94-18; 08/13/18-eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 7.40.07 Inspection, Testing and Maintenance Records
Section 901.6.2 of the 2015 International Fire Code Shall be amended to add: and submitted to
the Fire Prevention Division in an approved manor. (Ord. O-94-18; 08/13/18-eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 7-40.1. Wood Trusses
Wood I-joists, open web joists and metal plate connected wood trusses may be used if they are
protected from the underside. Approved protection methods include ½ inch drywall ceiling, sprinklers, or
U.L. fire-rated drop ceiling system.
Sec. 7-40.2. Automatic Sprinkler Systems – New Buildings
Approved automatic fire sprinkler system, installed in accordance with NFPA 13 and/or NFPA
13R, shall be installed in all new buildings and structures regardless of the materials used in construction
and/or use group classification (as defined in the International Building Code). Sprinkler systems shall be
equipped with electronically monitored water flow separation zone valves, and drains that will provide a
means to control the systems for each commercial unit and/or floor level in the case of a multi-story
residential or commercial structure. These zone valves will not eliminate the requirement for the main
riser flow switch. (Ord. 0-61-05, §1, 3/21/05, Ord. O-94-18; 08/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 7-40.3. Fire Protection Systems – Existing Buildings
Requirements for existing buildings that are added to, repaired, have a change in occupancy or
altered shall be determined per the International Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition or as required by
adopted codes. (Ord. No. 0-70-13, §2, 6/10/13, Ord. O-94-18; 08/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 7-40.4. Fire Department Connections and Hydrants
(a.) Location: Fire department connections shall be located and be visible on a street front or
in a location approved by the fire department. Such connections shall be located so that
immediate access can be made by the fire department and within one hundred fifty (150)
feet of a fire hydrant. Fire department connections shall not be obstructed by fences,
bushes, trees, walls or any other similar object.
(b.) Fire hydrants: installed on private property shall be located and installed as directed by
the fire department. Hydrants shall conform to the standards of the Village of Palatine
and the Fire Department. Hydrants shall not be installed on a water main less than six (6)
inches in diameter. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than three hundred (300) feet
from any point of the exterior of a building. All fire hydrants shall be properly
maintained and shall not be obstructed.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
7-8
Sec. 7-40.5. Sprinkler System Monitoring and Alarms
(a.) Alarm, supervisory and trouble signals shall be distinctly different and shall be
automatically transmitted to the Palatine Fire Department remote receiving station as
defined in NFPA 72.
(b.) Strobe lights at the sprinkler connection: There shall be an electronic audio-visual device
located on the exterior wall above all new fire department sprinkler and/or standpipe
connections which shall activate when water is flowing. The device shall be specified for
outdoor use (weatherproof), and must be visible from the street or driveway.
Sec. 7-40.6. Standpipe Systems
(a.) In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story, Class I automatic wet or
manual wet standpipes shall be provided where any portion of the buildings interior area
is more than 150 feet of travel, vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of fire
department vehicle access.
(b.) Where the most remote portion of a floor or story is more than 150 feet from a hose
connection, the fire prevention official is authorized to require that additional hose
connections be provided in approved locations.
Sec. 7-40.7. Fire Alarm and Detection Systems
All required fire alarm systems shall transmit trouble and fire signals directly to the Palatine Fire
Department remote receiving station by a wireless transmitter in accordance with NFPA 72, only
equipment certified and approved by the remote receiving station, and/or its’ designated proprietor may
be installed. (Ord. 0-61-05, §1, 3/21/05; Ord. 0-210-06, §4, 12/4/06; Ord. 0-200-07, §1&2, 12/3/07,
retroactive to 1/1/07, Ord. O-94-18; 08/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 7-40.7.1 Commercial Cooking Suppression Systems
All new, upgraded or modified existing commercial kitchen hood equipment protected by an
automatic fire suppression system as required by section 904 of the International Fire Code (IFC) shall
have the system monitored electronically by an approved fire alarm installed per the requirements of
NFPA 72. The fire panel shall be a direct tie to the Palatine Fire Department per the requirements of this
section. Audiovisual devices shall be installed; one in the kitchen area, and if applicable in the dining
areas. (Ord. 0-25-08, §2, 2/19/08)
Sec. 7-40.8. Curtain Boards and Smoke Venting Requirements
Curtain boards and smoke venting areas for Groups F-1 and S-1 as defined in the International
Building Code, 2015 Edition shall not exceed 20,000 square feet. (Ord. 0-57-06, §5 3/20/06, eff. 6/1/06,
Ord. 0-70-11, §1, 6/20/11, Ord. O-94-18; 08/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 7-40.9. Fire Department Access To Secured Buildings.
A Knox box(es), as approved by the Fire Prevention Division, shall be installed on all buildings
with a required fire alarm system, and on any building where immediate access by the Fire Department is
deemed necessary. The location(s) are to be approved by the Fire Prevention Division. The box(es) shall
contain keys, properly identified, which allow access to all portions of the building. A three foot wide
clear and unobstructed path shall be provided and maintained to access the Knox Box. (Ord. O-94-18;
08/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
7-9
Sec. 7-40.10. Reserved. (Ord. No. 0-127-09, §3, 11/16/09)
Sec. 7-40.11. Special Emergency Electrical Wiring Requirements.
Structures thirty-five feet in height and/or four stories and higher shall be provided with nonenergized
wiring to provide emergency power for firefighting and other fire department use. Nonenergized
interconnected outlets shall be located in each stairwell and at each floor level including the
ground level.
(a) Provide a National Electrical Manufacture’s Association approved red exterior grade male twist
lock receptacle, compatible with the fire department cords and generators, and a weather tight
snap cover adjacent to the fire department siamese connection, on the outside of the building.
The location shall be approved by the Fire Prevention Division and not obstruct access to the
siamese connection. (Ord. O-94-18; 08/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
(b) Provide a National Electrical Manufacture’s Association approved red exterior grade female
twist lock receptacle, compatible with the fire department cords and generators, and with
weather tight cover in each stairwell, at each floor level.
(c) If the required receptacles are not flush mounted, waterproof boxes must be provided.
(d) Structures up to one hundred feet in height shall be wired with a minimum of #8 gauge wire in
¾ inch conduit. Structures over one hundred feet in height shall be wired with a minimum of #6
gauge wire in 1 inch conduit. The conduit must be properly grounded to the neutral wire.
(e) Conduit concealed within a wall can be thin wall; heavy wall conduit must be used if the conduit
is exposed.
(f) Wiring shall be three pole, 3-wired grounded circuit conforming to the National Electrical Code.
(g) The plug shall be a standard 20 amp twist lock, L520P (Male) and L520C (Female). (Ord. No. 0-
23-10, §1, 3/15/10, Ord. O-94-18; 08/13/18 eff. 01/01/19)
Sec. 7-40.12 Fire Department Communications
Each floor of a structure shall have a minimum of (95%) radio communication reliability. If a
situation exists where this requirement can not be met a bi-directional radio amplification (BDA) system
shall be installed within or on the building. This system shall be designed to operate in conjunction with
the Fire Department radio equipment. Areas of the building such as fire command, fire pump, mechanical,
hazardous material, and computer rooms, as well as all levels below grade shall have 100% coverage.
(Ord. 0-25-08, §4, 2/19/08)
Sec. 7-40.12.1 Emergency power for Bi-Directional Radio Amplification
A twenty-four (24) hour battery backup is required for BDA systems. Where a building is
equipped with an emergency standby generator installed per the requirements of NFPA 70, 110, and 111,
and the BDA system is part of that generator system the battery backup will not be required. (Ord. 0-25-
08, §4, 2/19/08)
Sec. 7-40.12.2 Bi-Directional Radio Amplification Testing
Bi-directional radio amplification equipment shall be tested annually, and it shall be the building
owners’ responsibility to see that the system is continuously maintained to assure constant operation.
Annual tests shall be performed by a certified communications company, and results shall be sent directly
to the Fire Prevention Division. (Ord. 0-25-08, §4, 2/19/08)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
7-10
Sec. 7-41 Regular Fire and Life Safety Inspections
It shall be the responsibility of the Fire Prevention Division to conduct regular fire and life safety
inspections in all buildings or business types (except single-family and two-family homes). The purpose
of these inspections is to ensure a reasonable level of life safety and protection of property from the
hazards of fire, explosion, or dangerous conditions in new and existing buildings, structures, and
premises, and to provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations.
All violations must be corrected within thirty (30) days of the initial inspection. Those conditions
determined to be imminent life safety hazards must be corrected immediately. Fees related to the Annual
Fire and Life Safety Inspections shall be included in the Village’s Fee Schedule. In addition to the
applicable inspection fees, citations may be issued to building and/or business owners for any violations
that have not been corrected.
Sec. 7-42. Same--Copies to be on file.
The Village Clerk shall keep a copy of said codes on file in their office. (Code 1961, 6.205; Ord. 0-
200-07, §1&2, 12/3/07, retroactive to 1/1/07)
Sec. 7-43. AutoCAD drawing
Any persons submitting plans for a new building, addition to, or remodel of an existing building,
shall submit an AutoCAD file of the base plans at the time of permit application. (Ord. O-94-18; 08/13/18
eff. 01/01/19)
Secs. 7-44--7-50. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. FIRE PREVENTION DIVISION
Sec. 7-51. Power of Fire Chief to designate.
The Chief of the fire department shall designate such members of the department as he deems
necessary ; Ord. 0-210-06, §5,
12/4/06; Ord. 0-200-07, §1&2, 12/3/07, retroactive to 1/1/07)
Secs. 7-52--7-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. FIRE LANES
Sec. 7-61. Defined.
For purposes of this division "fire lane" shall mean any public street, alley, driveway, roadway or
easement of access, or with the consent of the owner, any privately-owned street, alley, driveway,
roadway or easement of access which is to be maintained free from obstruction so as to provide ready
access for fire fighting vehicles and equipment. (Code 1961, 6.301)
Sec. 7-62. Established.
Fire lanes may be established from time to time at locations designated by the Mayor and Village
Council by ordinance. (Code 1961, 6.302)
Sec. 7-63. Parking prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to park in or otherwise block or obstruct any portion of the fire lanes so
designated at any time. Signs shall be erected to identify such fire lanes and to serve notice that parking is
prohibited therein. (Code 1961, 6.303)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
7-11
DIVISION 4. FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
Sec. 7-64. Illinois Gasoline Storage Act.
There is hereby adopted the Regulations contained in the Illinois Gasoline Storage Act as
amended from time to time. (430 ILCS 15/2).
Sec. 7-65. Notification of State Inspections Required.
The Owner or Operator of an underground storage tank system or any person removing or
installing such a system shall provide notice to the Fire Department of said activity within 24 hours of
scheduling said activity with the State Fire Marshall.
Sec. 7-66. Above Ground Storage Tanks
All new above ground flammable/combustible storage tanks, except concrete vaulted tanks with a
two-hour or greater fire rating, shall have a containment dike equal to 150% of the tank’s rated capacity.
A closeable drain shall be provided in the dike to remove any standing water.
ARTICLE IV. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Sec. 7-67. Stop work order
(a) It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, contractor, subcontractor or builder engaged in
developing property pursuant to a permit issued by the Village to make any departure from or violate:
(i) Any ordinance or code of the Village;
(ii) Any conditions attached to a special use ordinance, planned unit development
ordinance, variation, or annexation agreement;
(iii) Any federal, state or other local law or ordinance;
(iv) Commit any fraud or make any misrepresentation or false statement in an
application for a license or permit; or
(v) Cause a nuisance or danger to the public health, safety or welfare.
Any such departure from or violation of such ordinance, code, condition or threat to the public
welfare or law shall operate to void the permit which has been issued for such work.
(b) The Manager, without delay, shall issue a stop work order directing that all persons
engaged in the work permitted under the permit shall cease and desist immediately until such
time as the Manager has either received satisfactory evidence that the work to be performed will
be done in accordance with such ordinance, codes, conditions, laws or the public welfare until the
Corporate Authorities have acted on the matter pursuant to either paragraph (c) or (d).
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
7-12
(c) The Manager may refer the matter of continuing the stop work order to the Corporate
Authorities for further proceedings. The Corporate Authorities shall have the authority
to:
(i) Continue in effect the stop work order;
(ii) Lift the stop work order;
(iii) Impose additional requirements as conditions to lifting the stop work order;
and/or
(iv) Any other relief consistent with the public welfare.
(d) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Manager in regard to the issuance of a stop
work order or refusal to rescind the same shall have the right to appeal to the Corporate
Authorities. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Manager, within five days after
receipt of a stop work order or after the Manager's refusal to rescind such an order, a
written statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The
Corporate Authorities shall appoint a hearing body to be composed of the Mayor or the
Mayor's designee and two Council Members who shall thereupon set the time and place
for a hearing of such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant.
The hearing body shall make a recommendation to the Corporate Authorities which shall
render a decision on such appeal which shall be final. Any appeal from a decision of the
Corporate Authorities shall be made directly to the Circuit Court of Cook County
pursuant to the Administrative Review Act (735 ILCS 5/3-101, et seq.).
(e) All costs and expenses including but not limited to court reporters fees and attorneys' fees
incurred by the Village in connection with any appeal of a stop work order shall be taxed
to the appellant and shall be paid by the appellant as a condition to reinstatement of the
permit.
(f) The authority to issue a stop work order shall be in addition to any other relief available
to the Village.
Sec. 7-68. Penalties
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or
who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this ordinance, shall, upon conviction, be fined
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for such offense,
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or which a violation occurs or
continues.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
7-13
ARTICLE V. AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE SERVICE FEES
(Editor’s Note: Ord. No. O-204-06 passed on December 4, 2006, replaced Sec. 7-80 in its entirety.)
(Editor’s Note: Ord. No. O-49-17 passed on April 17, 2017, added Sections 7-82 and 7-83)
Sec. 7-80 Ambulance Service Fees
The Village of Palatine shall charge a user service fee for transport by Fire Department ambulances as
provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances. (Ord. O-121-17, 12/4/17)
Sec. 7-81. Billing and Collection of Ambulance Service Fees
Billing and collection of fees for ambulance service shall be done by, or caused to be done by, the
Village Manager or his designee.
Sec. 7-82. Other Emergency Response Service Fees
The Village of Palatine shall charge a user service fee for emergency response by the Fire
Department as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 7-83. Billing and Collection of Emergency Response Service Fees
Billing and collection of fees for emergency responses by the Fire Department shall be done by,
or caused to be done by, the Village Manager or his designee.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 8 - GARBAGE AND REFUSE
8-1
Chapter 8 GARBAGE AND REFUSE*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Fire protection and prevention, Ch. 7; health and sanitation, Ch. 9; housing, Ch.
10; antilitter regulations, §12-191, et seq.
----------
Sec. 8-1. Collection charges.
The refuse collection charge shall be included in the village's billing to the eligible residence for water
and sewer service and shall be subject to the collection and penalty provisions provided for water and sewer
charges. All monies received by the village in payment of the consolidated refuse, water and sewer bill shall be
applied first toward the payment of the refuse bill, second to the sewer bill, and the balance to the water bill.
Each Single-family dwelling unit shall pay a monthly Basic User Billing Charge as set out in
the Fee Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances; however, this shall not be in addition to the
Basic User Billing Charge charged under Section 19-62. In addition to this Basic User Billing Charge,
each Single-family dwelling unit shall pay the following rates:
(Ord. 0-168-08, §1, 12/1/08, effective Jan. 1, 2009; Ord. #157-11, §1, 12/12/11, effective Jan. 1,
2012; Ord. O-136-18 effective 1-1-19)
(a) Single-family dwelling units:
Each single-family dwelling unit within the village shall pay in accordance with schedule below for
refuse collection and disposal service, which service shall be mandatory for all dwelling units within
the village. Said charge shall be payable in advance.
Requests from residents to change service to provide or delete the rear or premises pickup will be
granted for periods of not less than one (1) month. (Ord. No. 0-204-02, §1, 11-11-02, effect. Jan. 1,
2003; Ord. No. 0-284-03, §1, 12-8-03, effective Jan. 1, 2004)
(1) Curbside Pickup: The monthly fee for refuse collection and disposal service shall be as set out
in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances. Said payment shall entitle the
dwelling unit to one (1) weekly pickup of all garbage and refuse at the curb, with all garbage
placed in disposable plastic or paper sacks as prescribed in section 8-2. (Ord. No. 0-204-02,
§1, 11-11-02, effect. Jan. 1, 2003, Ord. No. 0-284-03, §2, 12-8-03, effective Jan. 1, 2004;
Ord. 0-213-07, §1, 12/10/07, effective Jan. 1, 2008; Ord. #157-11, §2, 12/12/11, effective
Jan. 1, 2012)
(2) Rear Door Pickup Premium: A unit may elect in writing to have garbage picked up at the rear
of the premises once per week. The Rear Door Pickup Premium shall be as set out in the Fee
Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances as an additional charge per month to the rate
charged in subsection (1). Said payment shall entitle the dwelling unit to the collection of
three (3) twenty-gallon cans or disposable sacks as prescribed in section 8-2 at the rear door
once each week with all excess refuse placed at the curb once each week. (Ord. No. 0-204-02,
§1, 11-11-02, effect. Jan. 1, 2003; Ord. No. 0-284-03, §3, 12-8-03, effective Jan. 1, 2004;
Ord. 0-213-07, §1, 12/10/07, effective Jan. 1, 2008; Ord. No. 0-168-08, §2, 12-1-08, effective
Jan. 1, 2009; Ord. #157-11, §3, 12/12/11, effective Jan. 1, 2012)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 8 - GARBAGE AND REFUSE
8-2
(3) Yard-Waste Exempt Discount: The Yard-Waste Exempt Discount shall be as set out in the Fee
Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances and shall be a per month reduction to the
rate charged in subsection (1). To qualify for a Yard-Waste Exempt Discount, an application
must be filled out by an officer of a condominium or townhouse association that a) provides
for individual refuse pickup, b) employs a comprehensive yard care service for all dwelling
units, and c) certifies that such yard waste as collected is deposited in accordance with state
law. Said application and certification shall be in a form and manner determined by the
Director of Finance and Operations and shall be renewed from time to time as determined by
the Director of Finance and Operations. (Ord. No. 0-204-02, §1, 11-11-02, effect. Jan. 1,
2003; Ord. No. 0-284-03, §4, 12-8-03, effective Jan. 1, 2004; Ord. 0-213-07, §1, 12/10/07,
effective Jan. 1, 2008; Ord. No. 0-168-08, §3, 12-1-08 effective Jan. 1, 2009; Ord. #157-11,
§4, 12/12/11, effective Jan. 1, 2012)
(4) Senior Citizen Discount: The Senior Citizen Discount shall be as set out in the Fee Schedule
Supplement to the Code of Ordinances and shall be a per month reduction to the rate charged
in subsection (1). To qualify for a senior refuse discount, an application must be filled out at
the Community Center in person, the applicant must be sixty-five (65) years or older, have the
refuse account in their name and be the title holder of the single-family dwelling unit for
which the senior citizen rate is sought. This rate shall become effective with all billings
prepared after January 1, 2002. (Ord. 0-159-01, §1, 11-12-01, effective 1-1-02) (Ord. No. 0-
204-02, §1, 11-11-02, effect. Jan. 1, 2003; Ord. No. 0-168-08, §4, 12-1-08, effective Jan. 1,
2009; Ord. #157-11, §5, 12/12/11, effective Jan. 1, 2012)
(b) Multiple dwelling, commercial, business or industrial service:
Each structure with two dwelling units shall pay a monthly rate equal to two times the rate charged in
subsection (1), which refuse collection and disposal service shall be mandatory for all two (2) dwelling
unit structures within the Village. (Ord. 0-168-08, §5, 12-1-08, effective Jan. 1, 2009)
(c) Churches; village facilities; and designated street litter baskets:
There shall be no charge for refuse collection and disposal service.
(Code 1961 §17.201; Ord. No. O-7-75, §1, 1-27-75; Ord. No. O-83- §1, 11-24-75; Ord. No. O-135- §1,
12-27-77; Ord. No. O-35- §1--3, 4-14-80; Ord. No. O-72- §1, 2, 8-24-81; Ord. No. O-29- §1,
4-14-86; Ord. No. O-180- §3, 12-27-88; Ord. No. O-48-90, §1, 4-23-90; Ord. No. O-88- §1, 6-24-91;
Ord. No. O-55- §1, 2, 4-27-92; Ord. No. 0-50- §1, 4-25-94; Ord. No. O-65- §2. 4-22-96;Ord. No.
0-63- §2,4-28-97; Ord.No.0-44- §2, 4/27/98;Ord.No.0-86- §1,6-28-99; Ord. No. 0-206-06, §1,
12/4/06 effec. 1/1/07)
Sec. 8-2. Specifications.
All garbage shall be wrapped in paper. All garbage and household refuse shall be placed in disposable
plastic or paper flexible and disposable sacks properly closed. The types of bags that are acceptable for this use
shall be prescribed by the director of environmental health and approved by the board. Other refuse to be
picked up shall include miscellaneous rubbish, yard clippings, grass cuttings, leaves in disposable containers
and branches cut into a maximum length of four (4) feet and bundled. Provided, however, that all yard
clippings, grass clippings and leaves placed at the curb for collection shall be placed only in village-approved
paper containers. Building materials, plaster, lumber, earth, stones and concrete shall not be collected under the
provisions of this article. If a dwelling unit has elected to have the garbage picked up at the rear of the
premises, then such unit may place garbage in metal containers, not exceeding twenty (20) gallons in capacity,
equipped with tight-fitting covers and maintained in good order by the owner or occupant of the premises.
(Code 1961, §17.202; Ord. No. O-48-90, §2, 4-23-90)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 8 - GARBAGE AND REFUSE
8-3
Sec. 8-3. Deposits prohibited; burial specifications.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit anywhere in the village any uncovered piles of animal
excrement, refuse, garbage, offal or carcasses of dead animals. Such refuse must be buried at least two (2) feet
below the surface of the ground or burned in properly-constructed incinerators or otherwise properly disposed
of within twenty-four (24) hours. Any uncovered pile of refuse, animal excrement, garbage, offal or carcasses
of dead animals are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Code 1961, 17.305)
Sec. 8-4. Burning, burying, accumulating refuse prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or bury garbage or other refuse within the village; to permit
garbage or other refuse to accumulate in any manner so as to create a nuisance and to attract flies, vermin or
rats, or to permit any garbage to accumulate for more than fourteen (14) days, provided, however, that gas
incinerators or similar equipment properly installed so that installation does not constitute a health hazard or
fire hazard, where such installation has been inspected and approved by the building and zoning administrator
or the director of environmental health, may be used for the burning of garbage and other refuse and properly
installed kitchen disposal units may be used for the disposal of garbage into sewer lines within the village.
(Code 1961, 17.203)
Cross reference(s)--Fire prevention and protection, generally, Ch. 7; open fires prohibited, 12-41;
grass fires prohibited, 12-42.
Sec. 8-5. Deposits in streets prohibited.
No garbage or refuse of any kind shall be deposited in any street, alley or public way excepting as is
provided in this chapter; and no such refuse shall be so placed that it can be blown or scattered by the wind,
nor shall any refuse container be placed at the curb (not in the street) sooner than 7:00 p.m. the day preceding
pickup during the time of the year when daylight savings time is in effect or sooner than 4:00 p.m. during the
time of the year when central standard time is in effect, nor later than 6:00 a.m. on a collection day. (Code
1961, 17.204; Ord. No. O-34-80, 1, 4-14-80; Ord. No. O-27-86, 1, 4-14-86)
Cross reference(s)--Rubbish on streets, etc., 12-28; streets and sidewalks generally, Ch. 16;
prohibited deposits, 16-20 et seq.
Sec. 8-6. Delinquent bills for refuse service; filing of statement of lien claim; notice of delinquency.
Whenever a bill for refuse service remains unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered, the village
manager shall refer such bills to a firm or agency specializing in collection work to pursue collection from the
debtor, including all charges incurred by the village in the collection of said bills.
The village clerk shall reserve the right to file with the county recorder of deeds of Cook County a statement of
lien claim on all above referenced unpaid bills. The statement shall contain the following: (Ord. No. 0-41-94
4/11/94)
(1) A legal description of the subject premises sufficient for identification thereof;
(2) The amount of money due for such services;
(3) The date when such amount became delinquent; and
(4) A notice that the village claims a lien for said amount.
If the user of the refuse service whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises, and the village
clerk has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises, if his address be known to the
clerk, whenever such bill remains unpaid for a period of sixty (60) days after it has been rendered. (Ord. No.
O-103-76, 1, 11-22-76)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 8 - GARBAGE AND REFUSE
8-4
Sec. 8-7. Foreclosure of lien for unpaid refuse service bills.
The village shall have the power to foreclose the lien for unpaid refuse service bill or bills, together
with all filing fees, court costs and other charges incurred by the village in the collection of said bill or bills, by
suit in chancery in the circuit court of Cook County. Said lien shall be effective and may be foreclosed against
the subject premises whether or not the party or parties owning or occupying the premises are the same as those
who owned or occupied the premises at the time such service was rendered. (Ord. No. O-103-76, 1, 11-22-
76)
Sec. 8-8. Unlawful removal of recycled material.
It shall be unlawful for unlicensed persons, firms or corporations to remove any item including but not
limited to newspapers; aluminum or bimetal cans; glass bottles or plastic milk containers placed in or adjacent
to village recycling containers; or the recycling containers themselves. (Ord. No. O-50-89, 1, 5-8-89)
Sec. 8-9. Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section [8-8] shall be subject to
a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. (Ord. No. O-50-89, 1, 5-8-89)
Sec. 8-10. Definitions applicable to sections 8-11 through 8-13.
The terms defined herein shall apply to the provisions of sections 8-11 through 8-13:
Agency means the Solid Waste Agency of Northern Cook County.
Municipal waste system means the waste collection, transportation and disposal system of the
municipality operated under license pursuant to Section Four, including all physical assets of the municipality
used for the collection, transportation and disposal of system waste, all amounts on deposit in the municipal
waste system fund and all amounts collected on account of rates and charges imposed under sections 8-10
through 8-13 herein.
Municipality means the Village of Palatine.
Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company,
joint venture, or corporation, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of
any court.
Project use agreement means the 1992 Project Use Agreement by and between the municipality and
the agency, as amended from time to time.
System waste means:
(1) Garbage and general household waste;
(2) Institutional waste; and
(3) Construction and demolition waste discarded by persons within the residential zoned districts,
further described as single-family, attached single-family, multifamily dwellings, congregate
housing, churches and Village-owned municipal buildings.
``System waste'' does not include industrial, commercial, office parks or other governmental agencies other
than the village. (Ord. No. O-25-92, 1, 3-9-92)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 8 - GARBAGE AND REFUSE
8-5
Sec. 8-11. Required use of municipal waste system.
(a) Except as permitted in paragraph (b) below, all persons owning or occupying real estate within the
corporate limits of the municipality shall dispose of system waste through the municipal waste system. All
system waste shall be collected by or on behalf of the municipality pursuant to the terms of these sections and
shall be delivered to a transfer station as directed by the agency and the municipality or as otherwise agreed to
by the agency and the municipality under the Project Use Agreement.
(b) All waste generated from real estate which is industrial, commercial [or from] office parks or other
governmental agencies other than the village are exempted from the requirement to deliver the waste generated
from their operations to the agency.
(c) No person shall dispose of system waste through the municipal waste system unless the system
waste complies with all rules and regulations applicable thereto and established from time to time by either the
municipality or the agency.
(d) Any person disposing of system waste through the municipal waste system shall pay the rates and
charges established by the municipality under the provisions of section 8-1. (Ord. No. O-25-92, 1, 3-9-92)
Sec. 8-12. Private collectors and haulers.
(a) No person shall collect, transport or dispose of system waste without a license issued pursuant to
chapter 11, sections 11-421 through 11-429 of the Palatine Municipal Code, as amended from time to time.
(b) Any person holding a license to collect, transport or dispose of system waste shall comply with the
following obligations as a condition of that license:
(1) Comply with all the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to the collection,
transportation and disposal of system waste as may be enacted from time to time by any
lawful authority, including the State of Illinois, this municipality and the agency.
(2) Deliver all system waste to the transfer station designated by the agency and the municipality.
(3) Maintain all equipment used to collect, transport and dispose of system waste in good repair
and working order and operate it efficiently and effectively.
(4) Collect as agent for and promptly pay to the municipality all rates and charges imposed by the
municipality on persons using the municipal waste system except for those persons who are to
be billed by the municipality.
(5) Maintain accurate books and records and make them available to the municipality upon
demand.
(c) Nothing in sections 8-10 through 8-13 is intended to impair any license issued before the effective
date of these sections to any person which authorizes the person to collect, transport and dispose of municipal
waste which constitutes system waste to a location other than the transfer station designated by the agency and
the municipality. (Ord. No. O-25-92, 1, 3-9-92)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 8 - GARBAGE AND REFUSE
8-6
Sec. 8-13. Municipal waste system fund; imposition of rates and charges.
(a) Creation. There is hereby created and established an enterprise fund of the municipality known as
the municipal waste system fund, which shall be separate and apart from all other funds and accounts of the
municipality as provided below in section (g).
(b) Budget. Before the beginning of each fiscal year, the village manager shall recommend and the
municipality shall adopt a budget for the municipal waste system. The budget shall estimate the revenue
required to:
(1) Pay all operating and maintenance expenses of the municipal waste system, including reserves
for uncollected charges, and all obligations to the agency under the Project Use Agreement;
(2) Pay as they become due interest on and principal of any revenue bonds, as needed or other
obligations payable from the revenues of the municipal waste system;
(3) Provide for all unpaid claims; and
(4) Maintain appropriate depreciation and reserve funds for the revenue bond issues.
The budget shall estimate the amounts available to pay those obligations from taxes levied and anticipated to
be collected pursuant to law as needed; other amounts deposited in the municipal waste system fund; and rates
and charges to be imposed on persons disposing of system waste through the municipal waste system.
(c) Sufficiency of rates and charges. The rates and charges imposed for use of the municipal waste
system shall be sufficient, after taking into account monies then on hand in the municipal waste system fund
and the proceeds of taxes levied and to be collected which have been assigned and pledged to the municipal
waste system fund, to pay all operation and maintenance expenses of the municipal waste system, including
reserves for uncollected charges, and all obligations to the agency under the terms of the Project Use
Agreement; to pay as they become due interest on and principal of any revenue bonds as needed, or other
obligations payable from revenues of the municipal waste system; to provide for all unpaid claims; and to
provide adequate depreciation and reserve funds for revenue bond issues of the municipal waste system.
(d) Rates set. The rates for the service will be those as set forth in section 8-1 of chapter 8 of the
Palatine Municipal Code, as amended, from time to time. This will include all single-family, attached singlefamily,
multifamily dwellings, congregate housing, churches and village-owned municipal buildings.
(e) Summary of accounts. The licensed private hauler shall provide to the village a detailed summary
of accounts for all single-family, attached single-family, multifamily dwellings, congregate housing, churches
and village-owned municipal buildings which will include the location and the tonnage of waste delivered to
the agency.
(f) Liability for rates and charges. The owners and occupants of real estate within the municipality
served by the municipal waste system shall be jointly and severally liable to pay all rates and charges imposed
by the municipality pursuant to the provisions of this section.
(g) Deposit of amounts collected. All amounts collected from rates and charges imposed under this
section shall be deposited in the municipal waste system fund, and together with all other amounts deposited in
the municipal waste system fund shall be separate apart from all other monies of the municipality, except
amounts deposited in the municipal waste system fund may be invested together with other funds of the
municipality. (Ord. No. O-25-92, 1, 3-9-92; Ord. No. O-37-92, 1, 3-23-92)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 9 - HEALTH AND SANITATION
9-1
Chapter 9 HEALTH AND SANITATION*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Environmental control board, §2-306 et seq.; director of environmental health,
2-326 et seq.; board of health, §2-341 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; fire prevention and
protection, Ch. 7; garbage and refuse, Ch. 8; housing, Ch. 10; water and sewer services, Ch. 19; zoning, App.
A; subdivision regulations, App. B; building code, App. C.
----------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-252-05, passed on December 19, 2005, effective January 1, 2006, added a
New Article III Public Swimming Pools
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-192-06, passed on November 13, 2006, effective January 2, 2007, added
New Article IV Village of Palatine Clean Indoor Air Ordinance
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-7-12, passed on January 9, 2012, deleted Sec. 9-10 Heat in apartments, 9-
14 Suntanning facilities, Art. III Public Swimming Pools in their entirety.
-------------
Art. I. In General, §§ 9-1--9-25
Art. II. Contagious Diseases, §§ 9-26--9-41
Art. III. Reserved, §§9-53—9-69
Art. IV. Village of Palatine Clean Indoor Air Ordinance §§9-70—9-77
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 9-1. Unwholesome food prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any unwholesome or polluted food or drink of any kind in
the village. (Code 1961, §17.301)
Sec. 9-2. Sanitary regulations.
All premises used in the sale or storage of food or drink intended for human consumption shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition. It shall be unlawful to permit any person who is afflicted with a contagious
disease to handle any food or drink intended for human consumption. Premises shall be kept free from flies and
vermin of all kinds. (Code 1961, §17.302)
Sec. 9-3. Water sources; obstruction, pollution prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to obstruct or pollute any water course or source of
water supply in the village. (Code 1961, §17.303)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 9 - HEALTH AND SANITATION
9-2
Sec. 9-4. Stagnant water prohibited.
Any stagnant pool of water in the village is hereby declared to be a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation to permit any such nuisance to remain or exist on any property under his or its
control. (Code 1961, §17.304)
Sec. 9-5. Burial of humans except in cemetery prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish a cemetery or to bury any person within the village
limits, or within three-quarters (3/4) of a mile thereof except in an established cemetery. (Code 1961, §
17.306)
Sec. 9-6. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful to commit or do any act which endangers the public health or results in annoyance
or discomfort to the public. (Code 1961, §17.308)
Sec. 9-7. Common drinking cups in public places prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to maintain any common drinking cup, or cups, dipper or other similar utensil, for
the use of more than one person in any public hall, theater, store or other place frequented by the public.
(Code 1961 §17.309)
Sec. 9-8. Sanitary utensils for service of food required; violation declared a nuisance; abatement.
Utensils for personal use in all places serving food or drink to the public shall be thoroughly cleaned
and sterilized after each such usage.
The chief of police and the health officer each hereby is authorized to abate any such nuisance existing
in the village, whether such nuisance is specifically recognized by this Code or other ordinance or not. (Code
1961, §17.310)
Sec. 9-9. Expectoration prohibited in public places.
It shall be unlawful to spit or expectorate on any public sidewalk or other public place, or on the floor
or walls of any store, theater, hall, public vehicle, or other place frequented by the public or to which the public
is invited. (Code 1961, §17.312)
Sec. 9-10. Deleted (Ord. #0-7-12, §1, 1/19/12)
Sec. 9-11. Dense smoke.
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil
burner or any other agency in the village so as to cause annoyance or discomfort to the residents thereof.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 9 - HEALTH AND SANITATION
9-3
For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as
published and used by the United States Geological Survey, shall be and is hereby adopted as a standard for
such grading, and smoke shall be, and is hereby defined as and declared to be "dense" when it is of a degree of
density of number three (3) of said chart, or greater, for more than six (6) minutes in any one hour; whether
such period of time is consecutive or not. (Code 1961, §17.314)
Sec. 9-12. Radiation hazards.
The rules and regulations issued by the U.S. Department of Health, State Health Department and such
other state or federal agencies authorized to promulgate rules and regulations pertaining to the control of
radiation hazards shall be given the force and effect as if they were set forth in this article. It shall be unlawful
to operate any machine or installation emitting gamma radiation into the body of human beings unless said
machine or installation is under the direct control and supervision of a physician, dentist or veterinarian
licensed to practice in the state. (Code 1961, §17.315)
Sec. 9-13. Spraying into atmosphere prohibited; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate mist sprayers or other types of spraying and fogging
devices which introduce into the atmosphere chlorinated hydrocarbons or organo-phosphates within the
corporate limits of the village except in emergency situations at the specific direction of the president and
board; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not prohibit:
(1) The larviciding of catch basins and sewers, or
(2) Ground spraying to control or exterminate other pest insects by persons holding a license
issued by the State of Illinois pursuant to the Illinois Custom or Public Application of
Pesticides Act, 415ILCS60/11, as a pesticide applicator, pesticide operator, public applicator
or public operator as defined therein.
(Code 1961, §17.316)
Secs. 9-14--9-25. Reserved.
(Ord. #0-7-12, §1, 1/9/12)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 9 - HEALTH AND SANITATION
9-4
ARTICLE II. CONTAGIOUS DISEASES
Sec. 9-26. Report required.
Every physician called in to care for or treat a person afflicted with a contagious disease or any
epidemic disease shall make a report of the same within twenty-four (24) hours after being called in to the
health officer. In case no physician is in attendance it shall be the duty of the person in charge or having the
care of such person to make a report within twenty-four (24) hours from the time the disease is recognized.
(Code 1961, §17.101)
Sec. 9-27. Quarantine.
The health officer shall have charge of the enforcement of the quarantine rules. He shall have the
power and the authority to place any premises within which a contagious or epidemic disease occurs under
quarantine, and the health officer shall determine the time when the quarantine ends. (Code 1961, §17.102)
Sec. 9-28. Same--Deliveries to premises.
No person engaged in the delivery of food or drink intended for human consumption shall enter any
premises which are quarantined because of the existence of a contagious or epidemic disease. No containers or
bottles shall be removed from any such premises until the termination of the quarantine and no such container
which has been left at such premises during the quarantine shall be placed in use for carrying food or drink
until it has been thoroughly sterilized. (Code 1961, §17.104)
Sec. 9-29. Spreading contagion prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to spread, wilfully or carelessly, any contagious disease or to so
cause the spread of same. (Code 1961, §17.103)
Sec. 9-30. Regulation of medical wastes.
The handling and disposal of medical wastes as hereinafter defined shall be regulated in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. O-170-90, §1, 12-17-90)
Sec. 9-31. Definition for sections 9-30 through 9-39.
For purposes of sections 9-30 through 9-39, the following definitions shall apply:
Communicable disease: An infectious agent or its toxic products which is transmitted directly or
indirectly to a well person from an infected person, animal or arthropod, or through the agency of an
intermediate host, vector or the inanimate environment.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 9 - HEALTH AND SANITATION
9-5
Effective treatment: Treatment that reduces the pathogenic qualities of the waste to a point where it is
safe to handle by nonclassified personnel. To be effective, the treatment must be designed for the waste in
question and be carried out in a manner acceptable to the health officer. The treatment may include, but is not
limited to the following:
(1) Incineration
(2) Steam sterilization (autoclaving)
(3) Chemical disinfection
(4) Thermal inactivation
(5) Irradiation
Health officer: The director of environmental health of the Village of Palatine or his authorized
representative.
Infectious waste: Waste that is capable of transmitting a communicable disease. Infectious waste
includes, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) Pathological wastes (human tissues, blood, excreta, and secretions);
(2) Cultures;
(3) Used sharps;
(4) Infectious agent stock and associated biologicals;
(5) Human blood and blood products;
(6) Human body parts and contaminated disposable bedding, bandages and dressings;
(7) Contaminated laboratory wastes;
(8) Wastes from surgery and autopsy;
(9) Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts and bedding.
Examples of establishments generating infectious waste include but are not limited to, hospitals,
doctor's and dentist's offices, medical and diagnostic laboratories, blood banks and plasma centers, ambulatory
surgical facilities, long-term health care facilities, research laboratories, pharmaceutical facilities, veterinary
offices and hospitals, clinics, mortuaries, animal quarantine facilities and ambulatory animal clinics.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 9 - HEALTH AND SANITATION
9-6
Liquid infectious waste: Liquid waste that is included with solid infectious waste for treatment and
disposal. It does not include urine, wash water and other liquids most properly disposed of via the sanitary
sewer.
Secure area: An area which is accessible only to classified personnel. If indoors, it must not be
accessible to the general public. If outdoors, the area must be locked. Any secure area must be marked with the
biohazard symbol at least six (6) inches high.
Sharps: Hypodermic and suture needles, syringes, scalpel blades, pipettes, lancets, guidewires or other
objects that could cut or penetrate the skin but not limited to the above. (Ord. No. O-170-90, §1, 12-17-90)
Sec. 9-32. Written protocol.
A written protocol for infectious waste treatment and disposal must be maintained on the premises and
available for inspection by the health officer and one copy must be sent to village health department. Any
changes or modifications of this protocol must also be sent to the health department upon instituting such
changes or modifications. The protocol must include storage before treatment, methods of treatment, quality
assurance checks per specifications of the manufacturer of the equipment used to treat the infectious waste and
final disposal methods. (Ord. No. O.170-90, §1, 12-17.90)
Sec. 9-33. Treatment before storage in an unsecured area.
No infectious waste shall be placed in an unsecured area until the waste has been effectively treated,
per written protocol, prior to its final disposal. (Ord. No. O-170-90, §1, 12-17-90)
Sec. 9-34. Storage before treatment.
Infectious waste being stored prior to treatment, or prior to collection for subsequent treatment, shall be
kept in secure area. Used sharps shall be placed in puncture-resistant containers. Liquid infectious waste shall
be stored in leak-proof containers. Each infectious waste container in the storage area shall be individually
marked with the universal biohazard symbol. (Ord. No. O-170-90, § 1, 12-17-90)
Sec. 9.35. Storage times.
Storage times for infectious waste that can putrefy and generate noxious odors shall be no longer than
seven (7) days above fifteen (15) degrees Fahrenheit or thirty (3 0) days below fifteen (15) degrees Fahrenheit.
Storage times for other infectious wastes shall be kept as short as possible but not to exceed thirty (30) days.
(Ord. No. O-170-90, §1, 12-17-90)
Sec. 9-36. Packaging of treated waste.
Infectious waste which has received effective treatment, except for ashes as set forth in section 9-37,
shall, prior to being placed in a nonsecure area for transportation to final disposal, be packaged in the following
manner:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 9 - HEALTH AND SANITATION
9-7
(1) If liquid, in a leak-proof container before being bagged.
(2) If sharps, in a puncture-resistant container which is nonopenable except by use of tools before
being bagged.
(3) All waste placed in sealed, tear-resistant plastic bags identified by the universal biohazard
symbol. The bags shall be thick enough to contain any spilled liquid infectious waste.
(4) All waste in a second properly identified bag or box if the treatment process destroyed the
biohazard marking or reduced the structural integrity of the original bag.
(Ord. No. O-170-90, §1, 12-17-90)
Sec. 9-37. Ashes.
Ashes from the effective treatment of infectious waste by proper incineration are exempt from the
packaging requirements of section 9-36 and shall be disposed of in an approved landfill. (Ord. No. O-170-90,
§1, 12-17-90)
Sec. 9-38. Final disposal.
Final disposal of infectious or medical hazardous wastes must be in a United States Environmental
Protection Agency-approved sanitary landfill or incinerator approved for infectious or medical hazardous
wastes. (Ord. No. O-170-90, § 1, 12-17-90)
Sec. 9-39. Exemptions.
Exemptions from the requirements of section 9-30 through 9-38 may be granted in writing by the
board of health if sufficient evidence indicates that such exemptions would not cause a risk to public health or
would result in a safer environment. (Ord. No. O-170-90, §1, 12-17-90)
Sec. 9-40. Penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of section 9-32 shall be fined no less than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation. This shall be in addition to any other remedy available to any
party. (Ord. No. O-170-90, §1, 12-17-90; Ord.No. 0-5-98, §10, 1-26-98)
Sec. 9-41. Violations declared a nuisance.
Any violation of sections 9-30, 9-31 and 9.33 through 9-38 of this article is declared a public nuisance
and shall be subject to the abatement provisions of article XXII of chapter 12 and the penalty provisions of
article XXIII of chapter 12 of this Code. (Ord. No. O-170-90, §1, 12-17-90)
Sec. 9-42 – 9-52 Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 9 - HEALTH AND SANITATION
9-8
ARTICLE III. RESERVED
Sec. 9-53—9-69 Reserved.
ARTICLE IV - VILLAGE OF PALATINE CLEAN INDOOR AIR ORDINANCE
[Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-192-06, passed on November 13, 2006, effective January 2, 2007, added New
Article IV Village of Palatine Clean Indoor Air Ordinance]
Sec. 9-70. Purpose.
This Ordinance shall be known as the Village of Palatine Clean Indoor Air Ordinance and shall be in
addition to and not be limited by the provisions of any state or federal legislation, it being the intent of the
Mayor and Village Council to enforce the most restrictive regulations available to curb secondhand smoke.
Sec. 9-71. Definitions.
The following words and phrases used in this Article shall have the following meanings:
(A) "Enclosed Area" means all space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed with (i) solid
wall or windows (exclusive of doorways) which extends from floor to the ceiling, or (ii) solid
wall with half wall partitions and no windows (exclusive of doorways) without limitation to
lobbies and corridors.
(B) "Place of Employment" means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private
employer where one or more employees are required or permitted by an employer to work in
the course of their employment and includes without limitation, work areas, private offices,
auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, cafeterias, elevators, employee
lounges, stairs, hallways, restrooms, medical facilities, private clubs, and the interior of a
vehicle of public conveyance. A private residence is not a "Place of Employment" unless the
dwelling is also used partially or exclusively as a day care facility for children or adults, a
health care facility or a home based business of any kind open to the public provided that
rooms in nursing homes or long-term care facilities occupied by one or more persons who
have requested in writing a room where smoking is permitted shall be considered private
dwelling units.
(C ) “Public Place” means any area that is open to and used by the general public, or any area to
which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including without limitations:
(1) Vehicles of public conveyance; including without limitation: busses, taxi
cabs, limousines, trolleys;
(2) Public transportation facilities under the authority of government agencies,
including without limitation METRA commuter rail platform, train station,
and other ticket boarding and waiting areas of public transit stations and
areas;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 9 - HEALTH AND SANITATION
9-9
(3) Common or public areas (including without limitation lobbies, hallways,
reception areas, restrooms, storage, laundry, and elevators) of apartment
buildings, condominiums, dormitory buildings, nursing home care facilities,
and other multiple family residential structures;
(4) Common or public areas (including without limitation lobbies, hallways,
reception areas, restrooms, and elevators) or any building or structure that
is accessible to the public including without limitation office, commercial
and industrial buildings, banks and financial institutions, education
institutions, health care facilities such as hospitals, clinics and doctor’s
offices, museums, libraries, restaurants, bars, polling places, government
and Village-owned buildings, food stores, cafeterias, shopping malls,
sports arenas, theaters, auditoriums, public transportation facilities, hotels,
motels, and retail and service establishments;
(5) Rooms, chambers, halls, or other locations within which meetings, hearings,
or gatherings are held, to which the public is invited or in which the public is
permitted, including specifically, but without limitation, any enclosed area
under the control of the Village of Palatine where there is, in progress, any
public meeting.
Provided, however, that "Public Place" shall not include hotel or motel rooms designated as
"smoking" provided that no more than twenty percent (20%) of the available rooms for rent in
any single building shall be designated as "smoking rooms".
(D) “Open-Air Dining Area” means a seating area open to the air that is accessory to a restaurant,
hotel cafeteria and private club or other public place, which engages in purveying commercial
food or beverage services where members of the public or members of guests are invited to sit
and receive food and beverage service for consideration.
(E) "Secondhand smoke" or "Involuntary smoking" is a mixture of the smoke given off by the
burning ends of a cigarette, pipe, cigar, bidis, kreteks (side stream smoke), e-cigarette, hookah pipe or
alternative nicotine product and the smoke emitted at the mouthpiece and exhaled from the lungs of smokers
(mainstream smoke).
(F) “E-cigarettes” means a device that uses a liquid or digital system that may or may not include
nicotine, including, but not limited to, vaporizers, vape pens, hookah pens, electronic cigarettes and electronic
pipes. This definition also includes products necessary of the use of the product such as the liquid or cartridge
meant to be used with such a device. This definition specifically excludes devices used to humidify rooms or to
deliver inhaled medications.
(G) “Alternative nicotine product” means a product or device not consisting of or containing
tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing,
dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing or by any other means.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 9 - HEALTH AND SANITATION
9-10
(H) "Smoking" means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe,
weed, hookah, other lighted tobacco product, e-cigarette or alternative nicotine product in any manner or in any
form.
Sec. 9-72. Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places.
Smoking shall be prohibited in all Public Places and Places of Employment within the Village of
Palatine, unless exempted in Section 9-74 of this Article. The prohibition shall also extend to any enclosed or
semi-enclosed sports arena or recreational area, including sports pavilion, stadium, gymnasium, health spa,
boxing arena, swimming pool, roller or ice rink, bowling alley, and other similar places where members of the
general public assemble. It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or lessee in control of the public place to
permit smoking in any such public place.
Sec. 9-73. Prohibition Within Distance of Public Places.
Smoking is prohibited within fifteen (15) feet of any entrance to an enclosed area in which smoking is
prohibited and also within fifteen (15) feet of any outdoor eating establishment or facility. This prohibition
does not apply to any person who is temporarily within the fifteen (15) foot area for the purpose of walking or
transversing through such area.
Sec. 9-74. Exemptions.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, the following areas shall be exempted from its
provision provided smoking is not limited or prohibited in such areas under the Illinois Clean Indoor Air Act or
federal legislation:
(a) Private residences as hereinabove defined.
(b) Hotel and motel sleeping rooms subject to restrictions as hereinabove set forth.
(c) Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term care facilities
occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in
writing to be placed or to remain as the case may be in a room where smoking is
permitted.
Sec. 9-75. Posting of Signs.
Every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this Ordinance shall have
posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign indicating "NO SMOKING". It shall be unlawful for any person
to remove, deface or obscure any sign posted pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance. The operator,
manager, or other person having control of an area where smoking is prohibited shall remove all ashtrays and
other smoking paraphernalia intended for use where smoking is prohibited.
Sec. 9-76. Violations and Penalties and Enforcement.
Any person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by this Ordinance shall be punished of
a fine of not more than One Hundred Dollars ($100). Any person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise
controls public place or place of employment who fails to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be fined not exceeding One Hundred Dollars ($100) for the first violation and Five Hundred Dollars ($500) for
the each subsequent offense within one year of the first violation. Each day on which a violation of this
Ordinance occurs shall be considered a separate offense. The Village Manager or his designee is hereby
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 9 - HEALTH AND SANITATION
9-11
authorized to enforce this ordinance and is further authorized to seek an injunction if he determines intentional
and repeated violations of this Ordinance by the owner, manager, or person in control of a public place or place
of employment and may commence revocation proceedings for any license issued to a public place subject to
licensing by the Village.
Sec. 9-77. Severability.
If any provision of this Ordinance, or any section, sentence, clause, phrase or word, or the application
thereof, in any circumstance, is held to be invalid, the remainder of this Ordinance shall be construed as if such
invalid part were never included herein, and this Ordinance shall be and remain valid and enforceable to the
fullest extent permitted by law.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-1
Chapter 11 LICENSES, PERMITS AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
- - - - - - - - - -
*Cross reference(s)--Licensing of dogs and cats, § 5-36; ambulance service license, Ch. 4, Art.
II; mobile intensive care unit service licenses, Ch. 4, Art. III.
- - - - - - - - -
Editor’s Note: Chapter 11 Licenses, Permits and Business Regulations was amended throughout
by Ordinance 0-16-01, passed on February 12, 2001.
Editor’s Note: A New Article IX Young Adult Entertainment Facilities was added by Ordinance
0-17-01, passed on February 12, 2001
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-7-12, passed on January 9, 2012 deleted references to environmental
health in Sec. 11-271—11-273, and 11-283
Editor’s Note: Ordinance O-3-19, passed on January 21, 2019 deleted Article III Div. 1-4 in its
Entirety and substituted a new Article III Div. 1 and Div. 2
Art. I. In General, §§ 11-1--11-30
Art. II. Amusement Facilities, §§ 11-31--11-65
Div. 1. Generally, §§ 11-31--11-60
Div. 2. Live Entertainment, §§ 11-61--11-65
Art. III. Food Establishments and Vending Machines, §§ 11-66--11-115
Div. 1. Generally, §§ 11-66--11-89
Div. 2. Delivery Vehicles, §§ 11-90--11-115
Art. IV. Merchants, §§ 11-116--11-250
Div. 1. Generally, §§ 11-116--11-125
Div. 2. Auctioneers, §§ 11-126--11-140
Div. 3. Cigarette and Tobacco Dealers, §§ 11-141--11-189
Div. 4. Florists, §§ 11-190--11-200
Div. 5. Itinerant Merchants, §§ 11-201--11-210
Div. 6. Junk Dealers, §§ 11-211--11-220
Div. 7. Pawnbrokers, §§ 11-221--11-226
Div. 8. Peddlers - Removed. See Solicitors.
Div. 9. Real Estate Brokers, §§ 11-241--11-250
Art. V. Miscellaneous Business Operations, §§ 11-251--11-507
Div. 1. Generally, §§ 11-251--11-259
Div. 2. Auto Courts, §§ 11-260--11-269
Div. 3. Barber Shops, §§ 11-270--11-280
Div. 4. Beauty Shops, §§ 11-281--11-283
Div. 4A. Suntanning Facilities, §§ 11-284--11-300
Div. 5. Electrical Contractors, §§ 11-301--11-310
Div. 6. House Movers, §§ 11-311--11-325
Div. 7. Laundries, §§ 11-326--11-350
Div. 8. Nursing Homes, §§ 11-351--11-365
Div. 9. Outdoor Advertisers, §§ 11-366--11-390
Div. 10. Parking Lots, §§ 11-391--11-420
Div. 11. Scavengers, §§ 11-421--11-430
Div. 12. Taxicabs, §§ 11-431--11-470
Div. 13. Building Contractors, §§ 11-471--11-489
Div. 14. Undertakers, §§ 11-490--11-500
Div. 15. Kennels, Pet Shops, Shelters, Pounds and Animal Hospitals, §§ 11-501--11-507
Div. 16. Dealers in Gold and Silver, §§ 11-508--11-516
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-2
Art. VI. Solicitors, §§ 11-517-11-535
Art. VII. Raffles, §§ 11-536 -- 11-600
Art. VIII. Commercial Vehicle Relocators Licensing Law, §§ 11-601--11-611
Art. IX. Young Adult Entertainment Facilities §§ 11-612—11-623
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 11-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless
their context clearly requires otherwise:
Accessory use is a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of a building
located on the same lot with the principal use of the building.
Corporate authorities are the Mayor and Village Council.
Floor area is the sum total of the gross horizontal areas of all of the several floors of a building
and its accessory buildings measured in square feet from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from
the center line of party walls separating two buildings or establishments on each of the respective floors,
and shall include the basement floor, cellar floor, motor vehicle parking space when such space is used in
conjunction with a retail and wholesale establishment devoted to the sale, service or repair of motor
vehicles, floor space used for storage of merchandise, whether open or enclosed, including such storage
space as may be located on the roof, penthouse, attic space, balconies, mezzanines, porches and verandas
and any other floor area devoted to and occupied by accessory uses.
Live Entertainment - shall consist of live music, dancing and/or singing performances, floor
shows, D.J. shows and other entertainment performances, whether or not an admission fee is charged.
Live entertainment shall not include ambient or incidental music provided for guests or patrons by
musicians, such as a piano player, harpist, strolling violinist, traditional juke box, karaoke or guitarist.
However, if there is an admission charge required to observe or attend such ambient or incidental music
or entertainment, the music will be considered live entertainment. (Ord. 0-2-10, §1, 1/11/10)
Owner is any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity
having sufficient proprietary interest in any establishment to maintain and manage its operation.
Retail and wholesale establishment is a building or premises or portion thereof the principal use
of which is for the sale or distribution of any commodity for a price or fee by a seller to a consumer or by
one business to another business.
Service establishment is a building or premises or a portion thereof the principal use of which is
for the rendering of a personal or material service, including a service intended to generate a sale by the
person rendering the service or a person, firm, partnership or corporation represented by the person
rendering the service, whether as a salesman, broker, manufacturer's representative or otherwise,
regardless of whether or not a commodity is worked upon or exchanged; and also including clerical,
administrative or other support services for or on behalf of a person, firm or corporation engaged in
rendering a service, as described herein.
Village manager - refers to the person in the position of Village Manager (“Manager”) or his
designee.
(Ord. No. O-17-75, § 1, 2-10-75; Ord. No. O-15-76, §§ 1, 2, 2-16-76; Ord. No. O-55-85, § 1, 7-8-85)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-3
Sec. 11-2. Applications.
Applications for all licenses, permits and certificates of registration required by this chapter shall
be made in writing to the Manager on forms supplied by the Manager, in the absence of provisions to the
contrary. Each application shall state the names of the applicants, the permit, license or certificate of
registration desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be paid. Each
application shall contain such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the
village officials in the issuing of the permit or license applied for. (Code 1961, § 10.001)
Sec. 11-3 License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person (which refers to, for purposes of this Chapter, any individual,
partnership, corporation, entity which conducts, engages in, maintains, operates, carries on or manages a
business or occupation within the Village of Palatine) to conduct, engage in, maintain, operate, carry on,
or manage a business or occupation for which a license is required by any provision of this code, without
a license first having been procured for such business or occupation. Any person violating this section
shall be fined no less than $200.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense, and every day such
violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Any business or occupation for which a license is required under this chapter or any other
provision of this code, and to which no license to operate for this period in question has been issued may
be closed by the Manager until such license is procured.
11-3.1 License required for businesses and occupations not provided for by other code provisions.
All persons who conduct, engage in, maintain, operate, carry on or manage a business or
occupation for which a license is not required under any other provision of this code, other than those
businesses or occupations which are exempt from municipal licensing pursuant to law, shall be required
to make application to the Village and obtain a general business license for such business or occupation.
The license fee for said license shall be set forth in Section 11-20.
Sec. 11-4. Duty of Manager --to prepare and furnish forms.
Forms for all licenses, permits, certificates of registration and applications therefor, shall be
prepared and kept on file by the manager. (Code 1961, § 10.003)
Sec. 11-5. Same--To sign.
Each license, permit or certificate of registration issued shall bear the signature of the clerk in the
absence of any provision to the contrary. (Code 1961, § 10.004)
Sec. 11-6. Investigations.
(a) Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit, where an investigation or inspection is
required by this chapter before the issuance of such permit or license, or where an inspection or
investigation shall be deemed reasonably necessary or appropriate, the Manager, within forty-eight (48)
hours of such receipt, shall refer the application to the appropriate officials for the making of such
investigation or inspection.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-4
(b) The officials to whom the application has been referred shall make a report thereon, favorably or
otherwise, within ten (10) working days after receiving such application or a copy thereof.
(c) The health officer shall make or cause to be made an inspection regarding such permits and
licenses as relate to the care and handling of food, the prevention of nuisances and the spread of disease,
and the protection of health. The building department shall make or cause to be made any inspections
which relate to compliance with the building code, zoning ordinance, and other related regulations. All
other investigations, except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the chief of police or by some
other officer designated by the Manager.
(d) If, after due consideration of the information contained within the application and the related
investigative reports, the manager shall determine that the application is satisfactory, he shall approve the
application and issue the license or permit.
(e) If, after due consideration of the information contained within the application and the related
investigative reports, the Manager shall determine that the matters concerning the application are
unsatisfactory, he may disapprove such application, indicating the reasons therefor. Thereupon, he shall
promptly notify the applicant that his application is disapproved, and that no license or permit will be
issued.
(f) In the event the Manager fails or refuses to issue a license, the Manager shall state in writing
the basis of the denial. The denial may be appealed to the corporate authorities for a hearing. The person
objecting to the denial shall present any facts or evidence showing compliance with village ordinances,
rules and regulations. The Manager or his representative shall detail the basis of the denial. corporate
authorities shall take final action on the recommendation and determine to issue or deny the license,
permit or certificate of registration. (Ord. No. O-17-75, § 2, 2-10-75; Ord. No. O-61-78, § 1, 7-24-78)(f).
Sec. 11-7. Fees.
In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses, permits or
certificates of registration shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor is made to the village in
the amounts prescribed in the schedule set forth in section 11-21. When an applicant has not engaged in
the business or activity until after the expiration of part of the current license year the license fee shall be
prorated by quarters and the fee paid for each quarter or fraction thereof during which the business or
activity has been or will be conducted. Except as otherwise provided, all license and permit fees shall
become a part of the corporate fund. In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any license or
permit fee, or part thereof, by reason of death or departure of the licensee or permittee; nor shall any
rebate or refund be made by reason of non-use of the license or discontinuance of the operation or
conduct of the licensed establishment, business or activity. (Ord. No. O-17-75, § 2, 2-10-75)
Sec. 11-8. Termination.
All annual licenses shall be operative and the license year for the village shall commence on the
first day of January of each calendar year and shall terminate on the 31st day of December of the same
year, where no provision to the contrary is made.
As directed by the Village Manager the business license division shall notify all licensees of the
village of the time of expiration three (3) weeks prior to the date of such expiration. Provided, however,
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-5
that a failure to make such notification, or failure of the licensee to receive it shall not excuse the licensee
from the obligation to obtain a new license, or renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an action based
upon operation without a license. All payments are due on or before the last day of January. Starting on
the first day of February a fifty (50) percent penalty will be added and after the last day of February an
additional fifty (50) percent penalty plus a citation will be issued. (Ord. No. O-17-75, § 2, 2-10-75; Ord.
No. 0-132-07, §1, 8/6/07)
Sec. 11-9. Building and premises; compliance with laws required.
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall be issued for any
purpose or activity, if the premises and building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with all
applicable provisions of this Code and other ordinances and regulations of the village and the state. (Ord.
No. O-17-75, § 2, 2-10-75)
Sec. 11-10. Location--Limited to one per license.
No license for the operation of a business or establishment in the village shall be construed to
permit the operation of a licensed business or establishment in more than one (1) location in the village; a
separate license shall be required for each location of a licensed establishment. For the purposes of this
chapter, the existence of a single location shall be evidenced by the fact that all buildings containing the
principal or accessory uses shall be connected or shall be located on the same lot or parcel, shall be
operated and managed by the same person or owner, and shall be an establishment with the same
classification. (Ord. No. O-17-75, § 2, 2-10-75)
Sec. 11-11. Location --Changes.
The location of any licensed business or occupation, or the location of any permitted act, may be
changed provided that ten (10) days’ notice thereof is given to the Manager in the absence of any
provisions to the contrary; provided, however, that all applicable provisions of this Code and other
ordinances and regulations of the village shall be complied with. (Ord. No. O-17-75, § 2, 2-10-75)
Sec. 11-12. Nuisances prohibited.
(a) Generally: No business or establishment, whether or not licensed, shall be so conducted or
operated as to constitute a nuisance in fact; and no building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises, or part
thereof, shall be used, kept, maintained, or operated in connection with any business or establishment so
as to occasion any nuisance, or so as to be dangerous to life or detrimental to health.
(b) Unsafe or unhealthful business:
(1) No building or structure, utilized, constructed, or maintained in connection with any
business or occupation, shall evidence an unsanitary, unsafe, or dangerous condition.
(2) No substance, matter, or thing of any kind whatever, which shall be dangerous or
detrimental to health, shall be allowed to exist in connection with any business or
occupation, or be used in any work or labor performed in the village.
(c) Refuse disposal:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-6
(1) Containers: The standard refuse container required by this section shall be a receptacle of
not less than twenty (20) nor more than thirty-two (32) gallons capacity, of impervious
material and sturdy construction, with a tight fitting cover, and equipped with handles
properly placed to facilitate handling.
(2) Duty to provide containers: The occupant of every building, structure, or premises used
or maintained in connection with any business or occupation shall provide and maintain
in good condition and repair a sufficient number of refuse containers for the temporary
storage of all refuse accumulating between collections. All refuse which is placed for
collection service outside any building or structure must be kept in standard refuse
containers.
(3) Removal: It shall be the duty of the occupant of every building, structure, or premises
used or maintained in connection with any business or occupation to cause to be removed
at his own cost and expense at least once each week all refuse produced therein.
(4) Removal of restaurant garbage. Every person owning or controlling any hotel, restaurant,
cafe, or retail food establishment where more than thirty-two (32) gallons of refuse is
normally produced weekly shall cause all garbage to be placed in sanitary refuse
containers and shall cause all substances deposited in such containers to be removed daily
from his premises and to be disposed of at his own expense.
(Ord. No. O-17-75, § 2, 2-10-75)
Sec. 11-13. Working conditions.
(a) Health requirements: No owner, lessee, manager, or superintendent of any store, factory,
workshop, or other place where persons are employed shall cause or permit such place, or any room or
part thereof, to be overcrowded or inadequate or faulty in respect to light, ventilation, heat or cleanliness.
(b) Sanitation: All such places of employment shall be kept in a clean condition, free from the
effluvia of a sewer, drain, privy, stable, or other nuisance; also as far as practicable such premises shall be
free from all gases, vapors, dust, or other impurities generated by manufacturing processes or otherwise
which are injurious to health. Sufficient washroom facilities for male and female employees shall be
provided and such facilities shall be properly ventilated.
(c) Heat required:
(1) It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling the heating plant which
furnishes heat to any factory or workshop, to maintain a temperature within such factory
or workshop of not less than sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit without such undue
restriction of ventilation as to interfere with proper sanitary conditions therein; provided,
however, that this requirement shall not apply to any factory or workshop where the
business conducted therein is of such a nature that a higher or lower temperature than
sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit is necessary or expedient for the work or
manufacturing processes of such business.
(2) It shall be the duty of any person owning or controlling the heating plant which furnishes
heat to any office, store, or other place of employment to maintain a temperature therein
of not less than sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit without such undue restriction of
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-7
ventilation as to interfere with proper sanitary conditions therein, between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. from October 1 of each year to June 1 of the succeeding year,
Sundays and legal holidays excepted.
(d) Inspection: The health officer and the building commissioner shall visit or cause to be visited
all such places of employment in the village as often as they shall deem necessary to assure compliance
with the provisions of this section, and to have such arrangements made as may be deemed necessary for
the health and safety of the employees. (Ord. No. O-17-75, § 2, 2-10-75)
Sec. 11-14. Inspections
(a) Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a
licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by any provision of this chapter, or are
reasonably necessary to assure compliance with any provisions of this Code or other ordinance or
regulation of the village, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in
charge of the premises to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee
of the village who is duly authorized to make such inspection at any reasonable time that such admission
or entry is requested.
(b) Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to assure
compliance with the provisions of any ordinance or regulation, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be
the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to give to any duly authorized officer or
employee of the village requesting the same sufficient sample of such material or commodity for such
analysis upon official request.
(c) In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Manager may revoke the license
of any owner or operator of a licensed business in the village who refuses to permit any duly authorized
officer or employee to make such inspection or to take an adequate sample of said commodity, or who
interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duties; provided, however, that
no license shall be subject to revocation for such cause unless such officer or employee has been refused
permission to enter upon the premises in the name of the village after first having presented a an
administrative warrant authorizing such entry.
(Ord. No. O-17-75, § 2, 2-10-75)
Sec. 11-15. Suspension or revocation of license or permit.
(a) Any license, permit, or certificate of registration issued under this Chapter may be
suspended, revoked and/or a fine imposed for any of the following causes:
(1) Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for the
license or permit;
(2) Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions relating to the license
or permit or the premises occupied; violation of conditions of the license or permit;
violation of or any other ordinance of the Village; or violation of any state or federal
law;
(3) Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-8
(4) Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fee, tax, fine or penalty owing to the
village;
(5) Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling, or any interference with a duly authorized
village officer or employee while in the performance of his duties in making such
inspections, as provided in section 11-14.
(6) Cause a nuisance or danger to public health, safety or welfare.
(7) Disorderly conduct on the premises or in the parking lot or for such acts that occur on
adjoining land or in any other area within the control of the licensee, attributable to
patrons of the holder of the license or the holder of the license or its employees. (Ord.
#106-13, §1, 9/9/13)
(8) Fraudulent or unfair business practices.
(9) Cessation of business for more than sixty (60) consecutive days.
Such suspension or revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and imposition of any other
penalties provided for the violation of other applicable ordinances of the village.
(b) The Manager shall notify the licensee, permittee, or registrant of a violation of one or more
of the above causes and call a hearing for the purposes of determining whether or not the license, permit
or certificate of registration should be suspended, revoked and/or a fine imposed. Notice of the hearing
for suspension or revocation of a license or permit shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the
grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee
or permittee at his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
(c) At the hearing, the village attorney shall present the complaint and shall represent the
Village. The licensee or permittee shall be permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence
and otherwise fully participate in the proceeding. A record shall be made of the proceedings. If the
Manager or his designee determines that the licensee, permittee, or registrant is guilty of one or more of
the charges in the complaint, he shall issue written findings and an order with respect to the evidence
presented. A copy of such order shall be delivered as promptly as possible to the licensee or permittee.
The order shall state the penalty to be imposed. The Manager or designee may impose any one or any
combination of the following penalties:
(1) Suspension of the license or permit for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days;
(2) Revocation of the license or permit;
(3) The payment of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each offense;
(4) Such other penalty or imposition of conditions on further operations designed to correct
and prevent future violations that the licensee or permittee was found guilty of violating.
(5) Refer the matter of suspension or revocation or further penalty, with or without a
recommendation, to a hearing body of the Corporate authorities for proceedings
consistent with Section 11-16. The Corporate authorities shall have the authority to
impose any of the penalties set forth herein.
(Ord. No. O-17-75, § 2, 2-10-75; Ord. No. O-77-90, § 2, 7-23-90)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-9
(d) Cessation of operation required. If a suspension or revocation is imposed as a penalty,
no activity at that location otherwise permitted under the license, permit, or certificate of registration
shall be conducted by the licensee, permittee, or registrant until the suspension is served or the license,
permit, or certificate of registration is reinstated.
(e) Reinstatement. Any licensee, permittee, or registrant whose license, permit, or certificate
of registration has been revoked may make application for reinstatement. Following receipt of a written
request, including a statement signed by the applicant that the conditions causing the revocation have
been corrected, the Manager may reinstate or set a hearing which shall be conducted within not more
than ten (10) working days. If a hearing is conducted, based upon the record of such hearing, the
Manager shall make a finding, sustaining, modifying or rescinding the previous order. A written report of
the hearing decision shall be furnished to the licensee, permittee, or registrant by mail.
Sec. 11-16. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Manager in regard to the suspension or the
revocation of a license or permit, or the failure to reinstate the same, as provided in section 11-15, shall
have the right to appeal to the corporate authorities. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the
Manager, within ten (10) days after notice of a suspension or revocation of a license or permit, a written
statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The corporate authorities shall
appoint a hearing body to be composed of the Mayor or her designee and two council members who shall
thereupon set the time and place for a hearing of such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to
the applicant or licensee or permittee in the same manner as provided in section 11-15(b) thereof. The
hearing body shall make a recommendation to the corporate authorities which shall render a decision on
such appeal which shall be final. Any appeal from a decision of the corporate authorities shall be made
directly to the Circuit Court of Cook County pursuant to the Administrative Review Act (735 ILCS 5/3-
101 et seq.). (Ord. No. O-17-75, § 2, 2-10-75)
Sec. 11-17. Costs and Expenses
All costs and expenses including but not limited to court reporter fees and attorneys’ fees incurred
by the Village in connection with any license suspension or revocation proceedings, shall be taxed to the
Licensee and shall be paid by the Licensee.
Sec. 11-18. Posting required.
(a) It shall be the duty of every person conducting a licensed business in the village to keep
his license posted in a prominent place on the premises used for such business at all times. (Ord. No. O-
17-75, § 2, 2-10-75)
(b) The food dealer’s current inspection score posting including the last three routine
inspection scores and the dates of inspection must be displayed in a prominent location and within a
reasonable proximity of the establishment’s front entrance on a form provided by the Division of
Environmental Health. The posting must be displayed in plain and unobstructed view at a height that
meets an adult’s eye level. The location shall be subject to the approval of the Division of Environmental
Health. The posting shall not be defaced, damaged, modified, removed or improperly displayed. The
posting shall not be transferable nor shall the posting be valid for any establishment other than that for
which originally issued. (Ord. 0-37-07, §1, 4/2/07; Ord. No. 0-127-08, §1, 9/8/08)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-10
Sec. 11-19. Required records.
The clerk shall cause to be maintained a record of all establishments and regulatory documents
which may from time to time be deemed necessary for the purpose of classifying, inspecting, serving,
licensing and regulating all establishments in the village. (Ord. No. O-17-75, § 2, 2-10-45)
Sec. 11-20. License suspension during liquor license suspension or revocation
Any license or permit issued under this chapter shall be suspended while a village liquor license
issued for the same premises, when the predominant use of the premises is the sale of alcoholic
beverages, is suspended or revoked.
Sec. 11-21. Fees.
License fees for the businesses, occupations, activities and uses set forth below shall be as
provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
TYPE A--AMUSEMENT AND ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
Step
Floor Area in Square Feet
1
0--2,500
2
2,501—over
TYPE B--FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Step
Floor Area in Square Feet
1
0--2,500
2
2,501--5,000
3
5,001--7,500
4
7,501--over
TYPE C--SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
Step
Floor Area in Square Feet
1
0--2,500
2
2,501--over
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-11
TYPE D--RETAIL, WHOLESALE AND OTHER ESTABLISHMENTS
Step
Floor Area in Square Feet
1
0--2,500
2
2,501--5,000
3
5,001--7,500
4
7,501--over
TYPE E--INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
Step
Floor Area in Square Feet
1
0--10,000
2
10,001--20,000
3
20,001--over
TYPE F - HOME OCCUPATIONS
MAXIMUM AREA ALLOWED IS 600 SQUARE FEET
(Ord. No. 0-164-12, §1, 12-10-12, effective 1-1-13)
Total floor area applicable for the determination of the yearly license fee shall include the sum
total of all the floor area in use or reserved for or retained for the use of the amusement and entertainment,
food, service, retail and wholesale, industrial or home occupation establishment, including but not
restricted to principal and accessory floor area, cellars and basements, storage or detached accessory
buildings, even though any such floor area may be temporarily vacant or not in use.
All measured area expressed in square feet shall be to the nearest integral square foot; if a fraction
is one-half (1/2) square foot or more, the integral square foot next above shall be taken. (Ord. No. O-17-
75, § 2, 2-10-75; Ord. No. O-15-76, § 3, 2-16-76; Ord. No. O-48-83, § 1(12), 8-8-83)
Sec. 11-22--11-29. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-12
ARTICLE II. AMUSEMENT FACILITIES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 11-30. Definitions.
Amusement and entertainment establishment is a building or premises or a portion thereof the
principal use of which is for the presentation to the public for a price or fee of any type of exhibition,
athletic event, show or other amusement or entertainment, or the making available of such building or
premises or portion thereof or facilities therein for the use, recreation, amusement or entertainment of a
consumer thereof.
Sec. 11-31. Street shows.
No license or permit shall be granted or given for any carnival, exhibition, show or other
amusement to be given on any public street or sidewalk or in such place that the only main
accommodation for the public or the audience will be in a public place, except on order of the board.
(Ord. No. O-18-75, § 1, 2-10-75)
Sec. 11-32. Coin-operated amusement devices
(A) Definition. A "coin-operated amusement device" shall mean and include any machine which,
upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally for use as
a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as
marble machines, pinball machines, electronic games, skill ball, mechanical grab machines and all similar
games, operations or devices however designated; but shall not include any music vending machine,
contrivance or device, commonly known as a "juke box," which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token,
plate, disc or key into any slot or other opening, produces, plays or emits songs, music or other
prerecorded entertainment.
(B) License required. No person, firm or corporation shall place, keep, install, maintain, operate
or permit any coin-operated amusement device in any building or place within the village for use by the
public without first having obtained a license for each such device.
(C) Classification of licenses and number of devices.
(1) Classification of licenses. Licenses of coin-operated amusement devices shall be issued
only for use in the following establishments and categories:
(a) Type A licenses shall be granted only to the following establishments which are
duly licensed as such by the village: Hotels and motels containing more than one
hundred fifty (150) rooms and restaurants. In the case of hotels and motels, all
coin-operated amusement devices shall be located in a single game room, access
to which shall be available only to registered guests through the use of a room
key.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-13
(b) Type B licenses shall be granted only to facilities (not including those in (a)
above) which are duly licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption
upon the premises. In such facilities where the holder of the liquor license is also
engaged in another business, coin-operated amusement devices may only be
located in the area in which alcoholic liquors are sold and to which access is
limited to no person, other than an employee of the licensee, less than age
twenty-one (21).
(c) Type C licenses shall be granted only to community colleges.
(d) Type D licenses shall be granted only to social service facilities, sponsored by
agencies of local governments, which provide counseling services for persons
under the age of eighteen (18) and which provide on-site adult supervision during
their hours of operation.
(e) Type E licenses shall be granted only to bowling centers. Persons under the age
of eighteen (18) are prohibited from operating coin-operated amusement devices
on any premises subject to a Type E license except between the hours of 4:00
p.m. and curfew other than on Saturdays, Sundays and school holidays on which
days curfew hours shall apply.
(f) Type F licenses shall be granted only to indoor sports facilities which offer sports
for participation of the customer, including but not limited to soccer and baseball
with use of the coin-operated amusement devices strictly limited to the time or
times when such indoor sports facilities are in use and operation.
(g) Type G licenses shall be granted only to not-for-profit community organizations
providing recreational facilities and activities to its members.
(h) Type H licenses shall be granted only to establishments conducting light-beam
enhanced competitions which operate coin-operated amusement devices in a
separate enclosed room as an incidental or ancillary use to the primary business
of the establishment.
(i) Type I licenses shall be granted only to establishments providing admittance to
children 16 and under who are accompanied by an adult. Such establishments
shall require an admission charge.
(j) Type J licenses shall be granted only to restaurant establishments. (Ord. No. 0-
134-04, §1, 7/6/04)
2) Number of devices.
(a) The number of coin-operated amusement devices permitted in Type A, B, D, G,
H, and J, establishments shall be determined on the basis of the size of the
establishment in accordance with the following schedule: (Ord. No. 0-134-04, §2,
7/6/04)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-14
Size of Establishment
(in square feet)
Number of Coin-Operated Amusement
Devices Permitted
0—400 1
400—800 2
800--1,200 3
1,200--1,600 4
1,600--2,000 5
2,000--2,400 6
2,400--2,800 7
2,800--3,200 8
3,200--3,600 9
Over 3,600 10
(b) The number of coin-operated amusement devices permitted in Type E and F
establishments shall be determined on the basis of the size of the establishment in
accordance with the following schedule:
Size of Establishment
(in square feet)
Number of Coin-Operated Amusement
Devices Permitted
0—1,200
1
1,200--2,000
2
2,000--2,800
3
2,800--3,600
4
Over 3,600
5
(c) The number of coin-operated amusement devices permitted in Type C establishments
shall be limited to twenty-two (22) and their location be restricted to the Student Union
only.
(d) No coin-operated amusement device shall be permitted within one thousand six hundred
(1,600) feet of any public or private school, other than community colleges.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-15
(e) The number of coin operated amusement devices permitted in Type I establishments shall
be limited to twenty (20).
(D) Amortization. Any establishment not authorized to be licensed for the use and operation of
coin-operated amusement devices hereunder, which nevertheless has one or more coin-operated
amusement devices in use and operation on the effective date of this amendatory ordinance, being April
26, 1982, shall phase out and terminate the use thereof within a period of two (2) years following said
date, or reduce the number of devices to the appropriate number permitted.
(E) Generally. No coin-operated amusement device shall provide a monetary reward for skill in
the operation thereof, nor shall gambling of any kind be permitted in connection with any coin-operated
amusement device. No coin-operated amusement device upon which free replays are awarded shall award
more than six (6) free replays in total, howsoever accumulated, nor shall any coin-operated amusement
device be equipped with a so-called "knock-off button" or other mechanism which releases or cancels free
replays.
(F) Application for license. Any person, firm or corporation desiring a license shall make
application therefor to the Manager. Application forms shall be provided by the Manager. The application
shall set forth the names and addresses of the applicant or if a corporation, partnership or association, the
principal officers and registered agent thereof and their addresses, the owners of the machine(s) and the
address of the building where such device(s) will be located, maintained and operated, the character of the
existing license, trade name and general description and total number of devices to be licensed and the
charge to be made to the customer for such operation.
No license shall be issued for coin-operated amusement devices for any premises which are not in
full compliance with all applicable ordinances of the village.
(G) Fees. License fees for each coin-operated amusement device shall be as provided in the fee
schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances. In the event a coin-operated amusement device
upon which an annual license fee has been paid is removed and replaced by another coin-operated
amusement device, the full license fee shall be payable on the replacement device.
(H) Tax imposed.
(1) Tax. A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of operating coin-operated amusement
devices in the Village of Palatine at an annual rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) per device;
provided, however that the total annual tax for devices in a single establishment shall not
exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) times the total number of devices in use and operation in
such establishment at any one time during the calendar year. The ultimate incidence of
and liability for payment of said tax shall be borne jointly by the owner and operator of
the coin-operated amusement device and by the person or persons to whom the license
for said device shall have been issued by the village. The tax herein levied shall be in
addition to any and all other taxes and license fees.
(2) Administration. The Manager hereby is designated as the administration and enforcement
officer of the tax hereby imposed on behalf of the village. It shall be the responsibility
and duty of the Manager to collect all amounts due the village from the owners, operators
and licensees of coin-operated amusement devices in the village.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-16
The tax hereby imposed shall be payable concurrently with the issuance of the annual
license for each coin-operated amusement device and shall be accompanied by a sworn
coin-operated amusement device tax return. In the event a replacement device is issued or
other cause exists for responsibility for the tax at the time a license is issued for such
device, the licensee shall so indicate on the return in the spaces provided.
(3) Enforcement. The Manager may enter the premises of any establishment where coinoperated
amusement devices are located for the purposes of inspection and examination
to determine the number of devices in use and operation for the proper administration of
this section, and for the enforcement of collection of the tax hereby imposed. It is
unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the Manager in the discharge
of his duties hereunder.
Whenever any person required to pay any taxes herein provided shall fail to pay such
taxes, the village prosecutor shall, upon request of the Manager, bring or cause to be
brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the village in any court
of competent jurisdiction.
If the Manager, after a hearing held by or for him, shall find that any coin-operated
amusement device owner, operator or licensee has no reasonable explanation for evading
his responsibility to pay the tax imposed by this section, he may suspend or revoke all
village licenses held by such tax evader pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section
11-15 herein. ..
In the event of failure by any coin-operated amusement device owner, operator or
licensee to pay to the village the tax required hereunder within thirty (30) days after the
same shall be due, interest shall accumulate and be due upon said tax at the rate of one
per cent per month. In addition, a penalty of fifty (50) per cent of the tax and interest due
shall be assessed against and collected from any owner, operator or licensee who shall
willfully evade payment of the tax imposed by this section.
(4) Proceeds of tax/general fund. All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under
this section, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the village
and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the village.
(Ord. No. O-18-75, § 1, 2-10-75; Ord. No. O-98-76, § 1, 11-8-76; Ord. No. O-5-77, § 1, 2-14-77; Ord.
No. O-33-78, § 1, 5-22-78; Ord. No. O-38-82, §§ 1, 2, 4-26-82; Ord. No. O-60-82, § 1(1), (2), 6-28-82;
Ord. No. O-27-83, §§ 1, 2, 4-25-83; Ord. No. O-48-83, § 1(13), 8-8-83; Ord. No. O-85-87, §§ 1, 2, 8-10-
87; Ord. No. O-139-87, §§ 1, 2, 10-26-87; Ord. No. O-8-88, § 1, 2-8-88; Ord. No. O-30-90, § 1, 3-26-90;
Ord. No. 0-32-95, §1, 2, 4-10-95)
Sec. 11-32.1. Juke boxes.
It shall be unlawful to offer or maintain for public use any music vending machine, contrivance or
device, commonly known as a "juke box," which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or
key into any slot or other opening, produces, plays or emits songs, music or other prerecorded
entertainment, without first having obtained a permit therefor. The annual fee for such permit shall be as
provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances. (Ord. No. O-98-76, § 2, 11-
8-76; Ord. No. O-48-83, § 1(14), 8-8-83)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-17
Editor's note--Ord. No. O-98-76, § 2, amended Ch. 11 by renumbering §§ 11-33--11-55 as §§ 11-
34--11-56 and adding a new section designated § 11-33. The editors have included the provisions herein
as § 11-32.1 in order to avoid the unnecessary expense to the village of reprinting certain pages and the
expense of re-indexing provisions which would have occurred as a result of renumbering.
Sec. 11-33. Athletic exhibitions.
It shall be unlawful to conduct, operate or exhibit any race between persons, animals or vehicles,
or any baseball game, boxing or wrestling matches, light-beam enhanced competitions or any other
athletic contest or exhibition for admission to which a fee is charged without having first procured a
license therefor. The fee for such license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
The proprietor of such exhibition shall submit to the Manager a statement verified under oath of
the gross receipts of each such game, contest or race, within one (1) week after such exhibition. At the
same time, the proprietor or person exhibiting or operating such exhibition shall pay to the Manager a
sum equal to three (3) per cent of the gross receipts, after deducting the license fee paid.
Sufficient members of the police department shall be admitted free of charge, to all such
exhibitions for the purpose of preserving and maintaining order; and the village manager may post a
person or any number of persons at the box office of each such performance; and may examine all the
books pertaining to such performance showing or tending to show the gross receipts. (Code 1961, §
11.105; Ord. No. O-63-86, § 1, 6-23-86)
Sec. 11-34. Duty of audience to be orderly; crowding prohibited.
The audience of any amusement, show or theatrical must be orderly and quiet at all times, and it
shall be unlawful for any person attending such amusement, show or theatrical to create a disturbance in
the audience.
It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any amusement or show as to
create a dangerous condition because of fire or other risks. (Code 1961, § 11.106)
Sec. 11-35. Inspections.
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and fire chief to see that every exhibition, amusement,
theatrical or other public show or amusement is inspected by a member of the police and fire department,
and to ensure conformity with the provisions concerning such amusements. (Code 1961, § 11.107)
Sec. 11-36. Indecency prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to permit any person to offer or present any theatricals or motion pictures
which have a tendency to cause a riot or public disturbance of the peace, or any immoral, indecent, or
blasphemous picture or performance. (Ord. No. O-18-75, § 1, 2-10-75)
Sec. 11-37. Exhibitions of criminals prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to exhibit any criminal or the body of any
criminal or any person who shall have become notorious because of the commission of a crime, in any
theatrical, exhibition, carnival, or other public place. (Code 1961, § 11.109)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-18
Sec. 11-38. Riots; amusements to cause, prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of any kind which tends to or is
calculated to cause or promote any riot or disturbance. (Code 1961; § 11.110)
Sec. 11-39. Smoking--Regulations.
It shall be unlawful to smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe on or beneath the stage or
in a dressing room of any building used as an assembly hall with seating accommodations for more than
one hundred (100) persons or in which theatricals, shows, amusements, lectures, or other entertainment
are e offered, presented, operated or exhibited. (Code 1961, § 11.111)
Sec. 11-40. Same--Signs.
It shall be the duty of the owner of such premises or of the occupant in charge, to provide and
place printed signs on which the words "NO SMOKING" shall appear in letters at least four (4) inches
high, in conspicuous places, at least two (2) signs being upon the stage or in the wings thereof and one (1)
in each dressing room. (Code 1961, § 11.112)
Sec. 11-41. Exit lights.
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant in charge of any building or hall used as an assembly
hall to comply with the Life Safety Code.. (Code 1961, § 11.113)
Sec. 11-42. Premises.
It shall be unlawful to operate or permit the operation of any amusement licensed in this article
unless the premises in which such amusement is operated or permitted to be operated conforms with all
the provisions or requirements in this code relating to public buildings and public gatherings. (Code
1961, § 11.114)
Sec. 11-43. Bowling alleys and billiard halls, etc.; hours of operation.
No person shall keep open, operate or use any bowling alley or billiard hall or any other hall
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. (Code 1961, § 11.204; Ord. No. O-18-75, § 1, 2-10-75)
Sec. 11-44. Gambling prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to gamble, bet or permit any form of gambling or betting in
any premises used for a bowling alley, pin or ball alley. (Code 1961, § 11.304)
Sec. 11-45. Circuses, carnivals--Sideshows, rides, games and concessions.
The license fee for a circus shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine
Code of Ordinances.
The fee for a carnival license shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine
Code of Ordinances.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-19
The fee for each sideshow, ride, game and concession (food or otherwise) operated in connection
with any circus or carnival, shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of
Ordinances.
Fees can be waived only by the corporate authorities upon prior written request by the applicant.
(Code 1961, § 11.404; Ord. No. O-66-85, § 1, 8-12-85)
Sec. 11-46. Same--Inspections required.
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the fire marshal to see that inspections as provided
for in article I of this chapter, shall be made of all circuses, circus performances, and of the premises used.
(Code 1961, § 11.406)
Sec. 11-47. Same--Bonding requirement.
It shall be unlawful to conduct any parade connected with a circus on any public street, alley or
other public way or place in the village, unless a permit therefor is first obtained from the Manager. Such
permit shall specify the route to be followed, and shall be accompanied by a bond in the sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss, damage or liability
incurred or caused by the conduct of such exhibition or such parade. (Code 1961, § 11.408)
Sec. 11-48. Theaters--Seating of audience required.
It shall be unlawful to permit any person, excepting ushers or other theater employees, to remain
standing in a hall or room in which a motion picture is presented during the time of such performance;
and it shall be unlawful to admit to any such hall more persons than can be accommodated by the seating
arrangements for the premises. (Code 1961, § 11.506)
Sec. 11-49. Same--Scenery.
It shall be unlawful to use any scenery in any theater other than non-flammable scenery or such as
shall have been rendered non-flammable by the application of fire preventive coatings. (Code 1961, §
11.507)
Sec. 11-50. Same--Exits.
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any aisles, corridors or exits leading
from the room or enclosures in which a motion picture performance or theatrical is being given or in
which an audience for such a performance is gathered. (Code 1961, § 11.509)
Sec. 11-51. Same--Outdoor; compliance required; washrooms required.
Outdoor theaters, where the audience is not housed in a building, shall be conducted in full
compliance with all applicable provisions of this article. Each outdoor theater shall be equipped with
washrooms--separate for men and for women. (Code 1961, § 11.510)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-20
Sec. 11-52. Public dance halls--Defined.
For the purposes of this article, a "public dance hall" shall mean an establishment offering
dancing to music to the public. It shall include a club or other form of operation although admission may
be open only to members, but not a dance sponsored by a public school, local government, or local unit of
a recognized national fraternal or veterans organization. (Code 1961, § 11.601)
Sec. 11-53. Same--Regulations.
No public dance hall licensed hereunder may remain open between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
1:00 p.m. Dance halls shall be supervised by at least one (1) adult employee, exclusive of check room or
concession personnel, but including the proprietor or manager, for every one hundred (100) persons in
attendance.
All areas designated for parking or driveways shall be illuminated to an average intensity of not
less than two (2) foot candles. Luminaries height shall be not less than one-quarter (1/4) the distance
between luminaries. (Code 1961, § 11.607)
Sec. 11-54. Skating rink; conduct restrictions.
It shall be unlawful to indulge in any improper conduct or to permit any improper conduct at any
public ice skating or roller skating rink, and it shall be unlawful to permit music at any public ice skating
or roller skating rink after the hour of 11:00 p.m. (Code 1961, § 11.705)
Secs. 11-55--11-60. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-21
DIVISION 2. LIVE ENTERTAINMENT*
----------
*Editor's note--Ord. No. O-34-76, § 1, enacted March 22, 1976, amended the 1961 Code by
adding the provisions codified herein as Div. 2, §§ 11-61--11-63.
Cross reference(s)--Live entertainment on premises of retail liquor dealers, § 3-35; special uses,
App. A, § 11.07
*Editor’s note--Ord. No. 0-2-10, § 2, enacted January 11, 2010, replaced Division 2, Sec. 11-61
through 11-63 in its entirety.
----------
Sec. 11-61. Special use permit required.
It shall be unlawful to conduct or allow to occur any live entertainment unless a special use
permit shall have been granted therefore, pursuant to the special use provisions of the zoning ordinance of
the Village of Palatine. Live entertainment conducted indoors at public institutions, schools, and religious
facilities, or within or upon any Park District facilities, shall be exempt from all the requirements of this
Division. (Ord. No. O-34-76, § 1, 3-22-76; 0-2-10 §2, 1/11/10)
Sec. 11-62. Applications and standards.
Applications for such special use permits and the standards for authorizing such live
entertainment shall be as set forth in paragraph (4), of Section 14.05 Article XI of the Zoning Ordinance
of the Village of Palatine. (Ord. No. O-34-76, § 1, 3-22-76; 0-2-10 §2, 1/11/10)
Sec. 11-63. Procedures and fees.
(a) Necessity of license. No person, firm or corporation shall offer, provide, procure, make
available, allow, suffer or permit ANY live entertainment without having first complied with the terms of
this section relating to same and having procured a live entertainment license to do so. All licenses shall
be subject to periodic inspections to ensure continual compliance with the terms of this section. (Ord. No.
0-2-10 §2, 1/11/10)
(b) Issuance. Upon issuance by the Manager, such live entertainment license shall entitle the
holder to conduct live entertainment subject to all of the conditions imposed upon the licensee pursuant to
the special use approval and pursuant to the Palatine Code of Ordinances, only upon the licensed
premises. The fee for such entertainment license shall be as provided for in the fee schedule supplement
to the Palatine Code of Ordinances. (Ord. No. 0-2-10 §2, 1/11/10)
(c) Appeal of denial of license. In the event the Manager fails or refuses to issue a live
entertainment license, the Manager shall state, in writing, the basis of the denial. The denial may be
appealed to the Corporate authorities pursuant to the provisions of Section 11-6 (e) and (f) for a hearing.
(Ord. No. 0-2-10 §2, 1/11/10)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-22
(d) Licenses term. All live entertainment licenses shall expire on the thirtieth day of June
thereafter and the full license fee shall be charged for the whole or fraction of a year. Such license may in
the discretion of the Manager be transferred to a new location upon payment of a transfer fee of ten
dollars ($10.00). The new premises must comply in all respects with all provisions of this section as if a
new application were being made. This same provision shall apply whenever a change of agent of a
corporation occurs, a change in managers or a change of ownership of the corporation (which shall be
defined as a change of five (5) percent or more in the ownership of the stock) and such live entertainment
license may, in the discretion of the village board, be transferred to the new agent upon the payment of
the prescribed fee. Any change of agency, management or ownership as herein defined shall be reported
to the Manager within five (5) business days. (Ord. No. 0-2-10 §2, 1/11/10)
(e) Suspension/revocation. A live entertainment license may be suspended by the Manager and
subsequently revoked or other penalties imposed by the corporate authorities for disorderly or immoral
conduct on the premises or in the parking lot or for such acts that occur on adjoining land attributable to
patrons of the holder of the license or in any other area within the control of the licensee, or for the
violation of any of the rules, regulations or laws governing or applying to entertainment licenses or
premises licensed to sell intoxicating liquor, or for any other violation of the Palatine Code of Ordinances
or on any of the grounds set forth in section 11-15 (a). The proceedings for suspension or revocation shall
be pursuant to Section 11-15 through 11-17 of the Palatine Code of Ordinances. (Ord. No. 0-2-10 §2,
1/11/10)
(f) Application terms. No live entertainment license shall be granted hereunder unless the person
or corporation desiring the same shall first have paid the fee therefor and shall have filed with the
Manager a written application therefor under oath and on forms to be furnished by the Manager,
designating the kind of license applied for, the address and description of the premises for which the
license is desired and such other information as may be required to ensure compliance with this section,
state law or such as may be required by the village council. No live entertainment license shall be granted
under this section, however, unless the village council shall have approved the necessary special use. The
Manager, in determining whether to issue or not issue such a license, may also consider as evidence the
previous operating experience and past record of convictions or admissions of violations of the applicant
related to the operation of entertainment establishments, restaurants, bars or other related businesses. The
Manager may impose such reasonable conditions on the establishment including additional limitations on
hours given the nature of the use, the location of the use and its environs and neighborhood and the past
operating history of the applicant. Such live entertainment license shall be purely a personal privilege
good for not more than one (1) year after issuance unless sooner revoked, as provided herein, and it shall
not constitute property. (Ord. No. 0-2-10 §2, 1/11/10)
(g) Minimum requirements and conditions:
(1) Every room used for entertainment purposes shall comply with the special use
requirements established by the village board.
(2) Effective means shall be employed to prevent ordinary sounds of music, dancing, singing
or entertainment within the premises from being heard on adjoining premises or on the public street, and
no unusually loud music, singing or entertainment or any boisterousness or noisy conduct on the part of
the patrons shall be permitted.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-23
(3) All licensed premises and the parking lot(s) shall be lighted in accordance with village
ordinance at all times when any patrons shall be therein and at all times when the same is open to the
public.
(4) The licensee shall, at all times, maintain sufficient supervisory control over the patrons
on the premises and on the parking lot to prevent disturbance to the residents of adjoining property and to
secure the safety of the patrons.
(5) No dancer or entertainer shall be permitted to engage in any performance that is lewd,
obscene or indecent. As used in this subsection, "lewd," "obscene" or "indecent" means a performance
which, when taken as a whole, depicts or describes sexual conduct in any way that appeals to the prurient
interest, portrays sexual conduct in a patently offensive way, and does not have serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value. As used in this subsection, "sexual conduct" means acts of sexual intercourse
between humans, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; acts of masturbation, fellatio, cunnilingus; acts
of excretory function; lewd exhibition of the genitals, especially in a stimulated condition; and sexual
relations between animals and humans.
(6) No intoxicated person shall be permitted to remain in any licensed premises and no
person bordering on intoxication shall be permitted to dance in any licensed premises.
(7) The sale, service or consumption of commodities for which licenses are otherwise
required shall not be permitted in any licensed premises unless the proper license or licenses therefor are
obtained for the licensed premises in the name of the owner or manager of such licensed premises.
(8) As a condition of licensing, the licensee shall permit free and unobstructed access to the
premises when licensed premises are open to the public by police, fire and health officers while acting on
official duty.
(9) No person holding a live entertainment license under this chapter shall permit on the
licensed premises any officer, director, associate, member, representative, agent, entertainer, patron or
any employee of such licensee (whether the same are engaged in any live act, demonstration, dance,
exhibition or otherwise) to:
a. Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum and anal region or
pubic hair region; or
b. Expose any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair
region; or
c. Expose any portion of the female breasts at or below the areola thereof; or
d. Commit an act which constitutes public indecency under section 12-6 hereof.
(Ord. No. O-34-76, § 1, 3-22-76; Ord. No. O-2-77, § 1, 1-24-77; Ord. No. O-48-83, § 1(15), 8-8-83; Ord.
No. O-101-91, § 1, 6-24-91; Ord. No. O-163-91, § 2, 11-25-91; Ord. No. O-68-92, §§ 8, 9, 4-27- 92)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-24
(h) Additional requirements and conditions for premises where the consumption of alcohol is
permitted:
(1) All premises shall comply with the Chapter 3 “Alcoholic Beverages” section of the
Village’s code of ordinances.
(2) All premises shall be closed to the public and no patron shall be therein during the time that
liquor or fermented malt beverages may not be sold.
(3) No minor under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall be permitted in any live entertainment
licensed premises where alcohol is sold unless accompanied by parent or guardian.
(Ord. No. 0-2-10 §2, 1/11/10)
Secs. 11-64 and 65. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND VENDING MACHINES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 11-66. Definitions.
The following adopted codes and Village of Palatine Ordinances sets the standards for the
management and personnel; food operations; and equipment and facilities; and provides for plan review;
employee exclusion and restriction; permit and license issuance, inspection and permit suspension of food
establishments.
Sec. 11-66.1. Minimum Standards.
The Village of Palatine hereby adopts by reference the current version of the Food Code, Title 77,
Chapter I, subchapter m, Part 750 of the Illinois Administrative Code, effective December 7, 2018, as
now or hereafter amended.
Sec. 11-66.2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless their
context clearly requires otherwise:
Food establishment means any operation as defined in the minimum standards referenced in Sec.
11-66.1.
Health authority means the Environmental Health Division of the Village of Palatine.
Health Officer means the Field Director of the Environmental Health Division of the Village of
Palatine or their designated representative.
Permit means the document issued by the Health Officer that authorizes a person to operate a
food establishment and can be further defined as one of the following types.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-25
(a) Permanent Food Establishment Permit allows a permanent food establishment to
operate in a permanently constructed structure.
(b) Temporary Food Establishment Permit allows a temporary food establishment to
operate for a period of no more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a
single event.
(c) Stationary Food Establishment Permit allows a stationary food establishment to
operate in a non-permanently constructed structure and does not include temporary or
mobile food establishments.
(d) Mobile Food Dispensing Unit Permit allows a mobile food establishment to operate
and serve only TCS food in individual servings that are prepared and prepackaged or
commercially prepackaged in an approved processing plant.
(e) Vending Machine TCS Food Permit allows the operation of a self-service device that
dispenses unit servings of TCS food in bulk or packages that is not ancillary to a
permanent food establishment.
(f) Delivery Vehicle Residential Permit allows the operation of a delivery service of TCS
foods to residential properties that is not ancillary to a permanent food establishment.
(g) Delivery Vehicle Retail Permit allows the operation of a delivery service of TCS
foods to commercial properties that is not ancillary to a permanent food
establishment.
Time/Temperature Control for Safety (TCS) Food means a food or beverage as defined in the
minimum standards referenced in section 11-66.1.
Sec. 11-67. Licenses, Permits and Fees Required.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment in the Village of
Palatine without having obtained a license and permit, pursuant to Sec. 11-3 and Article
III of this Chapter. Such license and permit shall be valid only for the premises, machine,
or vehicle for which it is issued. No license or permit may be transferable to any person
other than to that issued. A valid license and permit shall be displayed on the premises,
machine, or vehicle of any such food establishment at all times when such service is
available to the public.
(b) Each of the following vending classifications shall require a separate annual license and
license fee as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of
Ordinances:
(1) Vending machine that offers only prepackaged, non TCS food or beverages;
(2) Ice machine not ancillary to primary use;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-26
(3) Machines vending general merchandise (no food or beverage of any kind).
(c) Each of the following vending classifications shall require a separate permit, annual
license, and license fee as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code
of Ordinances:
(1) Vending machine that offers TCS foods or beverages;
(2) Mobile food dispensing units and roadside stands;
(3) Vehicles used for the delivery of TCS foods or beverages.
(a) To individual residences;
(b) To retail establishments.
Sec. 11-68. License and Permit Application.
(a) In general: All applications for a license and permit shall be made on forms supplied by
the Manager.
(b) Permits: All such applications for a permit shall be referred to the health authority, who
shall either issue said permit or refuse issuance with a report of its findings and reasons
for such refusal.
(c) Licenses: Licenses shall be issued by the Manager when the applicant has complied with
all provisions of this Chapter, including issuance of a permit.
Sec. 11-69. Summary Suspension and Revocation of Food Establishment Permits
(a) Suspension of permits by the Health Officer:
(1) Suspension of food establishment permits: Whenever the Health Officer finds an
imminent health hazard or other condition or circumstance that may endanger public
health during the course of the inspection of a food establishment; the Health Officer
may, in addition to any other action taken, order the immediate suspension of such
permit. When a permit is suspended, business operations shall immediately cease. The
holder of the permit shall be afforded, upon written request to the Health Officer an
opportunity for hearing within two (2) business days of receipt of a request for hearing.
(2) Reinstatement of suspended permits: Any person whose permit has been suspended may,
at any time, make application for a re-inspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the
permit to the Health Officer. Following receipt of a written request, including a statement
signed by the permit holder that the condition causing the suspension of the food
establishment permit has been corrected; the Health Officer shall make a re-inspection. If
the permit holder is found to be in compliance with the requirements of this Code, the
permit shall be reinstated.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-27
(3) Hearings: The hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted by the Manager at
the time and place designated by the Manager within two (2) business days after receipt
of a request for hearing from the permit holder. Based upon the record of such hearing,
the Manager shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any official notice
or order considered at the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be
furnished to the permit holder by the Manager.
(4) Appeal: The permit holder may appeal the decision of the Manager to the board of health
by filing written notice of such appeal with the Manager within five (5) days after receipt
of the Manager's written repo1t of the hearing decision. The board of health shall hear
such appeal within five (5) days after the permit holder files written notice thereof. The
board of health shall promptly notify the permit holder of the time and place of such
hearing. The decision of the board of health shall be final. Any appeal from a decision of
the board of health shall be made directly to the Circuit Court of Cook County pursuant
to the Administrative Review Act.
(b) Suspension or revocation of licenses by Manager: In the alternative, any license issued to
a food establishment may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with
Sec. 11- 15 of this Chapter.
Sec. 11-70. Food Establishment Noncompliance Inspection Service Fee.
When the Health Officer determines after an initial inspection of a food establishment, that
additional follow-up inspections are necessary for enforcement of the code, two additional follow-up
inspections for noncompliance shall be granted each permittee without charge. In the event more than two
follow-up inspections are needed, the permittee shall be assessed a noncompliance service charge of
$50.00. The $50.00 noncompliance service charge shall be assessed for each and every follow-up
inspection after the initial inspection and two follow-up inspections per inspection cycle. Payment must be
made in full prior to the business license being renewed. Failure to pay any balance will serve as grounds
to deny further permits or licenses from being issued by the Village.
Sec. 11-71--11-89. Reserved.
(Ord. O-3-19, 1-21-19)
DIVISION 2. DELIVERY VEHICLES
Sec. 11-90. Restrictions on Sales in School Zones.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, barter or exchange ice cream or other food
products from mobile food dispensing units and delivery vehicles on any public street, alley, highway or
public way within five hundred (500) feet of a school between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on a
day when school is in session; provided, however, that this section shall not preclude the delivery of any
items previously ordered where the purchaser has requested the seller, in writing, to deliver such
merchandise.
For the purpose of this section, school property shall be measured from the property line of any
lands owned by a public school district or a private or parochial school authorized to provide education by
the state.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-28
Sec. 11-91. Restrictions on Hours of Operation.
(Ord. O-3-19, 1-21-19)
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, barter or exchange ice cream or other food
products from mobile food dispending units and delivery vehicles on any public street, alley, highway, or
public way between the hours of 8:30 p.m. and 6:30 a.m.
Sec. 11-92-11-115. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. MERCHANTS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 11-116--11-125. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. AUCTIONEERS
Sec. 11-126. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct an auction in the village or to do business as an
auctioneer without having first obtained a license as is herein required, and paying the fee herein set forth.
(Code 1961, § 14.101)
Sec. 11-127. Fee.
The fee, payable in advance, for auctioneers shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement
to the Palatine Code of Ordinances; and a daily license fee shall be as provided in the fee schedule
supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances. (Code 1961, § 14.102; Ord. No. O-48-83, § 1(17), 8-8-
83)
Sec. 11-128. Application.
Applications for an auctioneer's license shall be made in writing to the Manager and shall state
thereon the place of business, if any, intended to be occupied; and the names of any employees, not to
exceed two (2), who are to be authorized to conduct auctions under the authority of the license. (Code
1961, § 14.103)
Sec. 11-129. Investigations.
The chief of police, or any other officer designated by the Manager, shall investigate the character
of every applicant for an auctioneer's license, and no such license shall he issued to any person who is not
of good character. (Code 1961, § 14.104)
Sec. 11-130. Employees.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-29
Every person, licensed as an auctioneer, may designate not to exceed two (2) employees who may
be authorized by him to conduct auctions. Notice containing the names of the employees so designated
must be given to the clerk, and an employee's license shall be issued on the payment of a fee as provided
in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances. This license shall be good for one
year, and it shall be unlawful for any person, not licensed under this section to conduct an auction, or for
any auctioneer to permit an auction to be conducted by an unlicensed employee. (Code 1961, § 14.105;
Ord. No. O-48-83, § 1(18), 8-8-83)
Sec. 11-131. On streets prohibited.
No person shall sell or attempt to sell or offer for sale at public auction, any goods, chattels, or
personal or real property of any kind upon the public streets or sidewalks of the village. (Code 1961, §
14.106)
Sec. 11-132. Exemptions.
Nothing in this article shall apply to any public auction or sale made or conducted by a public
officer by virtue of any judicial order or process or by virtue of any power or authority contained in a
mortgage or trust deed. (Code 1961, § 14.107)Sec. 11-133. Suspension or revocation of licenses and
permits by Manager. Any license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in
accordance with Section 11-15 of this Chapter.
Sec. 11-134--11-140. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO DEALERS
Sec. 11-141. License required.
It shall be unlawful to engage in the sale at retail of cigarettes, cigars or tobacco in any form, or in
any number without having obtained first a license therefor. Applications for such licenses shall be made
to the clerk; and no such license shall be issued to any person who is not a person of good character, or to
any corporation that is not represented in the village by a person of good character. (Code 1961, §
14.301)
Sec. 11-142. Fee.
The annual fee for such licenses shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the
Palatine Code of Ordinances. (Code 1961, § 14.302; Ord. No. O-48-83, § 1(19), 8-8-83)
Sec. 11-143. Sanitation.
Premises and buildings used for the sale of cigarettes, cigars or tobacco shall be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition; the health officer shall investigate such places sufficiently often to insure
compliance with the provisions of this section. (Code 1961, § 14.303)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-30
Sec. 11-144. Minors.
It shall be unlawful to sell or give cigarettes, cigars or tobacco to any person under eighteen (18)
years of age. (Code 1961, § 14.304; Ord. No. 0-109-94, 8-22-94 §1)
Sec. 11-145. Sales to minors, Possession of Tobacco Products.
(a) Possession. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years of age to
possess any tobacco products.
(b) Sales, delivery. It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell, offer
for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products to any person under the age of 18 years of age.
(c) Purchase. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years of age to
purchase tobacco products, or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to use false or altered identification
for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products. (Ord. No. 0-109-94 §2 8-22-94)
Sec. 11-146 Signage.
Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein shall be posted by every
licensee at or near every display of tobacco products which offers tobacco products for sale. Each such
sign shall be plainly visible and shall state: "THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS
UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW."
Sec. 11-147 Vending Machines.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give away, deliver or to keep with the
intention of selling, giving away or delivering tobacco products by use of a vending machine.
Sec. 11-148 Fines.
The fines imposed for any violation of any section of this division 3 shall not exceed $1000 for each
violation. (Ord. No. 0-120-96, 7-08-96 §1)
Cross reference(s)--Restrictions on sale of alcoholic beverages to minors, § 3-12; restrictions on
issuance of pawnbroker's license to minors, § 11-223.
Sec. 11-149 Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits by Manager .
Any license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with
Section 11-15 of this Chapter.
Sec. 11-150--11-189. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-31
DIVISION 4. FLORISTS
Sec. 11-190. Definitions.
Florist shop is any building, structure or premises used for the purpose of selling flowers, shrubs
and ornamental plants, and shall include that portion of any greenhouse within or adjacent to the subject
shop used for the purpose of preserving or storage of flowers, shrubs and ornamental plants, but shall not
include any building, structure or premises used as intensified agricultural growing chambers, and said
building or structure shall be excluded from the square foot floor area of a florist shop in the computation
of license fees.
Sec. 11-191. License required.
No person shall do business as a florist in the village without having first secured a license
therefor. Any person engaged in the business of selling flowers, shrubs, ornamental plants at retail in the
village shall be construed to be a florist. (Code 1961, § 14.601)
Sec. 11-192. Application.
Applications for a license to do business as a florist shall be made in writing to the Manager, and
must state thereon the nature of the business and the proposed location. (Code 1961, § 14.602)
Sec. 11-193. Regulations.
No owner or operator of a florist shop shall permit any dead or dying vegetation to remain in or
upon the premises so as to cause noxious or disagreeable odors. (Code 1961, § 14.604)
Sec. 11-194. Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits by Manager.
Any license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with
Section 11-15 of this Chapter.
Sec. 11-195--11-200. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. ITINERANT MERCHANTS
Sec. 11-201. License required.
No itinerant merchant shall do business in the village without having first obtained a license
therefor. The fee for doing business as an itinerant merchant shall be as provided in the fee schedule
supplement, except that the fee for doing business as an itinerant dealer in gold and silver shall be as
provided in section 11-512, Division 16, of this chapter. Itinerant merchants operating in a villageauthorized
farmer's market shall pay a fee as indicated in the fee schedule supplement. (Code 1961, §
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-32
14.801; Ord. No. O-80-81, § 1, 9-14-81; Ord. No. O-48-83, § 1(20), 8-8-83; Ord. No. O-18-93, § 1, 2-23-
93)
Sec. 11-202. Fraud.
No itinerant merchant shall make any fraudulent statements in regard to the articles or
merchandise with which he deals. (Code 1961, § 14.802)
Sec. 11-203. Premises or conveyances.
Premises or conveyances used for business by an itinerant merchant must be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition. It shall be unlawful to permit a collection or accumulation of combustible materials so
as to create a fire hazard. The Manager shall be authorized to issue appropriate health and safety
regulations for village-authorized farmer's market merchants. (Code 1961, § 14.803; Ord. No. O-18-93, §
2, 2-23-93)
Sec. 11-204. Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits by Manager.
Any license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with
Section 11-15 of this Chapter.
Sec. 11-205--11-210. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. JUNK DEALERS
Sec. 11-211. License required.
It shall be unlawful to operate or carry on the business of junk dealer or to keep any junk shop,
store or place for the purchase or sale of junk, rags, old rope, paper or bagging, old iron, brass, copper or
empty bottles, without having obtained a license therefor as in hereinafter provided. (Code 1961, §
14.901)
Sec. 11-212. Applications.
Applications for such licenses shall be made in conformance with the provisions of this Code
relating to licenses. (Code 1961, § 14.902)
Sec. 11-213. Fee.
The fee for an annual license shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine
Code of Ordinances; and an additional fee, as provided in the fee schedule supplement, shall be charged
for each vehicle used in the conduct of such business, provided that a junk dealer not maintaining a store
or yard in the village shall pay a fee per vehicle used, as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the
Palatine Code of Ordinances. (Code 1961, § 14.903; Ord. No. O-48-83, § 1(21), 8-8-83)
Sec. 11-214. Stolen goods.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-33
Every keeper of a junk shop who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, article or things
of value which may have been lost or stolen shall upon demand produce such articles or thing to any
member of the police department for examination. (Code 1961, § 14.904)
Sec. 11-215. Vehicles.
Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his business shall bear thereon in legible
characters the name and address of the owner and proprietor thereof. (Code 1961, § 14.905)
Sec. 11-216. Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits by Manager.
Any license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with
Section 11-15 of this Chapter.
Sec. 11-217--11-220. Reserved.
DIVISION 7. PAWNBROKERS
Sec. 11-221. 1 License required.
It shall be unlawful to operate or carry on the business of a pawnbroker without having obtained a
license therefore, pursuant to Sec. 11-2 of this Chapter.
Sec. 11-221.2 Required records.
Every pawnbroker doing business in the village shall keep a record of every article pledged with
him or sold to him, and this record shall be open to the inspection of any police officer at any time during
business hours.
Sec. 11-222. Weapons; restrictions on purchase and display.
No pawnbroker shall receive as a pledge or purchase any revolver, pistol, blackjack, or sawed-off
shot gun. And no pawnbroker shall display in his window or shop any such weapons for sale. (Code
1961, § 14.1005)
Sec. 11-223. Minors.
No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any person who is not twenty-one (21) years of age or
over; and no pawnbroker shall employ a person of less than twenty-one (21) years of age to assist him in
his business. No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as pawnbroker with any person less than
twenty-one (21) years of age, except with the written consent of the parent or guardian of the minor to
each particular transaction. (Code 1961, § 14.1006)
Cross reference(s)--Restriction on sale of alcoholic beverages to minors, § 3-12; restrictions on
sale or gift of tobacco to minors. § 11-144.
Sec. 11-224. Stolen goods.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-34
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article pledged with him, or
which it is sought to pledge with him, if he shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost,
and found by the person attempting to pledge in the case of a lost article. (Code 1961, § 14.1007)
Sec. 11-225. Separate license for second-hand dealer required.
No pawnbroker shall conduct the business of a second-hand dealer without having obtained the
license required for such dealer in addition to his pawnbroker's license. (Code 1961, 14.1008)
Sec. 11-226 Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits by Manager .
Any license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with
Section 11-15 of this Chapter.(Code 1961, § 14.1004)
DIVISION 8. PEDDLERS
(Code 1961, § 14.1104) deleted by Ord. No. 0-67-93 6-14-93)
Sec. 11-226--11-240. Reserved.
DIVISION 9. REAL ESTATE BROKERS
Sec. 11-241. Fee.
The annual fee for a real estate broker's license shall be as provided in the fee schedule
supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances, and no license shall be issued except upon payment of the
full amount of the annual license fee. (Code 1961, § 14.1203; Ord. No. O-48-83, § 1(23), 8-8-83)
Sec. 11-242. Standards of conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any real estate broker, acting with respect to real estate located in the
village, to do any of the following:
(1) Make any substantial misrepresentation or false promise likely to induce, persuade, or
influence, or engage in untruthful advertising, or pursue a continued or flagrant course of
misrepresenting or the making of false promises, through agents, or salesmen or
otherwise;
(2) Act for more than one (1) party in a transaction without the knowledge of all parties to
the transaction;
(3) Fail to furnish copies, upon request, of all documents for which the broker is
professionally responsible relating to a real estate transaction to all parties executing the
same, or fail to account for or to remit any moneys or documents coming into his
possession which belong to others;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-35
(4) Fail to maintain and deposit in a special account, separate and apart from his personal or
other business accounts, all moneys belonging to others entrusted to him while acting as a
real estate broker, or as escrow agent, or as the temporary custodian of the funds of
others, until the transaction involved is consummated or terminated;
(5) Pay a commission or valuable consideration to any person for acts or services performed
in violation of this division;
(6) Employ any person as a salesman or agent as a means of evading provisions of this
division;
(7) Display a `for rent' or `for sale' sign on any property without the written consent of the
owner or his duly authorized agent, or advertise that any property is for sale or for rent in
a newspaper or other publication without the consent of the owner or his authorized
agent;
(8) Fail to promptly present to his principal any and all bona fide offers for sale, lease, or
rental of real estate; or set the price, terms, conditions, or privileges of any kind relating
to the sale, lease, rental, financing, repair, rehabilitation, construction, maintenance, or
occupancy of real estate;
(9) Solicit for sale, lease or rental, real estate on the grounds of loss of value to the present,
prospective, or alleged entry into the vicinity of any person or persons of any particular
race, color, religion, national origin, or ancestry, or distribute or cause to be distributed,
written material or statements designed to induce any owner of real estate to sell, lease, or
rent his property because of any present, prospective, or alleged change in the race, color,
religion, national origin, or ancestry of persons in the vicinity;
(10) Refuse to show to any financially qualified buyer or buyers who have specified their
needs the list or other records identifying all properties reasonably meeting such needs
which the broker is offering, including those on any multiple listing of real estate to
which he has access in the course of his business;
(11) Circulate, advertise, display or cause to be circulated, advertised, or displayed any
communication, notice, advertisement, or sign relating to the sale, rental, or leasing of
any real property which will indicate or express any limitation in the sale, rental or
leasing of such real estate predicated upon the race, color, religion, national origin, or
ancestry of any prospective buyer, lessee, or renter of such property;
(12) Refuse to show real estate to a qualified prospective purchaser, lessee or tenant because
of race, color, religion, national origin, or ancestry of such prospective purchaser, lessee,
or tenant.
(Code 1961, § 14.1204)
Sec. 11-243. Conciliation. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-36
Sec. 11-243. Penalty.
Any person licensed under the provisions of this division who is guilty of a violation of any
provision of this division shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense; and upon a second conviction the corporate authorities may
suspend or revoke the license of such person.
Any person, association, co-partnership or corporation who acts as a real estate broker in the
village while not validly licensed pursuant to this division is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
not less than two hundred dollars ($ 200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
offense, and every day that a violation of this division shall occur shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. (Code 1961, § 14.1206)
Sec. 11-244--11-250. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS OPERATIONS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 11-251--11-259. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. AUTO COURTS
Sec. 11-260. License required.
It shall be unlawful to operate or carry on the business of a auto court without having obtained a
license therefore, as in hereinafter provided.
Sec. 11-261. Fire walls.
No parking space shall be provided for motor vehicles within ten (10) feet of any building or
structure used for housing accommodations in an auto court unless the facility is in compliance with the
Life Safety Code. (Code 1961, § 15.104)
Sec. 11-262. Sanitary facilities.
(a) No premises shall be operated as an auto court unless they are equipped with adequate toilet
and other sanitary facilities to serve the total number of persons accommodated therein. All such sanitary
facilities shall be properly connected with the sanitary sewer system of the village if the premises are
located on a street served by such sewer.
(b) Each establishment shall have at least one (1) competent attendant or caretaker available at all
times. It shall be his duty to receive and deliver telephone messages and mail and to maintain the
premises, facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition and free from rodents and
vermin.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-37
(c) All floors in the bathroom shall be thoroughly washed and disinfected for each incoming
guest.
(d) All areas shall be kept free from rubbish, litter and inflammable materials at all times, and no
inflammable liquids or chemicals shall be kept on the premises unless the same are in an approved type of
container.
(e) All drinking glasses shall be washed and sterilized for each incoming guest. If paper cups are
furnished in lieu thereof, such paper cups shall be in proper dispensers which do not provide the handling
of same except by a guest.
Hot and cold water for hand washing must be provided, and soap in either liquid, powder or solid
form must be kept available at all times. Individual paper towels or rolls of paper towels must likewise be
provided. Individual cloth towels and mechanisms from which consecutive strips of toweling are
produced are likewise allowed.
(f) In any accommodations where cooking facilities are provided, fly proof and metal containers
shall be supplied for garbage and refuse and it shall be the duty of the motel operator to promptly remove
and dispose of such garbage and refuse. (Code 1961, § 15.105)
Sec. 11-263. Regulations.
It shall be unlawful to permit any violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance or
statute on or in any auto court; such premises must be kept clean and sanitary at all times, and all waste
material must be removed therefrom at least once in every twenty-four (24) hours. The director of health
shall inspect or cause to be inspected each auto court to see to the compliance with the provisions of this
article.
It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any auto court, or any portion thereof, for immoral
purposes. (Code 1961, § 15.106)
Sec. 11-264. Lights.
Any area or premises of an auto court open to use by the public or by all persons staying in or
being accommodated in the court shall be kept adequately lighted at night time; provided that such lights
must be so shaded or otherwise regulated so as to prevent them from shining upon any adjacent premises.
(Code 1961, § 15.107)
Sec. 11-265. Trailers.
It shall be unlawful to permit the use or to use the premises of any auto court for the
accommodation of a trailer. (Code 1961, § 15.108)
Sec. 11-266. Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits by Manager.
Any license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with Section
11-15 of this Chapter.
Sec.. 11-267--11-269. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-38
DIVISION 3. BARBER SHOPS
Sec. 11-270 License required.
It shall be unlawful to operate or carry on the business of a barber shop without having obtained a
license therefore, pursuant to Section 11-2 of this Chapter.
Sec. 11-271. Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits by Manager.
Any license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with
Section 11-15 of this Chapter.
Sec. 11-272--11-280. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. BEAUTY SHOPS
Sec. 11-281. Defined.
The term "beauty shop" as used in this article shall be defined to mean and shall be construed as
meaning any structure, store, building or other place where the service of hair styling, washing, cutting or
beauty culture, when done for cosmetic or beautifying purposes is rendered for hire or is sold, re-sold or
offered for sale or re-sale. This term shall refer to any salon, parlor, coiffure or any other establishment by
any other name engaged in the service described herein, provided however, that the term "beauty shop"
shall not refer to establishments commonly known as "barber shops.”
(Code 1961, § 15.1807, Ord. #0-7-12, §1, 1/9/12)
Sec. 11-282. License Required.
Applications for beauty shop licenses shall be made pursuant to section 11-2. Such application
shall include the certificate of registration number issued under the provisions of the State of Illinois
Barber, Cosmetology, Esthetics and Nail Technology Act, issued to the address shown on said
application. (Ord. #0-7-12, §1, 1/9/12)
----------
*State law reference(s)--State of Illinois Barber, Cosmetology, Esthetics and Nail Technology
Act, 225ILCS410.
----------
(Code 1961, § 15.1903)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-39
Sec. 11-283 Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits by Manager.
Any license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with
Section 11-15 of this Chapter.
DIVISION 4-A. SUNTANNING FACILITIES*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Permit and operating requirements for suntanning facilities, § 9-14.
----------
Sec. 11-284. Defined.
The term "suntanning facility" or "tanning facility" means a room or a booth which houses
ultraviolet lamps or products containing such lamps intended for the irradiation of any part of the living
human body for cosmetic or non-medical related purposes. (Ord. No. O-107-85, § 1, 10-28-85)
Sec. 11-285. Application for license.
Applications for suntanning facility licenses shall be made pursuant to section 11-2. (Ord. No. O-
107-85, § 1, 10-28-85)
Sec. 11-286. Inspection.
Each tanning facility shall be inspected at least once each year after the initial year in which the
facility is granted a permit, and each tanning facility shall conform with the requirements of section 9-14
of Chapter 9, Health and Sanitation, of this Code of Ordinances. (Ord. No. O-107-85, § 1, 10-28-85)
Sec. 11-287. Fees.
In addition to the type C service establishment fee, the owner or operator of a suntanning facility
shall pay an annual fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each unit or booth containing a lamp; provided,
however, that if the suntanning facility is an accessory use of an already licensed Type C service
establishment, then only the unit or booth fee shall be charged. (Ord. No. O-107-85, § 1, 10-28-85)
Sec. 11-288. Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits by Manager .
Any license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with
Section 11-15 of this Chapter.
Sec.. 11-289--11-300. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-40
DIVISION 5. ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS
Sec. 11-301. Defined.
The term "electrical contractor" as used in this division is hereby defined and shall be construed
to mean any person engaged in the business of installing or altering by contract, equipment and electrical
appliances, for the utilization of electricity supplied by light, heat or power, not including radio apparatus
or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and signals, and not including apparatus, conductors and
other equipment installed for or by public utilities, including common carriers, which are under the
jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission for use in their operation as public utilities, but the
term "electrical contractor" does not include employees employed by such contractor to do or supervise
such work. (Code 1961, § 15.403)
Sec. 11-302. Registration required.
No person shall engage in the business of electrical contractor without having first obtained a
certificate of registration therefor as herein required. Applications shall be made to the Manager. (Code
1961, § 15.401)
Sec. 11-303. Fee.
Every person doing business in the village as an electrical contractor shall show proof of a
certificate of registration. This certificate of registration can be from any other city or village in this state.
Any electrical contractor who is registered as such shall not be required to pay a fee for being registered
in this village. (Code 1961, § 15.402, Ord. 0-185-00 §9, 12-18-00)
Sec. 11-304. Regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person registered under the provisions of this division to install any
electrical appliances, wiring or fixtures without strict compliance with the ordinances relating to such
fixtures, and it shall be unlawful for any such person to do any such work without having obtained such
permits as may be required. (Code 1961, § 15.404)
Sec. 11-305. Completion, Compliance and Damage Surety Bond
The provisions of Section 11-474 shall apply. (Ord. 0-185-00 §10, 12-18-00)
Sec. 11-306. Suspension or revocation of certificate of registration by Manager .
Any certificates of registration may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with
Section 11-15 of this Chapter.
Sec.. 11-307--11-310. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-41
DIVISION 6. HOUSE MOVERS
Sec. 11-311. License required.
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of house moving, raising or shoring without first
having secured a license therefor. Applications for such license shall be made in writing to the clerk.
(Code 1961, § 15.601)
Sec. 11-312. Fee.
The annual license fee and the daily license fee shall be as provided in the fee schedule
supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances. (Code 1961, § 15.602; Ord. No. O-48-83, § 1(25), 8-8-
83)
Sec. 11-313. Regulations.
Persons licensed under this division must comply with all the provisions of this Code or other
ordinances or laws relating to the work being done, and must pay the permit fee required for moving
buildings, and must keep lights and warnings maintained as is required by this Code or any other
ordinances or laws. (Code 1961, § 15.603)
Sec. 11-314. Inspections.
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and/or Manager to make or cause to be made such
inspections as may be necessary to insure compliance with the provisions of this division. (Code 1961, §
15.604)
Sec. 11-315. Irrevocable commercial letter of credit required.
Every licensee under the provisions of this division shall file with the clerk an irrevocable
commercial letter of credit in the amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), in substantially the
following form:
An irrevocable commercial letter of credit issued by a national bank located in Illinois or
a state bank chartered by the State of Illinois is deposited, it shall be in substantially the
following form:
AMOUNT: $15,000.00 DATED: ___________
NO: ______________
TO:
Village of Palatine,
a municipal corporation,
Cook County,
Palatine, Illinois.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-42
WE HEREBY AUTHORIZE YOU TO DRAW ON
______________________________________________________
(Name of Bank)
DRAFTS AT ____________________________________________
SIGHT FOR ANY SUM OR SUMS NOT EXCEEDING A TOTAL OF FIFTEEN
THOUSAND DOLLARS ($15,000.00) FOR ACCOUNT
OF_____________________________________________________________________
Drafts shall be signed by the Palatine village treasurer and must be accompanied by his written
certification that the funds drawn are to be used to pay for any loss, damage or expenses occasioned by
_____________________________________________________________________________________
who has applied for a House Movers License pursuant to Sec. 11-311 of the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Palatine or for any loss, damage or expenses incurred by the Village of Palatine resulting from
any act or failure to act of the said license applicant or by any failure of the license applicant to comply
with the provisions of said Code or other ordinances of the Village of Palatine relating to the moving,
raising or shoring of houses or other buildings; and such certification shall be binding and conclusive, and
______________________________________________ shall honor such drafts and pay such funds
without further inquiry.
All drafts hereunder must be marked drawn under
____________________, ______________, Illinois.
Letter of Credit No: ________ Dated ________.
The amount of each draft drawn under this credit must be endorsed hereon and
the presentation of each draft, if negotiated, shall be a warranty by the negotiating bank
that such endorsement has been made and that documents have been forwarded as herein
required; if the draft is not negotiated this credit must accompany the draft. This credit is
subject to Uniform Customs and Practice for Document Credits (as revised), International
Chamber of Commerce.
We hereby engage with the drawers, endorsers and bona fide holders of drafts
drawn under and in compliance with the terms of this credit that the same shall be duly
honored on due presentation and delivery of documents as specified if negotiated or
presented on or before ___________________________________________.
Name of Bank
BY: ____________________________
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-43
Sec. 11-316. Suspension or Revocation of Licenses or Permits by Manager.
Any license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with
Section 11-15 of this Chapter.
Sec.. 11-317--11-325. Reserved.
DIVISION 7. LAUNDRIES
Sec. 11-326. License required.
No person shall operate or conduct a laundry in the village without having first obtained a license
therefor; provided that establishments licensed as dry cleaning establishments need not obtain a laundry
license in addition to the dry cleaning license. Pursuant to Section 11-2 of this Chapter, applications for
such license shall be made in writing to the Manager and shall state thereon the location intended to be
occupied. (Code 1961, § 15.801)
Sec. 11-327. Sanitation requirements.
Premises used for laundries must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
No refuse of any kind shall be permitted to accumulate on such premises; and the premises must
be kept free from rats, mice and vermin.
It shall be unlawful to employ any person afflicted with a venereal or any contagious disease in a
laundry. (Code 1961, § 15.803)
Sec. 11-328. Inspections required.
It shall be the duty of the health officer or other official designated by the corporate authorities to
inspect or cause to be inspected every establishment licensed under this division at least once every six
(6) months. Any violation under the terms of this article, which are discovered, shall be reported to the
corporate authorities. (Code 1961, § 15.804)
Sec. 11-329. Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits by Manager .
Any license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with
Section 11-15 of this Chapter.
Sec. 11-330--11-350. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-44
DIVISION 8. NURSING HOMES
Sec. 11-351. Defined.
For the purpose of this division, a home is hereby defined to mean any institution or place used
for the reception or care, for a longer period than twenty-four (24) hours, of three (3) or more children or
infants, apart from their parents. A home is further defined to mean any institution used for the reception
or care of persons who are dependent or not capable of properly caring for themselves, and shall be
understood to include homes for aged or infirm, orphan asylums, refugees and shelters, and also boarding
homes caring for three (3) or more women with their children when such children are less than fourteen
(14) years of age.(Code 1961, § 15.1001)
Sec. 11-352. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the regularly-constituted authorities of the United
States, the county, the village, or of the state, or any association or institution for the care of children
which has been accredited, certified or licensed by the state, pursuant to an act of the legislature, to
regulate the treatment and control of dependent, neglected and delinquent children, to open, conduct,
manage or maintain any homes, as defined in this article, within the village, without first obtaining a
license therefor as hereinafter provided. (Code 1961, § 15.1002)
Sec. 11-353. Application.
Any person desiring such license shall make application in writing to the Manager. Such
application shall conform to the general provisions of this Code relating to applications for licenses and
shall state the location or proposed location of the home, the purpose for which it is to be opened,
conducted or maintained, the accommodations for the residents thereof, the nature and kind of care,
instruction or benefits given or proposed to be given therein, the name and address of the officials or
board of officials conducting, managing or maintaining said home, the name of the superintendent or
person in charge of said home, the name and address of the chief physician, surgeon, or attending
physician or surgeon, or the names and addresses of the board of physicians or surgeons attending therein
if there is such a board. No such license shall be issued until the applicant has secured a state license for
such purpose. (Code 1961, § 15.1003)
Sec. 11-354. Inspection.
It shall be the duty of the health officer, upon presentation of such application to make or cause to
be made strict inquiry into the facts set out in such application, and if upon inquiry and inspection he shall
find that such home complies with all ordinances and statutes relating thereto, he shall recommend to the
corporate authorities that a license be issued. (Code 1961, § 15.1004)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-45
Sec. 11-355. Fee.
The license fee to be paid annually to the Manager for nursing home licenses shall be computed
in accordance with the fee schedule for service establishments in section 11-20. (Ord. No. O-18-75, § 4,
2-10-75)
Sec. 11-356. Sanitation regulations.
(a) In every such home each room occupied or to be occupied by residents shall be of such
dimensions as shall give each inmate not less than four hundred (400) cubic feet of air space. Every such
room shall have at least one (1) window connecting with the external air for each four (4) beds. Said
windows shall be of such dimensions as shall secure to each resident at least one thousand five hundred
(1,500) cubic feet of fresh air per hour by ventilation, or in case said window shall not secure one
thousand five hundred (1,500) cubic feet of fresh air per hour by natural ventilation, then each room shall
in addition thereto, be fitted with such appliances for ventilation as shall secure to each resident in said
room at least one thousand five hundred (1,500) cubic feet of fresh air per hour.
(b) Each bed shall have at least forty (40) square feet of floor space, and in every room or
dormitory containing more than one (1) bed, the beds shall be so arranged as to leave a passageway of not
less than two (2) feet horizontally on all sides of each bed.
(c) Each ward or wing in said home shall have running water furnished in one (1) or more places,
either in said ward or convenient thereto so that the same may be adequate and convenient to the
occupants thereof. The plumbing, water closets, bathrooms and other sanitary appliances and equipment
shall be constructed in accordance with the regulations of the State Plumbing Code of 1959 promulgated
by the State Board of Health relating thereto. The floor of the cellar or basement in the building used as a
home shall be properly cemented so as to be water-tight.
(d) The halls of each floor shall be open to the external air with suitable windows, and shall have
no room or other obstruction at either end thereof, unless sufficient light and ventilation is otherwise
provided for such halls, and the building as a whole shall be provided with adequate and proper fire
escapes, stairways or inclines for exits.
(e) All homes, including the culinary department, dining rooms, laundry, laboratory, morgue and
post-mortem rooms connected with the same, shall be equipped from May 15 to November 15 with doors,
screens and other appliances necessary for the exclusion of flies.
(f) All areas occupied by inmates must be kept at a minimum temperature of sixty-five (65)
degrees Fahrenheit at all times. (Code 1961, § 15.1006)
Sec. 11-357. Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits by Manager .
Any license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with
Section 11-15 of this Chapter.
Sec.. 11-358--11-365. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-46
DIVISION 9. OUTDOOR ADVERTISERS
Sec. 11-366. Defined.
The term "advertiser" as used in this division is hereby defined, and for the purpose of this
division shall be construed to mean any person engaged in the business of placing, posting, or painting
any advertisements, notices, or displays in or on any place for the purpose of outdoor advertising so that
the resultant display is visible from any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place. The term
“advertiser” includes the owner or operator of a billboard. In connection with a billboard or any other
advertisement, notice or display the issuance of such a license shall be conditioned upon the applicant
obtaining the necessary zoning approvals to permit the establishment of same on a premises . (Code
1961, § 15.1101)
Sec. 11-367. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any outdoor advertiser to do business in the municipality without having
first secured a license therefor pursuant to Section 11-2 and 11-368 of this Chapter, provided that no
license, issued under this division shall be construed to permit the use of any structures, natural or
artificial, which are located in any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public place for advertising
purposes. (Code 1961, § 15.1102)
Sec. 11-368. Application.
Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the Manager, and shall be accompanied
by a list of all places, including billboards or natural structures on which it is intended to place signs or
advertisements. This list shall be amended from time to time by the licensee as the right to post or place
advertisements or signs on additional places is required. (Code 1961, § 15.1103)
Sec. 11-369. Fee.
The annual fee for outdoor advertisers' licenses shall be as provided in the fee schedule
supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances. (Code 1961, § 15.1104; Ord. No. O-48-83, § 1(26), 8-8-
83)
Sec. 11-370. Use of billboards.
No person shall post or maintain any advertisement or sign on any billboard or signboard which
does not fully comply with this Code or any other ordinances of this municipality. (Code 1961, §
15.1105)
Sec. 11-371. Consent of owner.
It shall be unlawful to post any advertisement on any premises in the municipality without the
consent of the owner of such premises. Such consents must be in writing and must be filed with the
Manager. (Code 1961, § 15.1106)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-47
Sec. 11-372. Refuse.
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in outdoor advertising to permit any refuse resulting
from this work to accumulate anywhere in the municipality except by placing it in properly established
refuse receptacles. It shall be unlawful to permit any loose or flapping combustible materials to hang from
or to be attached to any billboard, signboard or other place used for display or advertising purposes. All
refuse resulting from the operating of this business must be carefully gathered and properly disposed of.
(Code 1961, § 15.1107)
Sec. 11-373. Weeds and material at base of billboards.
It shall be the duty of every outdoor advertiser to keep all grass, weeds and other growths except
trees and ornamental shrubbery, cut so that the same shall not grow to be a greater height than ten (10)
inches within six (6) feet of any billboard or signboard used by him, provided that this obligation shall
extend only to property controlled by the advertiser. (Code 1961, § 15.1108)
Sec. 11-374. Unlawful advertising.
It shall be unlawful for any person to post or display any advertisement of an obscene or immoral
character, any advertisement tending to promote or cause a riot or breach of peace, any advertisement for
an unlawful gathering, or advertisements of unlawful sales. (Code 1961, § 15.1109)
Sec. 11-375. Disfiguring signs.
It shall be unlawful to mutilate or disfigure any lawful sign or advertisement in the municipality.
(Code 1961, § 15.1110)
Sec. 11-376. Name of advertiser.
It shall be unlawful for any outdoor advertiser to carry on his business unless the name of such
advertiser is attached, displayed or printed on all billboards or signboards used by him, or in any notice,
placard or advertisement posted by him, in such lettering as to be visible from a distance of at least five
(5) feet from the notice or advertisement. (Code 1961, § 15.1111)
Sec. 11-377. Exemptions.
The provisions of this division shall not be construed to apply to the posting of a sign or notices
by order of any court or by any public officer in the performance of his duties. (Code 1961, § 15.1112)
Sec. 11-378. Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits by Manager.
Any license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with
Section 11-15 of this Chapter.
Sec.. 11-379--11-390. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-48
DIVISION 10. PARKING LOTS
Sec. 11-391. Defined.
The term "parking lot" as used in this division shall be construed to mean and include any place
maintained for the outdoor parking of cars, excepting on a street, alley or other public place, where such
parking is permitted upon the payment of compensation or is made available to patrons or customers of
any places of business. (Code 1961, § 15.1201)
Sec. 11-392. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to operate a parking lot without first having obtained a permit therefor.
Applications for such permit shall be made in writing to the, Manager, pursuant to Section 11-2 of this
Chapter and shall contain all necessary information to insure compliance with the provisions of this
division, including a description of the location, size, number of cars to be accommodated, and a
statement of any services other than parking, or of any commodities for sale, offered to patrons of the
parking lot. (Ord. No. O-18-75, § 4, 2-10-75)
Sec. 11-393. Fee.
No fee shall be required for the issuance of a permit for a parking lot, provided a license has been
issued for said parking lot pursuant to section 11-2 et seq. (Ord. No. O-18-75, § 4, 2-10-75)
Sec. 11-394. Posting of sign; attendant required.
At the entrance of each parking lot there shall be posted in words and figures large enough to be
read by prospective patrons a statement of the rates to be charged and of the closing hours. There shall be
at least one (1) attendant on the premises at all times during which the parking lot is open for business.
Sec. 11-395. Surface.
It shall be unlawful to operate a parking lot unless the surface thereof is covered with concrete,
asphalt, macadam or similar paving; and such parking lot shall at all times be kept clean and free from
dust or refuse. (Code 1961, § 15.1209)
Sec. 11-396. Buildings.
Any buildings constructed on a parking lot shall be constructed in full compliance with the
ordinances pertaining thereto, and shall have exterior walls of non-flammable material provided, that any
structure used or to be used for office purposes only may have less than the minimum area requirements
prescribed for residences or commercial buildings. (Code 1961, § 15.1210)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-49
Sec. 11-397. Condition of vehicles.
It shall be unlawful to park or store, in any parking lot, any vehicle which is not in a condition
ready for use, or to permit the parking of any abandoned, junked or partially disabled vehicle in any such
lot. And it shall be unlawful to use any parking lot for storage or parking of any vehicle for the purpose of
displaying the same for sale, or to use any parking lot or portion thereof as an automobile repair shop.
(Code 1961, § 15.1211)
Sec. 11-398. Suspension or Revocation of Licenses or Permits by Village Manager.
Any license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with
Section 11-15 of this Chapter.
Sec.. 11-399--11-420. Reserved.
DIVISION 11. SCAVENGERS*
----------
*Editor's note--Ordinance No. O-108-89, § 1, adopted Aug. 14, 1989, deleted former Ch. 11, Art.
V, Div. 11, pertaining to scavengers, and derived from Code 1961, §§ 15.1401--15.1405, and Ord. No. O-
48-83, § 1 (27), adopted August 8, 1983, and substituted a new Div. 11 as set out herein.
----------
Sec. 11-421. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the business of scavenger, or
recycling, or the collection or disposal of animal, human or vegetable refuse, offal or refuse of any kind,
without first having secured a license therefor. (Ord. No. O-108-89, § 1, 8-14-89; Ord. No. 0-25-93, § 1,
3-22-93)
Sec. 11-422. Classification of licenses.
(a) Residential scavenger license. Only one (1) public scavenger license shall be issued for the
purpose of performing refuse collection from all residential property, including multifamily residences.
That person, firm or corporation shall be awarded the contract with the village which also includes the
right to the collection or disposal of animal, human or vegetable refuse, offal or refuse of any kind from
commercial, industrial and institutional properties, and no additional license will be required, therefor.
(b) Commercial, industrial and institutional license. The number of licenses issued for servicing
commercial, industrial and institutional facilities, but not residential properties, are unlimited. A license
for this purpose will be issued to each qualified applicant who presents evidence that he has adequate and
proper equipment and approved disposal facilities. Each licensee will be issued vehicle licenses as are
necessary. Such license shall be provided by the village and displayed on each vehicle of the licensee
used in the village. (Ord. No. O-108-89, § 1, 8-14-89)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-50
Sec. 11-423. Application.
(a) Residential scavenger license. The residential scavenger license shall be issued to the person,
firm or corporation which has been awarded the contract for the collection and removal of all residential
waste and shall also be subject to all conditions established in said contract. This contract shall be subject
to the approval of the corporate authorities.
(b) Commercial, industrial and institutional license. Applications for the commercial, industrial
and institutional license shall be made pursuant to section 11-2 of this chapter. The director of
environmental health shall review the application and make recommendations to the Manager for
approval or denial. No such license shall be issued except on the order of the Manager.
(c) Denial of license. The Manager shall have the right to deny any applicant a license, and may
require any reasonable proof necessary for assurance as to the applicant's compliance and ability to
comply with the provisions this division or any other ordinance of the village. (Ord. No. O-108-89, § 1,
8-14-89)
Sec. 11-424. Fees.
The annual fee for such licenses shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the
Palatine Code of Ordinances. Licenses issued in the midst of the, year shall be prorated. (Ord. No. O-
108-89, § 1, 8-14-89)
Sec. 11-425. Term of license.
All scavenger licenses will be valid for a period of one (1) year, which shall begin January 1 of
the year for which such license is issued and shall terminate on December 31 of the same year. (Ord. No.
O-108-89, § 1, 8-14-89)
Sec. 11-426. Bond and liability insurance.
No license which has been otherwise approved shall be issued until the applicant furnishes a bond
in the penal sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) executed by a responsible surety company for the
period of the license, which bond shall guarantee that the scavenger shall perform scavenger service in
accordance with the regulations of the village as ordered from time to time and shall indemnify the village
from any loss or damage resulting from any failure of the scavenger to so perform. Nor shall any license
be issued until the scavenger has filed with the Manager a certificate or other evidence that the scavenger
carries insurance of the following types of at least the limits specified below:
(1) Workman's compensation--Statutory as amended for time to time.
(2) Employer's liability--$500,000.00
(3) Bodily injury liability except automobile--$500,000.00 each occurrence, $1,000,000.00
aggregate
(4) Property damage liability except automobile--$500,000.00 each occurrence,
$1,000,000.00 aggregate
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-51
(5) Automobile bodily injury liability--$500,000.00 each person, $1,000,000.00 each
occurrence
(6) Automobile property damage--$500,000.00 each occurrence
(7) Excess umbrella liability--$5,000,000.00 each occurrence
(Ord. No. O-108-89, § 1, 8-14-89)
Sec. 11-427. Equipment; inspection.
(a) Every scavenger must demonstrate that he has adequate and sufficient equipment to render
service to any customer requesting service in accordance with the requirements of this division of this
Code.
(b) All scavenger trucks and refuse containers shall be subject to inspection and approval by the
director of environmental health or his authorized representatives.
(1) Truck requirements. No scavenger truck shall be operated unless it is a modern enclosed
leak proof truck with a load packer. Such equipment shall be cleaned at sufficient
frequency to prevent nuisance and insect breeding and shall be maintained in good
condition and repair. All scavenger trucks will be clearly identified with the name of the
scavenger, lettering must be at least four inches in height.
(2) Container requirements. Refuse containers must have a tight-fitting cover, be in a state of
good repair, be leak proof, free from rust and periodically painted. The name and phone
number of the scavenger must be clearly visible on the container. All containers must
meet all applicable safety standards as established by the board of health. Covers for the
storage of trade and construction waste shall not be necessary. The use of drums as refuse
bins is prohibited.(Ord. No. O-108-89, § 1, 8-14-89)
Sec. 11-428. Service standards.
(a) All applicants and licensed scavengers shall provide evidence that all materials collected are
being deposited at a lawful site designated and maintained for such purposes under the laws of the State
of Illinois. The Village of Palatine reserves the right to designate specific sites or locations in conjunction
with its participation with the Solid Waste Agency of Northern Cook County or its successor.
(b) All licensed scavengers shall maintain an office telephone for the receipt of service calls or
complaints and shall be available for such calls on all business days from 8:00 a.m. until 4:30 p.m. and
between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Saturdays.
(c) All licensed scavengers shall be responsible for the closing of all container lids after emptying
and shall immediately clean up in a neat and workmanlike manner any refuse that it may have caused to
spill anywhere in the village.
(d) All licensed scavengers shall furnish capable employees for use in the crews performing the
disposal services. The scavenger will prohibit any drinking of alcoholic beverages or use of illegal
narcotics by its drivers and crew members while on duty.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-52
(e) The hours of scavenger or recycling operations shall be limited to 6:30 a.m. to l2:00 midnight,
and 6:30 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. within or adjacent to residential areas. (Ord. No. O-108-89, § 1, 8-14-89; Ord.
No. 0-25-93 § 1, 3-22-93)
Sec. 11-429. Penalties.
(a) Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or resists the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this division, shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1000.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) In the event a licensed scavenger violates any provisions of any ordinance of the village, or
fails to remove the refuse as contracted with the customer, the Manager shall have the right to suspend or
revoke the license pursuant to Section 11-15 of this Chapter, and/or abate the violation by any means
available to the village, and any and all expense incurred by the village thereby may be charged against
the licensed scavenger and the performance bond furnished by the scavenger. (Ord. No. O-108-89, § 1, 8-
14-89)
Sec. 11-430. Reserved.
DIVISION 12. TAXICABS*
----------
*Editor's note--Ord. No. 0-20-76, § 1, enacted March 8, 1976, is included herein as superseding
former Div. 12, §§ 11-431--11-468, relative to taxicabs. Former Div. 12 was derived from Code 1961, §§
15.1601--15.1638, as amended by Ord. No. O-1-75, §§ 1--8, adopted Jan. 13, 1975.
Editor’s Note – Ord. No. 0-149-11, enacted December 5, 2011 replaced Division 12 in its
entirety.
----------
Sec. 11-431. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the
following terms shall, for the purpose of this division, have the meanings indicated in this section:
(1) The term "livery cab" means any public passenger vehicle, having a rated seating
capacity of not more than seven (7) persons, transporting passengers for hire, as a result
of individual contract, on a trip or hourly basis.
(2) The term "public passenger vehicle" means taxicabs and livery cabs used for the
transportation of passengers for hire.
(3) The term "public passenger vehicle license" means that license issued to each public
passenger vehicle upon successful compliance with the applicable provisions of this
division for the issuance of such license.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-53
(4) The term "public passenger vehicle driver's license" means that license issued to a driver
or operator of any public passenger vehicle when such driver or operator has complied
with the applicable provisions of this division for the issuance thereof.
(5) The term "taxicab" means all motor-propelled vehicles, having a rated seating capacity of
not more than seven (7) persons, carrying passengers for hire indiscriminately, accepting
and discharging all such persons as may offer themselves for transportation
(6) The term "taximeter" means any instrument or fare-registering device attached to a
taxicab and designed to register mechanically the distance traveled by the vehicle, to
record the time the vehicle is in waiting, and to indicate upon the records, by figures, the
fare to be charged in dollars and cents.
(Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76)
Sec. 11-432. Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this division shall be fined not less
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1000.00) for each offense.
(Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76)
Sec. 11-433. Public passenger vehicle license required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any public passenger vehicle or engage in
the business of operating public passenger vehicles in the village, including the operation of one or more
such vehicles, without obtaining a public passenger vehicle license for each such vehicle operated as
provided in this division and otherwise conforming to the requirements of this Code, and applicable
provisions of other ordinances of the village. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76)
Sec. 11-434. Application and fee for public passenger vehicle driver's license.
Any person desiring to secure a license as a driver or operator of any public passenger vehicle
licensed under this division and used for the carriage of passengers for hire, shall be at least eighteen (18)
years of age. Any person desiring to secure such a license shall make an application in writing therefor to
the chief of police upon the form provided, and shall pay the required annual fee as provided in the fee
schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances. The application shall set forth the following:
(1) Name, residence and occupation;
(2) Names and addresses of four (4) persons who have known the applicant for a period of at
least two (2) years and who will vouch for the sobriety, honesty and general good
character of the applicant;
(3) The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers, education
background, and a concise history of employment;
(4) A statement whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony or of driving
while intoxicated;
(5) Applicant's state chauffeur's license number;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-54
(6) Applicant shall attach to the application two (2) recent one by one and one-half (1 X 1
1/2) inch photographs of himself, together with a set of his fingerprints for examination
by the police chief;
(7) A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar license other than
described in said application, and the disposition thereof;
(8) A statement that applicant is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter
or thing contained in this Code, laws of this state, or other ordinances of this village;
(9) A statement whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the
federal government, has been revoked, and the reasons therefor;
(10) A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state or of the United
States, or any provision of his Code or other ordinances of the village in the conduct of
his business;
(11) A statement as to whether such applicant's license issued under this Code or any other
communities’ Code has been revoked for a cause; and
(12) A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of a violation of any federal
or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the passage of this Code or shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court
to answer charges for any such violation.
Inquiry shall be made as to the character and record of the applicant for honesty, sobriety and
capability. The corporate authorities may authorize the issuance of a public passenger vehicle driver's
license to an applicant convicted of a felony provided that in their judgment the applicant has been
rehabilitated and provided further that more than seven (7) years have elapsed since said conviction.
(Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76; Ord. No. O-5-79, § 1, 2-12-79; Ord. No. O-48-83, § 1(28), 8-8-83; Ord.
No. 0-149-11 §1, 12/5/11)
Sec. 11-435. Examination of applicant; issuance or refusal of public passenger vehicle driver's
license.
(a) The chief of police, or person designated by him, shall satisfy himself:
(1) As to the truth of the statements made in the application for the public passenger
vehicle driver's license.
(2) The applicant's knowledge of the provisions of this division, the traffic
regulations of the village and the geography of the village.
(3) The ability of the applicant to comply with the provisions of this division and the
ordinances of the village.
(4) Be able to effectively communicate with and receive directions from passengers.
(Ord. No. 0-149-11 §1, 12/5/11)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-55
(b) No public passenger vehicle driver's license shall be issued to any applicant if the results
of the foregoing examination are unsatisfactory in any respect, nor to an applicant who makes false
statements in his application, nor shall such license be issued (except as permitted under section 11-434
above) to:
(1) A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or of
the United States;
(2) A person who has been convicted of reckless driving or a similar provision of a local
ordinance or any like offense of another state or country, within the past five (5) years;
(Ord. No. 0-149-11 §1, 12/5/11)
(3) A person whose license issued under this Code or any other communities’ Code has been
revoked for a cause; (Ord. No. 0-149-11 §1, 12/5/11)
(4) A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed
to decency and morality;
(5) A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the
manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, subsequent to the passage of this
Code or shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such
violation.
(Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76; Ord. No. O-5-79, § 2, 2-12-79)
Sec. 11-435.1 Suspension or revocation by manager.
In addition, any public passenger vehicle drivers license may be suspended or revoked by the
Manager in accordance with Section 11-15 of the Code. (Ord. No. 0-149-11 §1, 12/5/11)
Sec. 11-436. Summary suspension of public passenger vehicle license.
(a) Suspension of public passenger vehicle license by the chief of police. The chief of police
is empowered and directed to immediately suspend the operation of any public passenger
vehicle found not to be in a safe condition. (Ord. No. 0-149-11 §1, 12/5/11)
(1) Not in a safe condition.
(2) Not in good condition with respect to appearance, cleanliness and mechanical
operation.
(3) Not in accord with the provisions of this division.
(b) Reinstatement of suspended permits: Any person whose permit has been suspended or
revoked may, at any time, make application for a re-inspection for the purpose of
reinstatement of the permit. Following receipt of a written request, including a statement
signed by the applicant that the condition causing the suspension of the permit has been
corrected, the chief of police shall make a re-inspection. If the applicant is found to be in
compliance with the requirements of this Code, the permit shall be reinstated.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-56
(c) Hearings: The hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted by the Manager at
the time and place designated by him or her pursuant to the procedures set forth in
Section 11-15(b) and (c)
(d) Appeal: An appeal from the decision or order of the Manager shall be pursuant to Section
11-16.
Sec. 11-436.1 Suspension or revocation of public passenger vehicle licenses by Manager.
In addition, any public passenger vehicle license issued may be suspended or revoked by the
Manager in accordance with Section 11-15 of this Code. (Code 1961, § 12.103; Ord. No. O-15-80, § 2, 2-
11-80) (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76)
Sec. 11-437. Insurance and bond required.
Each application for a public passenger vehicle license or for renewal of a public passenger
vehicle license to operate a public passenger vehicle in the village shall be accompanied by:
(1) A certificate from the secretary of state showing compliance by the owner for each public
passenger vehicle with the provisions of the statutes of the state now or hereafter in force,
relating to the bonding or insurance of motor vehicles used for the carriage of passengers
for hire.
(2) A policy of insurance or certificate of insurance showing that there is in full force and
effect a policy of insurance which complies with this section, by a solvent and
responsible insurance company to be approved by the board insuring the owner, his
consent or any person operating the public passenger vehicle with the owner's express or
implied consent against liability for injury to or death of any person or for damage to
property other than the public passenger vehicle resulting from the negligence of the
owner, his agent or any person operating the public passenger vehicle with his express or
implied consent in the operation of the public passenger vehicle. Every application for
any type of public passenger vehicle license shall be accompanied by a surety bond to
insure payment of property damage in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)
and public liability insurance in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for
each individual and two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for each accident, or a
certificate of insurance for such amount of property damage and public liability coverage.
In the event the authority of the issuing company to do business in the state is revoked,
the owner shall not operate nor permit any person to operate within the village the public
passenger vehicle covered by such policy, without replacing the policy with another
policy or a bond which complies with the provisions of this section. If, at any time, in the
judgment of the corporate authorities a policy of insurance given pursuant to this section
is not sufficient for any good cause, the corporate authorities may require the owner of
the public passenger vehicle who filed the same, to replace that policy of insurance with
another good and sufficient bond or insurance policy which complies with the provisions
of this section.(Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-57
Sec. 11-438. Revocation of public passenger vehicle license upon failure to obtain insurance or
bond.
The Manager is hereby empowered to revoke any license issued with respect to any public
passenger vehicle not complying with the provisions of the preceding section, pursuant to the procedures
set forth in Section 11-15. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76)
Sec. 11-439. Inspection of public passenger vehicles.
No public passenger vehicle shall be issued a public passenger vehicle license until it has been
thoroughly and carefully inspected and approved by the police chief or a member of the police department
designated by him and found to be in thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of passengers;
clean, fit, of good appearance, and well-painted and varnished, and complying with the provisions of this
division.(Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76)
Sec. 11-440. Mechanical tests.
A. Mechanical tests shall be made three (3) times a year during the months of April, August
and December, at any testing garage or testing station approved by the police chief. Said testing shall be
completed by the last day of each month and shall include the following:
(1) Brakes;
(2) Emergency brake;
(3) Wheel alignment;
(4) Horn;
(5) Windshield wipers;
(6) Rear view mirror;
(7) Steering mechanism;
(8) Head lights;
(9) Tail lights;
(10) Stop lights;
(11) Exhaust system.
(12) Taximeter; and
(13) All doors shall have functional interior door handles and latches.
B. The chief of police shall designate those facilities which may serve as inspection stations
to conduct the vehicle inspections required by this chapter, which stations may be within
or without the village. He shall establish procedures for conducting the inspections and
minimum standards in order that a vehicle be approved. He shall supply inspection
stations with certified inspection forms, numbered certified vehicle inspection stickers
and such other supplies as may be required to perform the duties required by this chapter
and the regulations established hereunder.
C. A list of authorized inspection stations shall be kept by the chief of police and shall be
given to each public passenger vehicle owner together with the notice that vehicles must
be inspected. An owner may use the authorized inspection station of his choice.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-58
D. Inspection stations shall charge the inspection fee authorized by the chief of police for all
public passenger vehicle inspections. There shall be no charge for a reinspection within
the five (5) working days allowed for repairs to a vehicle that fails the inspection. The
authorized inspection fee shall be charged for reinspection made after the five (5)
working days’ grace period.
(Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76; (Ord. No. 0-149-11 §1, 12/5/11))
Sec. 11-441. Duty of owner to submit vehicles for inspection prior to issuance of public passenger
vehicle license; unlawful to use until approved by police chief.
It is the duty of the owner of each public passenger vehicle to submit to the police chief each
vehicle for inspection prior to the issuance of the public passenger vehicle license or at any time upon
complaint. Also, the police department may inspect these vehicles at such other times as the police chief
may deem necessary and it is unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any such vehicle to use or
permit its use, in case it has been condemned by the police chief, until the vehicle has been repaired or
replaced to the satisfaction of the police chief. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76; Ord. No. 0-149-11 §1,
12/5/11)
Sec. 11-442. Public passenger vehicle license fees.
(a) A public passenger vehicle license fee, as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the
Palatine Code of Ordinances, per year, shall be paid to the village by the owner of the public passenger
vehicle, which fee shall entitle such owner to a license for one public passenger vehicle. For each
additional public passenger vehicle, a fee, as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code
of Ordinances, shall be paid to the village by owner.
(b) All public passenger vehicle licenses issued hereunder shall be for the calendar year beginning
January 1st and ending December 31st; provided, however, that if an application for a public passenger
vehicle license is made after July 1st of any year, the fee for such license for the remainder of the calendar
year for one public passenger vehicle, and the fee for each additional public passenger vehicle, shall be as
provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-
76; Ord. No. O-48-83, § 1(29), 8-8-83)
Sec. 11-443. Condition of vehicles.
All vehicles licensed under this division must be kept in a safe, clean and sanitary condition, and
must be equipped with properly working brakes, lights and warning signals, in accordance with the motor
vehicle laws of the State of Illinois, this division and the ordinances of the village, and no license shall be
issued for the operation of any public passenger vehicle under this division until it is shown to be in good
mechanical condition. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76)
Sec. 11-444. Identification of public passenger vehicles.
The name and telephone number of the owner of the public passenger vehicle shall be plainly
printed in a conspicuous place on both sides of the vehicle in letters at least two (2) inches high. If any
licensee operates more than one public passenger vehicle, each vehicle shall be numbered with figures not
less than two (2) inches high, and no two (2) vehicles shall bear the same number. All such names and
numbers shall be of such color and type as to be legible to one of normal eyesight at a minimum distance
of twenty-five (25) feet. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-59
Sec. 11-445. Public passenger vehicle driver's license to be displayed upon request.
Each licensed public passenger vehicle driver shall carry his public passenger vehicle driver's
license while engaged in the operation of any public passenger vehicle, and shall exhibit it whenever
requested to do so by any village official, any member of the police department, any passenger or any
person desiring to become a passenger. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76)
Sec. 11-446. Load limitation.
No driver or operator of a public passenger vehicle shall carry more people than is recommended
by the manufacturer of said vehicle, nor shall he carry any other person than the first person employing
the public passenger vehicle without the consent of the first passenger. No driver or operator of a public
passenger vehicle shall allow any person other than the passenger(s) being conveyed to occupy the public
passenger vehicle, except in the training of a new driver. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76)
Sec. 11-447. Public passenger vehicle license and public passenger vehicle driver's license
nontransferable.
Neither the public passenger vehicle license nor the public passenger vehicle driver's license
provided for in this division shall be transferable. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76)
Sec. 11-448. Public passenger vehicles constructed, designed, etc., in imitation of other public
passenger vehicles.
No public passenger vehicle or the owner of a public passenger vehicle shall be licensed under
the provisions of this division if the vehicle sought to be licensed as a public passenger vehicle is
constructed, designed, painted or labeled as to be so similar to the automobiles or similar vehicles of any
other person licensed and engaged in the business of operating public passenger vehicles in the village as
to be an imitation thereof and calculated to deceive the patrons of public passenger vehicles into believing
that such vehicles are in reality the public passenger vehicles of such other persons. (Ord. No. O-20-76, §
1, 3-8-76)
Sec. 11-449. Reserved. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76; Ord. 0-43-09, §1, 4/13/09)
Sec. 11-450. Reserved.
Sec. 11-451 Taximeters--Required.
Every taxicab operated in the village shall be equipped with an accurate and dependable
taximeter. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76)
Sec. 11-452. Same--To be placed so as to be visible to passengers; maintenance.
Taximeters shall be placed in the taxicab so as to be readily visible to passengers and shall be
maintained in a good and correct operating condition at all times. Every taximeter shall be tested for
accuracy at least semiannually by the police chief, or some member of the police department designated
by him, by checking its registration over a course of known length, and by checking its time registration.
Errors in distance or time registration shall be sealed. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-60
Sec. 11-453. Same--Unlawful to tamper with or change.
It is unlawful to tamper with or change any taximeter or the seal thereon. (Ord. No. 0-20-76, § 1,
3-8-76)
Sec. 11-454 and 11-455. Reserved.
Sec. 11-456. Same--Transfer.
No person controlling or operating any taxicab shall transfer the taximeter to any other taxicab,
unless a new inspection and certification of the taximeter is made. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76)
Sec. 11-457. Regular operation required.
Every taxicab shall be operated regularly in the village to the extent reasonably necessary to meet
the public demands for taxicab service. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76)
Sec. 11-458. Licensee of taxicab to have regular telephone service; required to have telephone
number listed in local directory.
Every licensee who is licensed to operate a taxicab in the village shall have and keep in service at
all times while his license is in effect regular telephone service within the village or by cellular telephone,
by means of which a person desiring to rent a taxicab may call the licensee by calling a village telephone
exchange number. Moreover, the licensee shall see that his telephone number, including cellular
telephone number, is listed in the local telephone directory which is published in and for the village by the
telephone company which furnishes local telephone service in the village. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-
76; Ord. No. 0-149-11 §1, 12/5/11)
Sec. 11-459. Taxicab rates.
Every person, firm or corporation which is licensed to operate a taxicab or taxicabs in the village
shall establish a schedule of its fares and shall cause a true and correct copy thereof to be filed with the
village. Any person, firm or corporation which shall hereafter apply for a public passenger vehicle license
shall file a schedule of its proposed fares with such application. In the event of any increase in such
schedule of fares, or any part thereof, such person, firm or corporation shall file a notice thereof with the
village at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the said increase. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-
8-76; Ord. No. O-119-79, §§ 1, 2, 11-13-79; Ord. No. O-18-80, § 1, 2-11-80; Ord. No. O-21-86, § 1, 3-
25-86)
Sec. 11-460. Uniform rates throughout the day.
Any rate schedule filed with the village shall provide that the fares charged shall be uniform
throughout all twenty-four (24) hours of each day. (Ord. No. O-58-79, § 1, 5-29-79; Ord. No. O-21-86, §
2, 3-25-86)
Sec. 11-461. Definition. "waiting time."
"Waiting time" shall include the time when the taxicab is not in motion, beginning with the
arrival at the place to which it has been called, or the time consumed while standing at the direction of the
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-61
passenger, but no charge shall be made for time lost on account of inefficiency of the taxicab, or its
operator, or time consumed by a premature response to a call. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76; Ord. No.
O-58-79, § 1, 5-29-79)
Sec. 11-462. Same--Posting of rates.
There shall be affixed on the inside of each taxicab in a conspicuous place and in such a manner
that it may be conveniently and easily read by any person riding therein, a card upon which shall be
printed in plain, legible type the rates of the fare of the taxicab. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76; Ord. No.
O-58-79, § 1, 5-29-79)
Sec. 11-463. Same--Receipt.
Any taxicab passenger paying a fare shall, upon request, be given a receipt indicating the amount
paid. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76; Ord. No. O-58-79, § 1, 5-29-79)
Sec. 11-464. Right of operator to demand fare in advance; refusal to convey passengers.
The operator or person in charge or control of any taxicab may demand, in advance, the payment
of the fare of the person desiring to be carried by such taxicab, and may refuse to convey any person who
shall not comply with the demand; but no driver or operator of a taxicab shall otherwise refuse or neglect
to convey any orderly person, upon request, anywhere in the village, unless previously engaged or unable
to do so. (Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76; Ord. No. O-58-79, § 1, 5-29-79)
Sec. 11-465. Roof light required.
Each taxicab shall be equipped with a roof-mounted taxicab light, and this light shall be lit at all
times while the taxicab is for hire. Each taxicab light shall have the word "TAXI" written on both sides of
the roof light visible for a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet to one of normal eyesight. (Ord. No. O-20-
76, § 1, 3-8-76; Ord. No. O-58-79, § 1, 5-29-79)
Sec. 11-466. Unattended vehicles.
It shall be unlawful to leave any taxicab unattended in an established taxicab loading area or
zone. A vehicle shall be considered unattended if its assigned driver is not in the taxicab or standing
immediately adjacent thereto, available for call. It shall further be unlawful for any taxicab driver parked
in an established taxicab loading zone or area to overtly solicit passengers for his vehicle. (Ord. No. O-
20-76, § 1, 3-8-76; Ord. No. O-58-79, § 1, 5-29-79)
Sec. 11-467. Livery cab regulations.
Livery cabs shall not use taxicab stands, nor pick up or solicit passengers for hire from the streets,
nor indiscriminately accept passengers, but shall be limited in scope of operation to carrying passengers
for hire on a contract basis at a price agreed upon prior to employment and by arrangement of the parties.
(Ord. No. O-20-76, § 1, 3-8-76; Ord. No. O-58-79, § 1, 5-29-79)
Sec. 11-468. Conduct of Taxicab Drivers.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-62
1. It shall be unlawful for any driver to conduct himself in a disrespectful, rude or
belligerent or contemptuous manner toward any person, or to use abusive or profane
language while so occupied or in charge of such vehicle.
2. It shall be unlawful for any driver to solicit by word, gesture or otherwise the patronage
of any person upon any public street or place in the village.
3. Drivers shall be obligated to render reasonable aid to any person who suffers injury or
illness while a passenger of a taxicab operated by the driver.
4. It shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any provision of this division and doing so
may result in sanctions including but not limited to those found in Section 11-5 of this
Code.
(Ord. No. 0-149-11 §1, 12/5/11)
Sec. 11-469--11-470. Reserved.
DIVISION 13. BUILDING CONTRACTORS
Sec. 11-471. Defined.
The term "building contractor" shall be defined as: general contractor, sub-contractor or anyone
engaging in the construction, repair or alteration of any building, structure, street, sidewalk or pavement
in the municipality for which the contracted valuation of work conducted is over $1,000.00, regardless of
whether or not a permit is required under the ordinances of the municipality. (Code 1961, § 15.1801;
Ord. No. 0-63-94, §2, 5-23-94; Ord. No. 0-16-08, §1, 2/4/08)
Sec. 11-472. Annual Registration.
It shall be unlawful to engage in business in the municipality as a building contractor, including
all contractors licensed or registered by an outside agency, without first having obtained an annual Village
registration. Exception: Contractors exempt from local registration per State Statute. (Code 1961, §
15.1801; Ord. No. 0-63-94, §2, 5-23-94; Ord. 0-134-16 12/5/16)
Sec. 11-473. Fees.
An annual registration fee, as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of
Ordinances, shall be assessed for the following building contractor's annual registration.
(1) General contractors
(2) All other contractors
Any building contractor registered as a general contractor shall not be required to secure an additional
registration for any self-performed carpentry, masonry, or concrete work. (Code 1961, § 15.1802; Ord.
No. O-48-83, § 1(30), 8-8-83; Ord. No. 0-63-94, §2, 5-23-94; Ord.0-134-16 12/5/16)
Sec. 11-474. Completion, Compliance and Damage Surety Bond.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-63
All building contractors shall, prior to receiving an annual registration, provide a surety bond in
the following amounts.
(1) General contractors: twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000)
(2) All other contractors: ten thousand dollars ($10,000)
The above surety bonds must be in a form acceptable to the Village and shall indemnify, keep and
save harmless the municipality and the party for whom the work was performed against any loss, cost,
damage, judgement or liability of any kind whatsoever which the municipality or the party for whom the
work was performed may suffer or be put to, or which may accrue against, be charged to or be recovered
from the municipality or any of its officials or from the party for whom the work was performed by
reason of any act or thing done or neglected to be done or by virtue of the authority given in such
registration, and further conditioned that the applicant shall well and faithfully observe all the provisions
of this ordinance and other ordinances and other regulations of the municipality relating to the activities
engaged in under or by virtue of the authority given in such registration. Such bond shall remain in full
force and effect for the duration of any permit and registration issued. The building contractor shall be
responsible for providing a continuation bond as needed to maintain the bond duration as provided for
above. Any expenses necessary for completion of work due to failure to comply with required codes or
completion per approved plans, shall necessitate the filing of a claim against said surety bond. Such
claims can be filed by the bond oblige or by the individual or party for which the work is performed.
Exceptions: Surety bonds shall not be required for the following construction, provided that the
homeowner is performing all work associated with the construction project.
(1) Single-family residential fence installation.
(2) Single-family residential shed installation.
(3) Single-family residential driveway.
(4) Single-family residential patios and private walks
(5) Single-family residential roof tear-off.
(6) Single-family residential deck installation.
(7) Single-family residential above-ground swimming pool.
(8) Single-family air conditioner installations.
(9) Single-family residential sewer repair or replacement.
(10) Single-family residential lawn sprinklers.
(11) Single-family residential electric service revision.
(Code 1961, § 15.1804; Ord. No. O-41-89, § 1, 4-24-89; Ord. No. 0-63-94, §2, 5-23-94; Ord. 0-134-16
12/5/16)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-64
Sec. 11-475. Duties of Registrant.
It shall be the duty of all building contractors to comply with all provisions of this Code and other
ordinances relating to or regulating the activities engaged in and, in addition thereto:
(1) To at least once each week remove or cause to be removed from the site of building
contractors' activities all trash, refuse and waste materials.
(2) To keep the site of activities in an orderly condition, free from standing water, unguarded
dangerous implements and health and safety hazards.
(3) To not obstruct traffic on streets or sidewalks or permit dirt or waste materials to fall or to
be carried onto such public ways. (Code 1961, § 15.1805; Ord. No. 0-63-94, §2, 5-23-94)
(4) To begin construction work timely, complete work in a timely, workmanlike manner in
accordance with the contract between the building contractor and client.
Sec. 11-476. Inspection; enforcement.
The provisions of this division are declared to be of a regulatory nature, and it shall at all times be
the duty of the inspection services division, the police department, the health department, and the fire
department regularly to inspect the site of the contractors' activities to see that the activities are being
conducted and operated in accordance with the requirements of all laws and ordinances applicable
thereto. Failure to comply with the above, all ordinances including the provisions of the surety bond, as
determined by the director of community services, shall give the municipality the right to suspend, or
revoke the contractor's certificate of registration in accordance with Section 11-15 of this Chapter, deny a
building contractor a re-registration, deny a building contractor registration, revoke or deny a building
contractor a building permit.
(Code 1961, § 15.1806; Ord. No. 0-63-94, §2, 5-23-94 Ord. 0-134-16 12/5/16)
Sec. 11-477--11-489. Reserved.
DIVISION 14. UNDERTAKERS
Sec. 11-490. License required.
It shall be unlawful to operate or carry on the business of an undertaker without having obtained a
license therefore, pursuant to Section 11-2 of this Chapter.
Sec. 11-491. Notice to police.
It shall be the duty of every undertaker to notify the police whenever a body is brought to him or
turned over to him for his services. (Code 1961, § 15.1702)
Sec. 11-492. Exhibitions prohibited.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-65
It shall be unlawful for any undertaker to permit his establishment to be used for the exhibition to
the public of the body of any deceased person. This shall not be construed to prevent the display of a body
to relatives and friends. (Code 1961, § 15.1703)
Sec. 11-493. Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits by Manager.
Any license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with
Section 11-15 of this Chapter.
Sec. 11-494--11-500. Reserved.
DIVISION 15. KENNELS, PET SHOPS, SHELTERS, POUNDS AND ANIMAL HOSPITALS
Sec. 11-501. License required.
It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain any kennel, pet shop, shelter, pound or animal hospital
within the village without first obtaining a license therefor. (Code 1961, § 16.601)
Sec. 11-502. Applications.
All applications for licenses to operate kennels, pet shops, shelters, pounds or animal hospitals
shall be accompanied by written approval of the health department showing compliance with local and
state rules and regulations governing location of and sanitation at such establishments. (Ord. No. O-18-
75, § 5, 2-10-75)
Sec. 11-503. Fees.
The annual fee for a license to operate a kennel, pet shop, shelter, pound or animal hospital shall
be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances. (Code 1961, § 16.603;
Ord. No. O-48-83, § 1(31), 8-8-83)
Sec. 11-504. Sanitation requirements.
It shall be unlawful to keep, use or maintain within the village any kennel, pet shop, shelter,
pound or animal hospital that is unsanitary, foul, or offensive or in any way detrimental to the public
health or safety or that violates state or local sanitation requirements. (Code 1961, § 16.604)
Sec. 11-505. Inspection.
It shall be the duty of the health department to make or cause to be made such inspections as may
be necessary to insure compliance with section 11-504 above. Subject to compliance with legal
requirements, the health department shall have the power to make or cause to be made entry into any
building or premises in which is contained a kennel, pet shop, shelter, pound or animal hospital for the
purpose of making such inspections. (Code 1961, § 16.605)
Sec. 11-506. Suspension and revocation by the Manager.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-66
The Manager may, in addition to other penalties provided herein, suspend, revoke or refuse to
renew any kennel, pet shop, shelter, pound or animal hospital license upon good cause, provided,
however, such suspension, revocation or refusal shall be only after a hearing held in accordance with
Section 11-15 . (Code 1961, § 16.606)
Sec. 11-507. Reserved.
DIVISION 16. DEALERS IN GOLD AND SILVER
Sec. 11-508. Definitions.
The term "itinerant dealer in gold and silver" when used in this chapter shall mean any person
engaged in the business of buying or selling tangible objects of gold and silver within the village who has
not established a permanent place of business within the village from which such operation has been
carried on for a period of at least ninety (90) days prior to the first sale or purchase of such objects.
The term "permanent dealer in gold and silver" when used in this chapter shall mean any person
engaged in the business of buying or selling tangible objects of gold and silver within the village who has
established a permanent place of business within the village and who presents to the Manager at the time
of application title showing legal or beneficial ownership to the premises or a bona fide lease for a period
of not less than one year for permanent premises within the village. (Ord. No. O-80-81, § 2, 9-14-81)
Sec. 11-509. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of itinerant or permanent dealer in gold and silver within
the village without first having obtained a license therefor. If the operation of the gold and silver business,
either as a stand alone business or in conjunction with the operation of a retail store (e.g. jewelry store, or
other similar such store) results in 20% or more of their gross business receipts being derived from the
purchase of gold or silver, a Special Use is required. The process and requirements are further detailed in
Appendix ‘A’. (Ord. No. O-80-81, §2, 9-14-81; Ord. No. 0-145-11, §1, 11/21/11)
Sec. 11-510. Application.
An application as itinerant or permanent dealer in gold and silver shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. (Ord. No. O-80-81, § 2,
9-14-81)
Sec. 11-511. Investigation.
The police chief or any other village official designated by the Manager shall make an
investigation to determine whether the applicant is a person of good character and reputation. No such
license shall be issued to any applicant who is not found to be a person of good character and reputation
and no license shall be issued to any applicant who has been convicted of receiving stolen goods,
burglary, robbery or any other felony in the federal or state courts. In the event that the Manager shall not
issue a license, an applicant may appeal to the corporate authorities in the manner provided by section 11-
16 of this Code.
(Ord. No. O-80-81, § 2, 9-14-81)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-67
Sec. 11-512. Fees.
A fee, as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances, shall be
paid for each day's proposed operation within the village by an itinerant dealer in gold and silver.
A fee, as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances, shall be
paid by a permanent dealer in gold and silver who is issued a license. (Ord. No. O-80-81, § 2, 9-14-81;
Ord. No. O-48-83, § 1(32), 8-8-83)
Sec. 11-513. Records.
Every itinerant dealer in gold and silver doing business in the village shall keep a record of every
article received, purchased, sold or exchanged by him, setting forth the following: The date of the
transaction, name and address of the purchaser or seller, and a brief description of the article sold,
purchased, received or exchanged, including identification number thereon, if any. Such record and the
articles themselves shall, at all reasonable times, be open to the inspection of any police officer. (0-145-
11, §1, 11/21/11).
Such records shall include the following information:
1. A listing of the item received, including the exact time and date when the item was received
or purchased.
2. Digital picture or photographs of all of the received items sold, purchased or exchanged.
3. A copy of the government issued photo identification of all customers transacting an item of
gold and silver.
4. Such records shall be transmitted (in a format approved by the Palatine Police Department) to
the Palatine Police Department at the conclusion of each business day. Failure to deliver
such record shall automatically revoke the license for the following day. (Ord. #0-73-12, §1,
5/14/12, Ord. No. 0-13-13, §1, 2/18/13)
Such record and the articles themselves shall, at all reasonable times, be open to the inspection of
any police officer. (Ord. #0-73-12, §1, 5/14/12)
Every permanent dealer in gold and silver doing business in the village shall keep a record of
every article received, except articles received, from an established wholesaler, antique dealer, or other
licensed dealer with whom the permanent dealer does business on a regular and continuing basis, in the
ordinary course of business. Such record shall be maintained, as described below. The date of the
transaction, name and address of the purchaser or seller, and a brief description of the article sold,
purchased, received or exchanged, including identification number thereon, if any. Such record and the
articles themselves shall be open to the inspection of any police officer at all reasonable times during
normal business hours. Said record shall he maintained by the dealer for a minimum of three (3) years.
Refusal to permit police inspection of such record shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the
license. (Ord. No. O-80-81, § 2, 9-14-81, Ord. No. 0-13-13, §1, 2/18/13)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-68
Such records shall include the following information:
1. A listing of the item received, including the exact time and date when the item was received
or purchased.
2. Digital picture or photographs of all of the received items sold, purchased or exchanged.
3. A copy of the government issued photo identification of all customers transacting an item of
gold and silver.
4. Such records shall be transmitted (in a format approved by the Palatine Police Department) to
the Palatine Police Department at the conclusion of each business day. Failure to deliver
such record shall automatically revoke the license for the following day.
(Ord. No. 0-145-11, §1, 11/21/11; Ord. #0-73-12, §1, 5/14/12, Ord. No. 0-13-13, §1, 2/18/13)
Sec. 11-514. Electronic reporting of transactions.
The Village may enter into a contract for service and maintain its contract for service with Leads
Online, or a similar entity as designated by the chief of police, in order to enhance its investigative
services to protect gold and silver dealers and members of the general public. In the event of a change to
its electronic reporting system, the village will notify all impacted licensees of the change within a
reasonable time prior to such change.
Every gold and silver dealer shall operate and maintain a computer system with internet access
and photographic or video capability sufficient for the electronic reporting requirements described in this
article. Any failure or malfunction of such equipment on the part of the licensee shall not exempt the
licensee from the recording/reporting requirements outlined in Sec. 11-513 of this article. The licensee
shall immediately notify the police department of any such failure or malfunction, and shall have such
resolved as soon as practicable. Failure by the licensee to resolve any failure or malfunction of equipment
in a reasonable amount of time will lead to license revocation proceedings under Section 11-516 of this
article. (Ord. #0-73-12, §2, 5/14/12)
Sec. 11-515. Stolen goods.
It shall be the duty of every person licensed under the provisions of this division to report to the
police any article received or offered to him if he shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen or
lost. (Ord. No. O-80-81, § 2, 9-14-81)
Sec. 11-516. Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits by Manager .
Any license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with
Section 11-15 of this Chapter.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-69
ARTICLE VI. SOLICITORS
Sec. 11-517. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless their
context clearly requires otherwise:
Business shall mean and include those enterprises engaged in industry, warehousing, insurance,
commercial or retail activity in order to produce a profit.
Charitable organizations are those organizations defined in the 225 ILCS 460/1 (a) and (f); to
wit: (a) Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary person or one purporting to be such
which solicits and collects funds for charitable purposes and includes each local, county, or area division
with this State of such charitable organization, provided such local, county or area division has authority
and discretion to disburse funds or property otherwise than by transfer to any parent organization. And (f)
Charitable Purpose. Any charitable, benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary purpose.
Peddler I is defined as anyone seeking to sell or offer for sale, barter, or exchange, any goods,
wares or merchandise, traveling from place to place along or upon streets of the Village, who shall sell
and deliver from any vehicle: wagons, push carts, hand carts, or motor vehicles.
Peddler II is anyone who shall go about from place to place selling or delivering goods, wares
and merchandise, whether selling or delivering from packs, baskets or similar containers.
Registered solicitor shall mean and include any person who obtained a valid certificate of
registration as hereinafter provided, and which certificate is in the possession of the solicitor and clearly
displayed while engaged in soliciting.
Residence shall mean and include every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by
one (1) or more persons, contained within any type building or structure.
Soliciting shall mean and include any one (1) or more of the following activities:
(1) Seeking to obtain order for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs,
services, of any kind, character or description whatever for any kind of consideration
whatever; or
(2) Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any
type, kind or character; or
(3) Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every
other type or kind of publication.
(4) Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for
the support or benefit of any charitable or non-profit association, organization or project.
(5) Peddling either as a Peddler I or as a Peddler II.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-70
Sec. 11-518. Certificate of registration required.
Every person and organization desiring to engage in soliciting from persons in residences within
the village is hereby required to make written application for a certificate of registration as hereinafter
provided.
Sec. 11-519. Application for certificate of registration; contents, filing, and identification; persons to
whom certificate will not issue.
Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a form provided by the Chief of
Police of this village and filed with such Chief of Police upon completion. The applicant shall truthfully
state in full the information requested on the application to wit:
(1) Name, address or present place of residence and home telephone number, social security
number and driver's license number and issuing State if applicant possesses one.
(2) Physical description of the applicant, including date of birth and sex.
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm or corporation or association, if
any, whom the applicant is employed by or represents.
(4) Name of the person in charge of soliciting for the firm or corporation or association.
(5) Nature of the goods or service solicited for.
(6) Whether or not a deposit is to be collected and the number of persons to be involved in
the solicitation effort.
(7) The dates of soliciting within the village and the total number of days to be soliciting.
(8) If the person has ever solicited before within the village, the dates and the firm or
organization associated with during prior solicitations.
(9) If the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony and the details involved in the
incident, arrest and conviction.
(10) Illinois State sales tax number when the soliciting is being done for profit.
(11) The license plate number and the state of issuance when a vehicle will be involved in the
soliciting.
(12) The name, address and telephone number of where any commodities or articles sold are
to be obtained from when the soliciting involves direct sales.
All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therein shall be
certified as the truth by the applicant signing their individual application.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-71
All individual applications must be accompanied by two head and shoulder color photographs of
the applicant, photographs to be no larger than one and a half inches by one and a half inches.
The Chief of Police shall cause an accurate record to be kept of every application received and
acted upon together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all certificates of
registration issued under the provisions of this article and the denial of applications. Applications for
certificates shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every certificate issued and any renewal
thereof shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued.
No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has a criminal record of crimes
against persons, gang activity or has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the
State of Illinois or any other state or federal law of the United States, within ten (10) years of the date of
the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any provision of this article, or
the ordinance of any other Illinois municipality regulating soliciting, nor to any person whose certificate
of registration issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided, nor to any person who
makes any untruthful statements upon the application for a certificate of registration.
Sec. 11-520. Charitable Organizations.
Charitable organizations must furnish the Chief of Police the following information:
(1) Name and address of the organization.
(2) Name, address and telephone numbers of the person or persons having the primary
responsibility for supervision of the solicitation with the village.
(3) The name, date of birth and sex of all individuals who will be soliciting.
(4) Evidence of full compliance with the provisions of "An Act to regulate solicitation and
collection of funds for charitable purposes, providing for violations thereof, and making
appropriation therefor," approved July 26, 1963, as amended (225 ILCS 460/1 et seq.)
(5) Two head and shoulder color photographs of each solicitor, one and a half inches by one
and a half inches, if no identifiable uniform is worn by the organization members.
Sec. 11-521. Issuance.
The Chief of Police, after consideration of the completed application and all information obtained
relative thereto, shall deny the application if the applicant does not possess the qualifications for such
certificates as herein required. When the applicant is found to be fully qualified, the certificate of
registration shall be issued. Provided the application for the certificate of registration is complete and all
information required herein is provided on the application, the certificate of registration will generally be
issued within two to five working days of receipt of the application by the Chief of Police.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-72
Sec. 11-522. Youth and School Groups from within theVillage of Palatine
Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, school bands, school sports teams, recognized school clubs and
organizations, and youth sports teams from within the corporate limits of the Village of Palatine shall not
be required to wear badges or name tags, nor pay required fees; however the organization shall be
required to complete the solicitor's application process.
Sec. 11-523. Policy.
The regulations set forth in this and succeeding sections are designed to provide reasonable
protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the village, to guard them from unwarranted
invasions of privacy and protect them in the peaceful enjoyment of their homes, while allowing all
persons reasonable exercise of free speech and political expression as guaranteed by the First Amendment
of the United States Constitution.
Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by the regulations
pertaining to soliciting contained in this article, shall comply with the following directions, to wit:
Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to solicitors, or the refusal of
invitation to solicitors, to any residence or business, shall be given in the manner following:
(1) One of four cards, approximately three inches by four inches in size, shall be exhibited
upon or near the main entrance door to the residence or business, indicating the
determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words, as follows:
(a) ONLY SOLICITORS REGISTERED IN PALATINE INVITED
(b) NO SOLICITORS INVITED
(c) ONLY CHARITABLE SOLICITORS INVITED
(d) SOLICITATION BY PRIOR APPOINTMENT ONLY (For display by
businesses only)
(2) For purposes of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the Village to persons
requesting them.
(3) When such card is displayed, it shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of the
occupant's decision about inviting or not inviting solicitors to approach their door.
Sec. 11-524. Duty of solicitors.
It shall be the duty of every non-charitable solicitor engaging in solicitation from persons in
residences within the village to wear a nametag or other badge provided by the village on his or her
person clearly identifying the name of the person soliciting and nametag or badge number assigned to that
individual and the date of expiration. Tags or badges pursuant to this section shall be issued by the
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-73
Manager in such form as the Manager may determine. Fees for nametags or badges shall be as provided
in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
Charitable solicitors, in lieu of nametag or badges, may choose to wear their appropriate uniform,
e.g. Salvation Army, etc.
It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises in the Village to immediately and
peacefully abide by any notice so posted by the occupant in accordance with section 11-522 if indicated
and depart the premises. Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence or business, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the
occupant.
Sec. 11-525. Prohibited soliciting.
(1) It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go
upon any premises and ring the door bell upon or near any door, or create any sound in
any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for
the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as
herein defined, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the
provisions of section 11-522.
(2) It shall be unlawful for anyone to solicit from residences within the Village of Palatine
without an approved certificate of registration.
(3) It shall be unlawful for anyone to solicit from residences within the Village of Palatine
without displaying their issued nametag or badge, or a recognizable uniform worn,
clearly visible to the occupant of the residence whereupon the solicitation is to take place.
(4) It shall be unlawful for anyone soliciting from residences to park a vehicle in excess of 5
tons, 10,000 pounds upon any Village street for purposes of conducting business.
(5) It shall be unlawful for anyone to solicit from any business which displays a notice
described in section 11-522, or to violate a clearly posted notice to solicitors that
solicitation is acceptable only by prior appointment.
Sec. 11-526. Time limit for soliciting.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person whether
registered under this article or not to go upon any residential premises and ring the door bell upon or near
any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any
manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an
audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting prior to 9:00 a.m. of any weekday or
Saturday, or after 8:00 p.m. of any weekday or 6:00 p.m. on Saturday during Central Standard Time, or
prior to 9:00 a.m. of any weekday or Saturday or after 9:00 p.m. any weekday or 6:00 p.m. on Saturday
during Daylight Savings Time, or at any time on a Sunday or on a State of Illinois or national holiday.
For Peddler I and Peddler II, in addition to the foregoing time limitations, no soliciting shall occur after
6:00 p.m. on any week day.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-74
Sec. 11-527. Fee; exemptions.
The registration fee for solicitors shall be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the
Palatine Code of Ordinances, plus a per day fee, as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the
Palatine Code of Ordinances, for each day solicitation activities are conducted in the village; provided,
however, that no fee shall be charged for solicitation by charitable or not-for-profit organizations other
than the fee for the cost of the name tag or badge, and further provided that no fee beyond the registration
fee shall be charged to solicitors for holders of a franchise granted by the village for the operation of a
cable communications system.
Sec. 11-528. Enforcement and appeal.
The Palatine Police Department shall be responsible for enforcing this ordinance and may take
any of the following actions upon receiving a complaint of a violation of this ordinance by a resident:
1. The name tag or badge of the individual solicitor may be confiscated and the individual
solicitor's permit to solicit within the Village may be revoked for up to one calendar year.
2. An individual's permit to solicit may be revoked without the confiscation of the
individual's name tag or badge, upon notification of revocation, the name tag or badge
shall be returned to the police department.
3. The individual solicitor may be arrested and prosecuted.
4. The organization for which the individual solicitor is a part of may have their certificate
of registration revoked.
Upon the confiscation of an individual solicitor's name tag or badge, the circumstances
surrounding the complaint shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police or his designated representative, and
upon completion of the investigation, the name tag or badge along with the permit to solicit to be either
revoked or reinstated. If the individual solicitor's permit is revoked, the umbrella organization, if the
solicitor is part of one, will be notified of the permit revocation.
The individual whose name tag or badge is confiscated and whose permit to solicit is revoked
shall have the right to appeal the revocation to the Manager pursuant to Section 11-15 (e) within seven
working days of the revocation. (Ord. No. 0-67-93 6-14-93)
Editor's note--Ord. No. O-84-76, §§ 1--3, repealed former § 11-517, relative to solicitations by
charitable and nonprofit organizations, derived from Ord. No. O-3-75, § 1, adopted Jan. 13, 1975; redesignated
former § 11-518 as § 11-517; repealed former § 11-519, pertaining to application for a
certificate of registration, derived from Ord. No. O-3-75, § 1, adopted Jan. 13, 1975; added a new § 11-
518; re-designated former § 11-521 as § 11-520, and added a new § 11-521.
Sec. 11-529 to 11-535 Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-75
ARTICLE VII. RAFFLES.
Sec. 11-536. License Required.
. It shall be unlawful to conduct a raffle as defined by 230 ILCS 15/2 et. seq. (1994) of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes in the Village of Palatine without having obtained a license therefor in
accordance with Sections 11-2, 11-539 , and 11-38 through 11-540 of this Chapter.
Sec. 11-537. Definitions.
The definitions contained in 230 ILCS 15/1 are incorporated by reference as if set forth herein.
Sec. 11-538. Fee.
A ten ($10) dollar fee shall be charged for licenses hereunder, or such fee may be waived.
Sec. 11-539. Requirements.
Only non-profit organizations as defined by 235 ILCS 15/2 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes may
apply for a license. There shall be no limit on aggregate retail value of prizes, number of tickets, price of
tickets or time period of the raffle.
The following are ineligible for any license under this Article.
1. Any person who has been convicted of a felon;
2. Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter;
3. Any person who is not of good moral character;
4. Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in 1, 2 or 3 has a proprietary, equitable
or credit interest, or in which such a person is active or employed;
5. Any organization in which a person defined in 1, 2 or 3 is an officer, director or
employee, whether compensated or not;
6. Any organization in which a person defined in 1, 2 or 3 is to participate in the
management or operation of a raffle as defined in this Article.
Sec. 11-540. Application.
(1) Applications for raffle licenses shall be on forms provided by the Village.
(2) The license and application for license must specify the area or areas within the Village
in which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period during which raffle chances
will be sold or issued, the date, time, location and manner of determining the winning
chances;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-76
(3) A copy of the applicants articles of incorporation and/or charter shall be attached to the
license application;
(4) The application must contain a sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of
the prospective license organization, signed by the presiding officer and the secretary of
that organization. No bond shall be required for such application and license.
Sec. 11-541. Conduct of raffles.
The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions.
1. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes
of the organization permitted to conduct the game.
2. No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in
the management or operation of the raffle.
3. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or
operation of the raffle.
4. A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a
raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under this Section.
5. Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license and
winning chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the license.
6. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the conducting of
raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where
winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his parent or guardian.
Sec. 11-542. Records.
Records shall be kept pursuant to the provisions 235 ILCS 15/6 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
(Ord. No. 0-70-95 §1 7-10-95)
Sec. 11-543. Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits by Manager.
Any license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with
Section 11-15 of this Chapter.
Secs. 11-544 - 11-600. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-77
ARTICLE VIII. COMMERCIAL VEHICLE RELOCATORS LICENSING LAW
Sec. 11-601. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless
their context clearly requires otherwise:
Commercial vehicle relocator or relocator: Any person or entity engaged in the business of
removing trespassing vehicles from private property by means of towing or otherwise, and thereafter
relocating and storing such vehicles.
Dispatcher: Any person who, as an employee or agent of a commercial vehicle relocator,
dispatches vehicles to or from which operators perform removal activities.
Operator: Any person who, as an employee of a commercial vehicle relocator, removes
trespassing vehicles from private property by means of towing or otherwise. This term includes the driver
of any vehicle used in removing a trespassing vehicle from private property as well as any person other
than the driver who assists in the removal of a trespassing vehicle from private property.
Relocator's license: A license issued to a commercial vehicle relocator in accordance with this
chapter. (Ord. No. O-35-92, § 1, 3-23-92)
Sec. 11-602. Declaration of village policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village of Palatine to regulate the commercial
removal of trespassing vehicles from private property and the subsequent relocation and storage of such
vehicles in such manner as to fairly distribute rights and responsibilities among vehicle owners, private
property owners and commercial vehicle relocators. For this purpose, the village's regulations herein are
for the purpose of complementing and supplementing the regulatory process of the Illinois Commerce
Commission pursuant to 625ILCS5/18a-100 et seq., and any amendments thereto, and its enforcement
efforts thereunder. The laws and regulations adopted hereunder are adopted pursuant to the home rule
authority of the Village of Palatine as well as the express authority conferred by the state legislature on
local units of government pursuant to 625ILCS5/18a-102. (Ord. No. O-35-92, § 1, 3-23-92)
Sec. 11-603. Towing performed pursuant to police order.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to regulate or otherwise affect towing
performed by any relocator pursuant to the order of a law enforcement official or agency in accordance
with 625ILCS5/4-201 through 5/4-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, or pursuant to section 18-90 of the
Palatine Code of Ordinances. (Ord. No. O-35-92, § 1, 3-23-92)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-78
Sec. 11-604. Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to the relocation of:
(1) Vehicles registered for a gross weight in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds, or if the
vehicle is not registered, with a gross weight in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds
including vehicle weight and maximum load; or
(2) Motorcycles.
Such relocation shall be governed by the provisions of 625ILCS5/4-203 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(Ord. No. O-35-92, § 1, 3-23-92)
Sec. 11-605. General powers and duties of the Manager.
The Manager or his designee shall:
(1) Regulate commercial vehicle relocators and their employees or agents in accordance with
this article and to that end may establish reasonable requirements with respect to proper
service, and practices relating thereto;
(2) Require the maintenance of uniform systems of accounts, records and the preservation
thereof;
(3) Require that all drivers and other personnel used in relocation be employees of a licensed
relocator;
(4) Issue relocator's licenses in accordance with the requirements of this article;
(5) Upon verified compliant in writing by any person, organization or body politic, or upon
its own initiative, may investigate whether any commercial vehicle relocator, operator,
dispatcher or person otherwise required to comply with any provision of this article or
any rule promulgated hereunder has failed to comply with any such provision or rule.
(Ord. No. O-35-92, § 1, 3-23-92)
Sec. 11-606. Unlawful practices.
It shall be unlawful for any commercial vehicle relocator to:
(1) Relocate vehicles from authorized spaces. No vehicle shall be relocated if it is parked in a
space on private property where it is authorized to be parked.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-79
(2) Relocate vehicles from private property without authorization from property owner. No
vehicle shall be relocated from private property without express, written authorization
from the property owner, lessee or agent. The authorization must either direct the
relocator to remove the specific vehicle in question or authorize the relocator to remove
all unauthorized vehicles from the property.
(3) Relocate vehicles not in accordance with proper posting. No vehicle shall be relocated
from a lot which does not, at the time of the tow and for at least twenty-four (24) hours
prior thereto, have signs posted in compliance with this article. Furthermore, no vehicle
shall be relocated to a storage lot or facility that is not identified on signs posted in
compliance with this article at the location from which the vehicle is relocated. No
vehicle shall be relocated and/or stored even temporarily at any other location than the
location advertised on the relocator's sign. Once a vehicle is picked up from private
property it must be towed immediately to the storage lot or facility that is identified on
the sign posted on the private property. No vehicle shall be subsequently transported to
any other lot or facility.
(4) Relocate vehicles where owner or driver is present. No vehicle shall be relocated where
the owner or operator of such vehicle is present or arrives at such location at any time
prior to the completion of the removal of the vehicle from private property, and provided
such owner and operator is willing and able to remove the vehicle immediately, and
provided that the owner or operator does immediately remove the vehicle from the
private property.
(5) Notification of police department. Transact any part of its business at any location until
after the relocator has given notice of the location of the police department.
(6) Post signs at locations where the relocator is not authorized to operate or tow beyond a
maximum distance. No relocator shall remove any vehicle otherwise in accordance with
this article more than ten (10) air miles from its location when towed nor shall it post a
sign at a location more than ten (10) air miles from the storage lot to which the relocator
can relocate vehicles.
(7) Relocate vehicles unless the relocation lot is open during certain prescribed hours. No
vehicle shall be relocated to a lot which is not open to the vehicle owner to permit the
vehicle owner to retrieve its car for a period of a minimum of two (2) hours after the
vehicle is towed. Furthermore, the relocator must be open the day following the day of
the tow a minimum of four (4) consecutive hours during the regular business hours
between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
(8) Accept certain types of compensation:
a. Except as provided in subsection b. below, no relocator shall demand, collect or
receive anything of value or compensation for or in relation to its relocation
business;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-80
1. From the property owner, lessee or their agents or from any person other
than the owner or owner's agent of the relocated vehicle, except
according to terms in the contract entered into between the property
owner or lessee and the relocator;
2. From the vehicle owner, lessee or their agents;
i. Greater than the amount posted on the signs, posted on the
private property from which the vehicle was located;
ii. Greater than or other than the rates prescribed by the
Commission; or
iii. Where the relocation was not performed in compliance with the
law in this Article.
b. Storage fees prescribed by the Illinois Commerce Commission need not be
posted on signs at locations from which vehicles are towed, but must be posted at
locations at which vehicles may be reclaimed.
c. A vehicle relocator must release the vehicle provided payment is either in cash or
through a valid major credit card, including, but not limited to, VISA, American
Express, Discovery or MasterCard. That the relocator cannot obtain a verification
of the credit card's validity shall not be grounds for refusing to accept a major
credit card in lieu of cash.
(9) Prerequisites to operation within the village. No relocator shall:
a. Operate within the village without a valid, current relocator's license as approved
by the village as authorized in this article.
b. Employ as an operator or otherwise so use the services of any person who has not
been duly licensed by the Illinois Commerce Commission and the Secretary of
State of Illinois pursuant to the applicable laws, rules and regulations.
c. Operate a business other than in conformance with the laws of the Illinois
Commerce Commission and the rules and regulations adopted thereunder.
d. Operate any tow truck vehicle which does not carry with it a copy of chapter 95
1/2, section 18A, The Illinois Commercial Relocation of Trespassing Vehicles
Law, a copy of the Village of Palatine Commercial Vehicle Licensing Law and
sufficient copies of the Illinois Commerce Commission complaint form all of
which shall be made available to any complainant at their request in the event of
a controversy over vehicle relocation.
e. Operate any vehicle which has not been inspected and passed by the Illinois
Department of Transportation.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-81
(10) Notice to police department. A relocator must:
a. Notify the village police department within one (1) hour of such removal.
Notification shall include a complete description of the vehicle, including the
year, make, model and state license plate number, the registration numbers, the
locations from which and to which the vehicle was removed, the time of removal
and any other information required by state or local regulations, statute or
ordinance.
b. Make a telephone number available to the police department at which the
relocator or an employer of the relocator may be contacted at any time during the
hours in which the relocator is engaged in the towing of vehicles (or two (2)
hours after the last tow) or advertised as engaged in the towing of vehicles for the
purpose of effectuating the release of a towed vehicle or to fail to have an
employee available at any time on the premises owned or controlled by the
relocator for the purposes of arranging for the immediate release of the vehicle.
(Ord. No. O-35-92, § 1, 3-23-92)
Sec. 11-607. Posting of signs; sign specifications.
(a) Generally. It shall be unlawful for an owner or other person in lawful possession or control of
private property to remove or employ a commercial relocator to remove an unauthorized vehicle from
such property unless written notice is provided to the effect that such vehicles will be removed, including
the name, address and telephone number of the appropriate commercial vehicle relocator, if any. Such
notice shall consist of a sign posted in a conspicuous place in the affected area of a size at least twentyfour
(24) inches in height by thirty-six (36) inches in width. Such sign shall be at least four (4) feet from
the ground but less than eight (8) feet from the ground and shall be illuminated as provided below. Such
sign shall state the amount of the towing charges to which the person parking may be subject. Such signs
must be posted at least twenty-four (24) hours before any vehicle is relocated from the lot.
(b) Application to residential property. No express notice shall be required under this section
upon residential property which, paying due regard to the circumstances in the surrounding area, is clearly
reserved or intended exclusively for the use or occupation of residents or their vehicles.
(c) Sign specifications:
(1) Those portions of the sign warning that unauthorized vehicles will be relocated must be
in characters at least three (3) inches in height, in colors contrasting with the background
of the sign. Other portions of the sign must be in characters at least one (1) inch in height,
in colors likewise contrasting with the background of the sign.
(2) Each sign must contain the following information:
a. A general statement indicating who is authorized to park on the lot. The
statement may refer to classes of persons, as well as individuals;
b. A warning that unauthorized vehicles will be relocated;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-82
c. The full legal name of the relocator as it appears on the relocator's license, the
address and telephone number of the relocator, and the address and telephone
number of the location to which the vehicle will be relocated and at which it can
be reclaimed, if different from the address of the relocator;
d. The maximum fee which the relocator will charge the owner or owner's agent of
the vehicle as a condition of reclaiming the vehicle and any restrictions on the
form of payment which will be accepted by the relocator; provided, that no sign
shall indicate a restriction on the form of acceptable payment that is contrary to
section 11-606(8)c.; and
e. The hours during which the owner or owner's agent can reclaim the vehicle and
when the relocator is closed to the public due to observation of holidays or
otherwise. To the extent that a sign does not show limitation on hours or days
when the vehicle can be reclaimed, the sign shall constitute a representation that
the vehicle can be reclaimed at any time or on any day; provided, that no sign
shall include hours of doing business contrary to the restrictions contained in
section 11-606(7).
(3) Such signs must be located within fifty (50) feet of any space from which vehicles may
be relocated.
(4) Such signs must be visible and readable from all entrances and exits, both during the day
and at night, free of any natural or man-made interference.
(5) No more than one (1) location to which the vehicle may be relocated and at which the
vehicle can be reclaimed shall be identified on any sign or posted at any lot from which
vehicles may be relocated.
(d) Lighting standard. All such signs shall be illuminated from dusk to dawn by a lighting source
used solely to illuminate the sign. Such lighting shall be directed to the sign face, shall be uniformly
distributed over the sign face and shall provide an illumination level on the sign face of at least twenty
(20) foot candles. (A standard 200-watt incandescent spotlight positioned two (2) feet in front of the sign
provides approximately forty (40) foot candles.) These lighting requirements shall not apply to parking
lots that principally serve dwellings. (Ord. No. O-35-92, § 1, 3-23-92)
Sec. 11-608. Unlawful practice.
It shall be unlawful for any relocator:
(1) To act as a relocator without a valid, current relocator's license issued by the Village of
Palatine.
(2) To violate any other provision of this chapter or village commission regulations or orders
adopted under this chapter or pursuant to chapter 95 1/2, article 18(a).
(Ord. No. O-35-92, § 1, 3-23-92)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-83
Sec. 11-609. License Required.
(a) Applications, original determinations. Each application for a license to operate as a
commercial vehicle relocator shall be made in writing to the Manager, shall be verified under oath, shall
be in such form and contain such information as the Manager may require. It shall be accompanied by the
required application fee and proof of security. In addition to filling out the application required by the
Manager and paying the filing fee as provided for in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the Palatine Code of
Ordinances, a certified copy of the license issued by the Illinois Commerce Commission to such applicant
to operate as a relocator shall be sufficient evidence to qualify a relocator for a village commercial vehicle
relocator's license. Nothing herein, however, shall interfere with the Manager's right to impose reasonable
conditions on the issuance of such license. Upon payment of the prescribed fee, the Manager shall issue
duplicate licenses, one (1) for each truck operating within the village.
(b) Transfer. A relocator's license is not transferable.
(c) Expiration renewal:
(1) All relocator's licenses shall expire on the same date that the license issued by the Illinois
Commerce Commission expires. Consistent with the rules and regulations of the Illinois
Commerce Commission, the village may temporarily extend the duration of the license
for the pendency of a renewal application until formally approved or denied by the
Illinois Commerce Commission upon filing, no early than ninety (90) days nor later
forty-five (45) days prior to such expiration, of written application for renewal, verified
under oath, in such form and containing such information as the Manager requires, and
accompanied by the required application fee and proof of security. The Manager, upon
receipt of a certified copy of the Illinois Commerce Commission's renewal license, shall
renew the license.
(2) The Manager may at any time during the term of the license make inquiry into the
management, conduct of business or otherwise determine that the provisions of this
Chapter are not being observed. (Ord. No. O-35-92, § 1, 3-23-92)
Sec. 11-610. Suspension of license.
The Manager shall suspend or revoke the permit of a relocator if it finds that:
(1) The relocator made a false statement on the application for a relocator's permit;
(2) The relocator's license issued by the Illinois Commerce Commission has been suspended
or revoked; or
(3) After a hearing, it is established the relocator has violated one (1) or more of the unlawful
practices contained in section 11-606 of this article and that revocation or suspension are
appropriate penalty for the misconduct.
(Ord. No. O-35-92, § 1, 3-23-92)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-84
Sec. 11-611. Hearing on revocation/suspension/penalties.
(a) Suspension and revocation. A vehicle relocator's license may be suspended by the Manager
and subsequently revoked by the Corporate authorities for violation of this article, the state law or the
rules and regulations adopted thereunder or for any of the grounds set forth in Section 11-15(a), or for any
other violations of the Palatine Code of Ordinances. The procedures for suspension or revocation shall be
pursuant tot Section 11-15 (b) and (c).
(b) Cessation of operations required. If a fine or a suspension is imposed as a penalty, no activity
otherwise permitted under the license shall be conducted by the relocator until such fine is paid or such
suspension served. If a relocator is found to be operating without a license or after a license is revoked or
suspended, the village shall enforce its ordinance or any other orders by fine, injunction or in any other
means permitted by law.
( c) Penalty for violation of section 11-607. If an owner of private property violates the
provisions of section 11-607 of this article, the penalty shall be that provided for ordinance violations
shall not be not less than two hundred ($200.00) and not more than one thousand ($1000.00). (Ord. No.
O-35-92, § 1, 3-23-92)
ARTICLE IX. YOUNG ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
Sec. 11-612. Definitions.
As used in this division the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context
clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
License Officer: The Village Manager or his designee.
Light Food Service: The ability to store, prepare, sell, and service hot and cold sandwiches, snacks,
and similar food items and is separately licensed by the Village as a food service establishment.
Person: One or more natural persons, corporations, limited liability companies, partnerships,
associations or other entities capable of having an action of law brought against such entity.
Premises: Any Zoning Lot, as defined in the Village Zoning Ordinance, where a Young Adult
Entertainment Facility is operated or maintained including, but not limited to all hallways, bathrooms,
parking areas and any other portions of the Zoning Lot which is accessible to the public during operating
hours.
Special Event: An activity at a Young Adult Entertainment Facility which is marketed to patrons
or prospective patrons as being of a temporary or non-routine nature.
Village: Village of Palatine
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-85
Young Adult Entertainment Facility: A for-profit establishment which is open to the public, the
primary function of which is to offer, provide, procure, make available, allow, suffer or permit
entertainment to patrons between the ages of 16 and 20 years an opportunity to engage in social activities
such as dancing, or the enjoyment of live or pre-recorded music, or the enjoyment of' entertainment
provided by dancers or other performers. A Young Adult Entertainment Facility shall provide light food
service and beverages (excluding alcoholic beverages) to its patrons from the time of opening until 11:00
p.m.
The term "Young Adult Entertainment Facility" does not include the following: Premises which
serve alcoholic beverages as defined by State and local laws; theaters in which the patrons sit in parallel
rows of fixed seats; full service restaurants where the only entertainment consists of background music
which is incidental to the primary function of serving food; outdoor performances; a banquet, party or
celebration conducted for invited guests which is not open to the public; dances or events sponsored and
operated by a governmental entity, an educational institution, or a nonprofit or charitable group duly
licensed with the state and having a five (5) year operational history in the Village.
Sec. 11-613. Young Adult Entertainment Facility License Required.
It is unlawful for any person to own, operate, manage, or maintain a Young Adult Entertainment
Facility in the Village without first obtaining a Young Adult Entertainment Facility License from the
Village. The license fee shall be based on the permitted occupancy of the Young Adult Entertainment
Facility as follows:
For occupancy up to 100 $ 1,000.00
For occupancy from 101 to 200 $ 5,000.00
For occupancy from 201 to 300 $10,000.00
For occupancy from 301 to 600 $20,000.00
For occupancy from 601 to 800 $25,000.00
For occupancy from 801 to 1000 $30,000.00
All Young Adult Entertainment Facilities shall have an occupancy limit established by the
applicable fire or Village Code of Ordinances and by the special use approved for the facility. For the
purpose of this subsection, licensed premises shall not include kitchen area, storage areas, hallways, or
any area used by the licensee and/or his employees and not open to the licensee's patrons.
A license shall be effective from the date of its issue until June 30th of each year. The fee to be
paid shall be reduced in proportion to the full calendar months which have expired in the fiscal year prior
to the issuance of the license.
Sec. 11-614. Special Use Ordinance Required.
All Young Adult Entertainment Facilities shall require a special use permit to operate which shall
set limits on the occupancy of the facility and set forth other operational constraints and conditions in
connection with the operation.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-86
Sec. 11-615. License Application Procedures.
A. An application for a license shall be made in writing to the Village, upon forms provided, and
shall include the following:
1. The name, birthdate, and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case
of a partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof, and in the case of a
corporation, the date of incorporation (in the case of a foreign corporation, the state
where it was incorporated and the date of its becoming qualified under the Illinois
Business Corporation Act to transact business in the State of Illinois), and the objects for
which it was organized. In the case of an Illinois Limited Liability Company, the same
information for its managing member and members. The names, dates of birth, and
addresses of any partner, any officer and any director, and if a majority in interest of the
stock of a corporation is owned by one person or his nominees, the name, date of birth
and address of such person.
2. The location of the Young Adult Entertainment Facility including address, legal
description and permanent index number.
3. Evidence of proof of ownership or a valid and binding leasehold interest in the form of a
title policy or a fully executed copy of the lease.
4. If a leasehold (or any legal interest that is not fee simple ownership) a letter of
authorization from the legal owner of the property of which the leasehold is a part.
5. A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant as provided in this section. If the
applicant is a corporation, such statement shall include applicant's officers, and directors
thereof, and any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than twenty
percent of the stock of such corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, such statement
shall include all general partners, and any limited partner owning more than twenty
percent of the aggregate limited partner interest in such partnership. If the applicant is a
limited liability company such statement shall include the managing member and
shareholders owning more than 20% of the shares of the limited liability company. Such
listing shall include but not be limited to the following:
(a) Any offense involving sexual misconduct with children of other sex offenses as
defined in Article 11 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended.
(b) A felony based upon conduct or involvement in such business or activity or
related or similar business or activity, within the past ten years; or
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-87
(c) A felony unrelated to conduct or involvement in such business or activity or
related or similar business or activity, but which felony involved the use of a
deadly weapon, traffic in narcotic drugs, or violence against another person,
including rape, within the past five years; or
(d) A misdemeanor or licensing ordinance violation, based upon conduct or
involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or activity,
within the past two years.
6. A description of the proposed Young Adult Entertainment Facility, including the
anticipated age and number of patrons, hours of operation and all activities and business
conducted at the same location, and the physical facilities to be used.
7. A written statement setting forth all measures proposed to ensure that adequate traffic
control, crowd protection and security, both inside and outside the licensed premises, will
be maintained, that the age limits of the patrons to be admitted to the Young Adult
Entertainment Facility will be enforced and that the curfew will be enforced.
8. A statement of whether the business will be conducted by a manager. In such case the
manager's name, address, telephone number and age shall be provided, along with a
statement of any convictions as set forth under subsection (3), above.
9. A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a similar other license at
a location other than described in this application and the disposition of such application.
10. The license fee as provided herein.
11. A site plan for the licensed premises, including a floor plan showing all entrances, exits
and public areas.
12. The operation and training manuals to be used for the establishment, setting forth
procedures for complying with this chapter, including, but not limited to, security and age
verification.
13. A certificate of insurance evidencing that the applicant has secured commercial general
liability insurance issued by one or more companies authorized to do business in the State
of Illinois providing the following minimum coverage:
(a) One million dollars ($1,000,000) per person, per occurrence; and
(b) One million dollars ($1,000,000) annual aggregate.
14. A copy of the Special Use Ordinance approved by the Village Council.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-88
B. In the event the applicant learns that any information or document submitted as part of this
application process is inaccurate or incomplete, the applicant shall immediately notify the Village
and provide appropriate corrections. Failure to accurately and completely provide, or as
necessary update, required information may delay the processing of such application or result in
its denial.
C. In addition to the requirements of subsections (A) and (B) above, the applicant and, if applicable,
the manager shall submit their fingerprints to be used in completing the investigation. Applicants
are required to present themselves for fingerprints to be taken by the Police Department as
provided by the Chief of Police. If the applicant is a corporation, fingerprints shall be required of
applicant's officers, directors, and any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more
than twenty percent of the stock of such corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, fingerprints
shall be required of all general partners, and any limited partner owning more than twenty percent
of the aggregate limited partner interest in such partnership. If a limited liability company, the
managing member and the owners of more than 20% of the stock shall be required. The applicant
shall pay the fingerprint fee for each person required to submit fingerprints. Provided, in the case
of a renewal application, fingerprints and the fingerprint fee shall not be required from a renewal
applicant whose fingerprints are on file, unless the Chief of Police determines that there may be
reason to believe that the renewal applicant may have unreported convictions.
Sec. 11-616. Procedures for Issuance or Denial of License.
After receiving a complete application for a Young Adult Entertainment Facility license, the
Village shall follow the following procedures:
A. The License Officer shall forward copies of the application to appropriate Village officials for
their comments regarding compliance with regulations under their jurisdiction. The License
Officer shall consider all materials and comments submitted and issue or deny the license within
thirty (30) working days after the date on which a completed application was filed unless the
applicant agrees to an extension of the time period. In the event that the License Officer fails to
act upon any application within the time period set forth herein, such failure to act shall be
deemed a denial of the application.
B. The grounds for the denial of the issuance or renewal of a Young Adult Entertainment Facility
License shall include but not be limited to one or more of the following reasons:
1. The applicant has been convicted of one or more of the following offenses
(a) Any offense involving sexual misconduct with children or other sex offenses as
defined in Article 11 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended;
(b) A felony based upon conduct or involvement in such business or activity or
related or similar business or activity, within the past ten years; or
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-89
(c) A felony unrelated to conduct or involvement in such business or activity or
related or similar business or activity, but which felony involved the use of a
deadly weapon, traffic in narcotic drugs, or violence against another person,
including rape, within the past five years; or
(d) A misdemeanor or licensing ordinance violation, based upon conduct or
involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or activity,
within the past two years.
2. The applicant whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for cause.
3. The applicant who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued under this
chapter would not be eligible for such license upon a first application.
4. The applicant is under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
5. If the applicant is a partnership and any general partner, or any limited partner of owning
more that twenty percent (20%) of the aggregate limited partner interest in such
partnership, would not be eligible to receive a license under this chapter.
6. If the applicant is a corporation and any officer or director, or any stockholder or
stockholders owning in the aggregate more than twenty percent (20%) of the stock of
such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license under this chapter.
7. If the applicant is a corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois or unless it is a foreign
corporation which is qualified under the "Business Corporation Act of 1983 " to transact
business in Illinois.
8. If the applicant is a limited liability company and its managing member are the owners of
20% or more of the stock do not possess the same qualifications required of the licensee.
9. If the business of the Young Adult Entertainment Facility is to be conducted by a
manager unless the manager possesses the same qualifications required by the licensee.
10. If the applicant is not legally authorized to run the business.
11. If the Premises do not comply with all applicable Village Ordinances and State laws
including its zoning ordinance and other applicable ordinances of the Village.
12. If the application is incomplete or if it contains any material misrepresentation.
13. If the application does not show adequate measures for the protection of persons or
property, security, both inside and outside the premises, and the monitoring of the ages of
patrons admitted to the Young Adult Entertainment Facility.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-90
14. A pattern or history and experience of the establishment proposing a threat to the public
welfare.
15. A pattern of arrests or referrals to hospitals from the establishment.
16. A pattern of complaints received including, complaints at other facilities that are owned
by the applicant or owned by others operating similar facilities in the Village or in other
communities in Cook County.
17. Where grounds for revocation of the license exists.
C. In connection with the issuance of any license, the Village may impose any conditions on the
license, the operating plan and on the conduct of the business that it deems necessary and
appropriate including, but not limited to limitations on the days and hours of operation, the age of
the patrons, the training and qualifications of the staff, staffing requirements, controls on parking
lot and the environs outside of the facility, the layout of the licensed premises and additional
insurance requirements.
D. If the License Officer denies a license or imposes conditions on the application found
objectionable by the applicant, written notice of the denial stating the reasons why shall be sent to
the applicant within five (5) working days after the denial. The applicant shall have a period of
ten (10) working days after the date of license denial or the conditional license to appeal to the
Village Council. Said appeal shall be in writing and shall be scheduled for hearing within
fourteen (14) days of the receipt of the appeal for a regular meeting occurring not more than thirty
(30) days after receipt of the notice and after at least five (5) days notification of the hearing date
to the appellant.
Sec. 11-617. Operating Rules and Regulations.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16) years to enter or remain on the
Premises of a Young Adult Entertainment Facility unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person twenty-one (21) years of age or older to enter or remain on the
premises of a Young Adult Entertainment Facility except for bona fide employees or independent
contractors hired by the licensee to work in the Young Adult Entertainment Facility, a parent or
guardian of a person under twenty one (21) years of age present in the Young Adult
Entertainment Facility or a governmental employee in the performance of his duties.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent their age for the purpose of gaining
admission to a Young Adult Entertainment Facility.
D. The Licensee shall require each person admitted or seeking to be admitted to display to a
supervisory security person of the Young Adult Entertainment Facility an identification card
showing the photo and age of the person seeking admission. In addition all patrons shall be
required to pass through a metal detection device or pass a scanning by a metal detection wand.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-91
E. It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit a person to enter or remain in a Young Adult
Entertainment Facility who is under the age of sixteen (16) years or over twenty (20) years of age
or older unless such person is a bona fide employee or independent contractor hired by the
licensee to work in the Young Adult Entertainment Facility or a governmental employee in the
performance of his duties.
F. A patron once admitted to the Young Adult Entertainment Facility on the Premises not be
permitted to exit and re-enter the Premises sooner than the following business day.
G. In the event of an emergency, health, or safety condition occurring anywhere on the licensed
premises, including the parking lot, the licensee and its employees and/or agents shall
immediately contact the Fire Department or Police Department, as appropriate to the incident,
and request assistance. A written plan for implementing this requirement shall be placed of
record with the Village.
H. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to employ two (2) off-duty police officers who shall be
present on the Premises during all operating hours to maintain peace and order and to ensure
compliance with all applicable laws of the State and of the Village. The licensee shall also
employ qualified security personnel who shall have been trained in crowd control, drug
awareness, and gang awareness. The names, addresses and birthrates of all such security
personnel must be on file with the Chief of Police at least forty-eight (48) hours before their
employment.
I. Each licensee shall provide at least one supervising security person to monitor and verify ages of
those persons seeking to gain admittance to the licensed premises.
J. The licensee and its agents shall not permit or allow alcoholic beverages or controlled substances
to be consumed or be present on any Young Adult Entertainment Facility premises shall not
allow or permit tobacco to be sold in any Young Adult Entertainment Facility and shall not allow
tobacco to be used by any person under the age of eighteen (18). The presence of any prohibited
item upon the licensed premises shall be deemed a violation of this provision.
K. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to refuse admittance and to remove from the Young Adult
Entertainment Facility any person who is, or appears to be, under the influence of, or affected by
the use of alcohol or drugs, or whose conduct poses a physical danger to the safety of others
present. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to refuse admittance and to remove from a
Young Adult Entertainment Facility any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who
possesses or uses tobacco.
L. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to provide proper and adequate illumination of all
portions of the Premises which are available for public use. Such illumination shall be not less
than 1.3 foot candle at floor level at all times when the premises are open to the public or when
any member of the public is permitted to enter and remain on the premises. All off-street parking
areas within one hundred feet (100') of any entrance shall be illuminated during all hours of
operation after sunset with a lighting system designed to provide a minimum maintained
horizontal illumination of greater than one (1) foot candle of light on the parking surface and/or
walkway.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-92
M. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to prevent loitering, the creation of public nuisances or
disturbances of the peace by any patrons of the Young Adult Entertainment Facility on the
Premises or in the immediate vicinity. "Loitering" shall not include the act of waiting in line to
gain admission to the Premises.
N. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to clean up all litter resulting from its operations. The
cleanup shall occur within two (2) hours after the end of each day's operation.
O. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to permit (a) a greater number of patrons into the premises at
any time than the permitted occupancy, or (b) any greater number of patrons to remain upon the
premises than the permitted occupancy. All Young Adult Entertainment Facilities shall provide
seating for not less than thirty percent (30%) of the maximum permitted occupancy.
P. No licensee, his agent or employee shall allow or permit any person to perform acts of or acts
which simulate: a) sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation,
flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; b) the actual or simulated touching,
caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals; c) the actual or simulated
displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals; d) the actual or simulated displaying of the
breast so as to expose the nipple of the female breast; e) the displaying of films or pictures
depicting acts, a live performance of which is prohibited by a), b), c) or d) above.
Q. No licensee, his agent or employee shall allow or permit any person to remain in or upon the
licensed premises who exposes in public view any portion of his or her genitals or anus.
R. Each licensee shall provide at least one (1) public telephone for outgoing calls only for each 125
patrons (based upon the maximum occupancy of the Premises). No licensee shall permit sound or
vibration exceeding ninety (90) decibels measured with a standard meter "A" scale within two (2)
feet of any public telephone receiver or audible at such level on the outside of any exterior wall of
the premises located more than ten (10) feet from a doorway of the licensed premises. No public
telephone shall be provided on the premises for incoming calls.
S. Designation of the individual who will be available prior to and during the event and who shall
have authority to accept complaints, receive notice of violations, or take corrective action as
required by proper officials of the Village;
T. Automatic counters are required to be used prior to entry into the licensed premises to determine
occupancy of the premises;
U. The hours of operation of a Young Adult Entertainment Facility are as follows:
Sunday through Thursday, 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
Friday and Saturday, 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
New Year's Eve, 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 am. the following day.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-93
V. All employees and independent contractors hired by the licensee to work in the Young Adult
Entertainment Facility who will be present on the premises during hours of operation shall submit
to criminal background checks. No person shall be permitted to be employed who has been
convicted of a felony violation of any section of the following:
Solicitation, Conspiracy and Attempt,
Homicide;
Kidnapping and Related Offenses;
Sex Offenses;
Bodily Harm;
Robbery;
Burglary;
Armed Violence; or Contributing to the Criminal Delinquency
of a Juvenile of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended; or any section
of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, as amended; or
Homicide;
Kidnapping;
Obscenity;
Rape;
Robbery and Burglary;
Sexual Exploitation of Children;
Sec. 11-618. Special Events.
A. The licensee shall deliver to the Chief of Police, no later than seventy-two (72) hours before any
scheduled Special Event occurring at a licensed premises, true and accurate copies of any and all
advertisements of whatever nature therefore used to advertise or promote the event. The licensee
shall also include prior to any such advertised event:
B. The number of employees and/or performers to be used for the event;
C. A security plan with an identification of any changes to the security plan on file must be
submitted to the Chief of Police in writing a minimum of two (2) business days before the event.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to approve the plan, approve subject to conditions or
disapprove the plan. The security plan must be followed without any changes unless such change
has been submitted to the Chief of Police in writing and he has approved it prior to the event
being opened;
D. Security personnel shall be required for the maximum capacity of the event as determined by the
maximum occupancy of the premises under Village's ordinance unless attendance is limited to a
lesser number;
E. Inspections may be conducted by the Village to ensure compliance with its codes and ordinances;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-94
F. No members of the general public shall be allowed admittance prior to the opening of the event;
G. Tickets may be sold before the event with the number of tickets sold limited to the occupancy
limit of the premises for patrons, and after all said tickets have been sold, the licensee shall post a
sign stating that the event is "Sold Out."
Sec. 11-619. Access by Police Officers.
All police officers of the Village and other Village employees engaged in inspection shall be
permitted access to all Young Adult Entertainment Facilities for the purpose of inspection and to enforce
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance at all times including when the Premises are open to
patrons.
Sec. 11-620. Suspension or Revocation of Licenses.
A. The Village Manager may, at any time, suspend a Young Adult Entertainment Facility license
whenever the licensee, or any manager, officer, director, agent or employee of the licensee has
caused, permitted or knowingly done any of the following:
1. Failed to keep the building structure or equipment of the licensed premises in compliance
with the applicable health, building, fire or safety laws, regulations or ordinances in a
way which relates to or affects public health or safety on the Young Adult Entertainment
Facility Premises.
2. Failed to comply with the provisions of Young Adult Entertainment Facilities specified in
this chapter including the operating rules and regulations set forth above.
3. Whenever the Village learns that the licenses made a material false statement or
representation, or failed to disclose any material information to the Village, in connection
with any application for the Young Adult Entertainment Facility license or any license
renewal.
4. Whenever the licensee or any manager, officer, director, agent or employee of the
licensee knowingly permits conduct on the licensed premises that violates any federal,
state or village criminal or penal statute, law or ordinance, or the operating rules and
regulations, this ordinance or the terms and conditions of the license and the special use
or the zoning ordinance.
5. Whenever the operation of the Young Adult Entertainment Facility becomes the
proximate cause of a significant increase in criminal activity on the premises or in the
immediate vicinity in such a way as to endanger persons or property.
6. For any of the grounds set forth in Section 11-15(a).
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 11 – LICENSES, BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-95
B. Any license may be suspended or revoked by the Manager in accordance with Section 11-15 of
this Chapter. The procedure for suspension or revocation or any penalty shall be subject to
Section 11-15(b) and (c).
C. Any appeal shall be pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 11-16 of this Chapter.
D. In the event of a license suspension or revocation, the licensee shall be responsible for all of the
costs, including attorneys fees incurred by the Village which costs shall be taxed to the licensee
and payment made by certified check to the Village before the reopening of the business.
Sec. 11-621. License, Non-transferable.
A license granted under the provisions of this chapter is non-transferable. The sale, lease or
transfer of substantially all of the assets (more than 25%) of a business holding an Young Adult
Entertainment Facility License or a sale or transfer of a controlling interest in a corporation or partnership
holding an Young Adult Entertainment Facility License shall result in the termination of the license
granted herein.
A license shall only be good for one (1) year and there shall be no obligation on the part of the
Village to renew said license.
Sec. 11-622. Nuisance, Injunction.
Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided
by this chapter, the Village Attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to
prohibit the continuation of any violation of this chapter. The application for relief may include seeking a
temporary restraining order, temporary injunction or permanent injunction.
Sec. 11-623. Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars nor more than One Thousand ($1,000.00) Dollars for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-1
Chapter 12 OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Art. I. In General, §§ 12-1--12-40
Art. II. Fires, §§ 12-41--12-56
Art. III. Explosives; Fireworks, §§ 12-57--12-69
Art. IV. Plants and Weeds, §§ 12-70--12-90
Art. V. Tag Days, §§ 12-91--12-100
Art. VI. Public Gatherings, §§ 12-101--12-115
Art. VII. Public Buildings, §§ 12-116--12-135
Art. VIII. Sound Amplifiers, §§ 12-136--12-150
Art. IX. State of Emergency, §§ 12-151--12-165
Art. X. Dutch Elm Disease and Emerald Ash Borer Infestation, §§ 12-166--12-180
Art. XI. Village Jail, §§ 12-181--12-190
Art. XII. Antilitter Regulations, §§ 12-191--12-214
Art. XIII. Regulation of Parades and Motorcades, §§ 12-215--12-229
Art. XIV. Regulation of Adult Bookstores and Adult Movie Theaters, §§ 12-230--12-240
Art. XV. Vandalism, §§ 12-241--12-249
Art. XVI. Theft, §§12-250--12-259
Art. XVII. Retail Theft (Shoplifting), §§ 12-260--12-267
Art. XVIII. Parental Responsibility, §§ 12-268--12-275
Art. XIX. Trespass, §§ 12-276--12-281
Art. XX. Obstructing Public Easements, §§ 12-282--12-286
Art. XXI. Burglary or Robbery Alarm Systems, §§ 12-287--12-291
Art. XXII. Abatement of Nuisances, §§ 12-292, 12-293
Art. XXIII. Penalty for Nuisance Violations, § 12-294
Art. XXIV. Spray Paint, § 12-294.1
Art. XXV. General Penalty; Citations, §§ 12-295--12-309
Art. XXVI. Regulation of Lighting, §§ 12-310--12-316
Art. XXVII. Graffiti, §§ 12-317--12-318
Art. XXVIII. Drug Paraphernalia §§12-319--12-324
Art. XXIX. Conflicts with Certain Home Rule County Ordinances
----------
Editor’s Note: Article XXIX Conflicts with Certain Home Rule County Ordinances, a new
article, was adopted by Ordinance #O-50-17, passed on May 1, 2017.
Editor’s Note: Article XXVIII Drug Paraphernalia, a new article, was adopted by Ordinance
# 0-22-01 passed on March 12, 2001.
---------
Editor’s Note: Article X Dutch Elm Disease and Emerald Ash Borer Infestation, was replaced in
its entirety by Ordinance 0-24-08, passed on February 19, 2008.
---------
Editor’s Note: Article IV Plants and Weeds was replaced in its entirety by Ord. #0-91-08,
passed on 7/14/08
---------
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 12-1. Injury to public property.
It shall be unlawful to injure, deface or interfere with any property belonging to the village without
proper authority from the board. (Code 1961, ? 8.604)
Cross reference(s)--Vandalism, ? 12.241 et seq.
Sec. 12-2. Gambling.
It shall be unlawful to gamble or attend any gambling resort or to make a bet, lottery (other than
lawfully approved lotteries) or gambling hazard, or to buy or sell any chances or tickets in any gambling game,
arrangement or device.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-2
It shall be unlawful to possess or expose for public use any slot machine, pinball machine or coinoperated
device designed for gambling or any other gambling device, punch board or paraphernalia with the
intent to use the same for an unlawful purpose; and any such device or paraphernalia kept with such intent may
be confiscated by any member of the police department.
It shall be unlawful to maintain or patronize any establishment maintained for a gambling house or
resort anywhere in the village.
It shall be unlawful to advertise any gambling house or resort in any street, alley or other public places
within the village. (Code 1961, ? 25.001)
Sec. 12-3. Disorderly conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of disorderly conduct or of any conduct tending toward
a breach of the peace. The causing or making of any unnecessary loud noise and shouting or yelling shall be
considered disorderly conduct. (Code 1961, ? 25.002)
Sec. 12-4. Possession of alcoholic beverages in public places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of an alcoholic beverage in a public street or
other public place unless such beverage is in its original container with the seal unbroken, or unless such
possession is on the premises of an establishment licensed by the Village of Palatine to sell such alcoholic
beverage. For purposes of this section, a public place shall include, but not be limited to all Village-owned
parking facilities and lots, and all parking lots serving commercial establishments and serving multiple family
residential developments containing four or more dwelling units. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to
be in possession of an alcoholic beverage in a common area of: a property owners association serving a
multiple family residential development containing four or more dwelling units, an apartment complex or a
Common Element, as defined by the Illinois Condominium Property Act, 765 ILCS 605/2(e), except for patios
and balconies. Said Common Area includes all the portions of the property except the interior unit, including
but not limited to the parking lots, sidewalks, grass areas, open space areas, detention areas, stairways, hallways
and storage rooms. Provided that upon the application of the owner, manager or property owners association
(collectively, ?owner?) for a modification of this prohibition the Village Council may, subject to conditions
and restrictions, satisfactory to the Village council, permit consumption of alcoholic beverages in certain
defined areas agreed to by the Village and the Owner. (Code 1961, ? 25,003; Ord. No. O-78-76, ? 1, 9-13-76;
Ord. No. O-113-90, ? 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 0-155-97 ?1, 9-8-97; Ord.No. 0-169-97, ?1, 10-13-97, Ord. No. 0-
149-00 ? 1, 11-13-00)
Sec. 12-5. Profanity.
It shall be unlawful to use profanity in any street, alley or other public place in the village. (Code
1961, ? 25.004)
Sec. 12-6. Public indecency.
(a) Definitions. The following defined terms apply to this section:
(1) Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with
less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breasts with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
(2) Public place for the purpose of this section means any place where the conduct may
reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-3
(3) Sexual conduct means any intentional or knowing touching or fondling by the person or other
person, either directly or through clothing, of the sex organs, anus or breast of the person or
other person, or any part of the body of a child under thirteen (13) years of age, for the
purpose of sexual gratification or arousal of the person or other person.
(4) Sexual penetration means any contact, however slight, between the sex organ of one person
and the sex organ, mouth or anus of another person, or any intrusion, however slight, of any
part of the body of one person or of any animal or object into the sex organ or anus of another
person, including, but not limited to, cunnilingus, fellatio or anal penetration. Evidence of
emission of semen is not required to prove sexual penetration.
(b) Acts constituting public indecency. Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and upwards who
performs any of the following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:
(1) An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct as defined herein;
(2) A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of the
person or of persons observing; or
(3) Appears in a state of nudity.
(c) Penalty. Any person found to have committed a public indecency shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Code 1961, §25.005; Ord.
No. O-163-91, §3, 11-25-91; Ord.No. 0-5-98, §15, 1-26-98)
Sec. 12-7. Assault and battery.
(a) Assault. It shall be unlawful for any person to, without lawful authority, engage in conduct which
places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery.
(b) Battery. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly without legal justification
and by any means, to (1) cause bodily harm to an individual or (2) to make physical contact of an insulting or
provoking nature with an individual. (Code 1961, §25.006; Ord. No. 0-27-95 §7, 4-10-95)
Sec. 12-8. False fire alarms.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start or spread any false alarm of fire in the village.
(Code 1961, §25.007) State law reference(s)--Fire protection and prevention, Ch. 7.
Sec. 12-9. Disturbing assemblages.
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage or gathering in the village. (Code
1961, §25.008)
Sec. 12-10. Hunting.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in killing or to hunt any animal other than as prescribed
by law in the village. (Code 1961, §25.009)
Sec. 12-11. Weapons.
It shall be unlawful to carry any concealed weapons in the village without having first secured a license
to carry such concealed weapons issued under the laws of this state. (Code 1961, §25.010)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-4
Sec. 12-12. Discharge of firearms.
It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms or air gun in the village (the term air gun shall include
any air rifle, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, B-B gun, paint ball gun, pellet gun or any implement that is
not a firearm which impels a breakable paint ball containing washable marking colors or, a pellet constructed
of hard plastic, steel, lead or other hard materials, with a force that reasonably is expected to cause bodily
harm); provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law to discharge a firearm
in the performance of his duty; nor to any citizen to discharge a firearm when lawfully defending his person or
property. (Code 1961, §25.016, Ord. # 0-118-13, §1, 10/14/13)
Sec. 12-13. Missiles.
It shall be unlawful to cast, throw, or propel any missile on any street, alley or public place; and it shall
be unlawful to throw or deposit any glass, nails, tacks or other similar articles on any street, alley, sidewalk, or
other public place in the village. (Code 1961, §25.012)
Sec. 12-14. Advertising.
It shall be unlawful to advertise any unlawful business or article in the village and it shall be unlawful
to injure or deface any lawful advertisement or notice. (Code 1961, §25.013)
Sec. 12-15. Unlawful assemblages.
It shall be unlawful to collect, gather or be a member of any disorderly crowd, or any crowd gathered
together for any unlawful purpose. (Code 1961, §25.014)
Sec. 12-16. Nude bathing.
It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe at any public place or in any place open to the public view
unless such person is adequately garbed in a bathing suit. (Code 1961, §25.019)
Sec. 12-17. Posting bills.
It shall be unlawful to post any bills or advertisement on any public property without the authority of
the president and board and it shall be unlawful to post any bill or advertisement on any property without the
written consent of the owner thereof. (Code 1961, §25.020)
Sec. 12-18. Medical advertisements.
It shall be unlawful for any person, by himself or by his agents or servants, to distribute, cast, throw or
place or cause to be distributed, thrown, cast or placed in, upon or along any of the streets, alleys or other
public places in the village, or upon the porches or yards of private residences therein or within any dwelling or
building in the village, any samples of merchandise or medicinal preparations for the purpose or with the intent
of advertising or making known in a general or promiscuous manner any business, occupation, proposition,
medical treatment, medicine or any other article whatsoever, or to conduct any medicine show or entertainment
to attract attention to any tonic, remedy, medicine or treatment for human ailments. (Code 1961, §25.022)
Sec. 12-19. Indecent publications.
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, or to circulate, pass from one (1) person to another, or
expose in any public place or anywhere in view of a store or place frequented by the public, any immoral,
indecent or obscene publications, printed or written or picture or other representation.
It shall be unlawful to keep any such publication, printed or written matter, picture or other
representation in any place frequented by, or where it may come into the possession of minors, or to disclose or
expose any such material to minors. (Code 1961, §25.023)
Cross reference(s)--Adult bookstores, §12-30 et seq.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-5
Sec. 12-20. Scaffolds.
Any scaffold or ladders placed in such a position that they overhang or can fall onto any public street,
alley or other public place in the village, shall be firmly and properly constructed and safeguarded; and it shall
be unlawful to place or leave any tools or article on any such place in such a manner that the same can fall into
any such street, sidewalk, alley or other public way from a greater height than four (4) feet. (Code 1961, ?
25.024)
Sec. 12-21. Articles on windows.
It shall be unlawful to place any movable article on any window ledge, or other place abutting a public
street, alley or other place at a height above four (4) feet from the ground, in such a manner that the same can
be or is in danger of falling onto such sidewalk, street, alley or other public place. (Code 1961, ? 25.025)
Sec. 12-22. Whistles.
It shall be unlawful to blow or cause to be sounded any steam whistles of any stationary engine or
steam engine in the village except as a signal for starting or stopping work or in emergencies to avoid or to
prevent injury to persons or property. (Code 1961, ? 25.026)
Sec. 12-23. Obstructing stairways or exits.
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any stairway, aisle, corridor, or exit in any
office building, factory, hotel, school, church, theater, assembly hall, lodge or other public hall, or any building
used by two (2) or more tenants or families in such manner that it interferes with the free use of such stairway,
aisle, corridor or exit. (Code 1961, ? 25.027)
Sec. 12-24. Mendicants or vagrants.
It shall be unlawful for any mendicant or vagrant to frequent any depot, store, theater, street, alley,
sidewalk, park or other public place or any place frequented by the public in the village. (Code 1961, ?
25.028)
Sec. 12-25. Fuel tanks.
It shall be unlawful to install or maintain any fuel oil, gas or liquid gas tanks above ground. All such
tanks must be placed below the ground surface. (Code 1961, ? 25.029)
Sec. 12-26. Obstructing storm water flow.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction, or deposit or cause to be deposited any
junk, debris, earthen fill, grass clippings, brush, tree limbs, yard waste or other foreign matter, in any drainage
ditch or swale, into or along any branch or tributary of Salt Creek or Buffalo Creek and their floodplains, lake,
pond, detention basin, drain tiles, storm sewers, roadside culverts, roadside ditches or other area that
periodically collects or conveys storm water runoff within the boundaries of the village. Any person who
deposit any of the above shall remove it or shall cause it to be removed therefrom immediately. The Director
of Public Works or his duly authorized agents or employees upon proper identification to the owner or person
in charge of the property shall be permitted to enter upon the property within the Village of Palatine for the
purposes of inspection, observation, measurement and enforcement in accordance with the provisions of this
-59-03, §1, 3/10/03)
Sec. 12-27. Curfew for minors.
(a) It shall be unlawful for a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to be present at or upon any
public assembly, building, place, street or highway at the following times, unless accompanied and supervised
by a parent, legal guardian or other responsible companion at least eighteen (18) years of age approved by a
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-6
parent or legal guardian, or unless engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of the state authorize a
person less than seventeen (17) years of age to perform:
(1) Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;
(2) Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday; and
(3) Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on the following day.
(b) It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to knowingly permit a person in his
custody or control to violate this section.
(c) A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be guilty of a petty offense
and shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
Sec. 12-28. Rubbish, refuse, etc., on streets, alleys, public places; removal.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to throw, deposit, place or cause, suffer or
permit to be thrown, deposited or placed in any street, alley, public ground or place any rubbish, refuse,
material, obstruction or encroachment of any kind.
(b) Any person, firm or corporation who violates this section by throwing, depositing, placing, or
causing, suffering or permitting to be thrown, deposited or placed in any street, alley, public ground or place
any rubbish, refuse, material, obstruction or encroachment of any kind shall, upon conviction, be fined not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(c) It shall be the duty of any person, firm or corporation throwing, depositing, placing or causing,
suffering or permitting to be thrown, deposited or placed in any street, alley, public ground or place any
rubbish, refuse, material, obstruction or encroachment of any kind, contrary to the provisions of the aforegoing
subsection (a), to remove the same promptly and leave such street, alley, public ground or place in good
condition after such removal.
(d) Upon the failure of any person, firm or corporation to remove the rubbish, refuse, material,
obstruction or encroachment, the village manager shall cause the same to be removed from the street, alley,
public ground or place and shall bill the responsible person, firm or corporation for all costs incurred.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or occupies premises in the village in industrial,
multifamily residential or commercial districts or in planned developments wherein industrial, multifamily
residential or commercial uses are authorized, which premises generate more than four (4) cubic yards of
refuse, garbage or other waste material per week, to allow to be placed or remain on such premises refuse
containers designed to hold one cubic yard or more of refuse, garbage, other waste material or materials for
recycling unless such containers are firmly covered at all times and surrounded by wooden, masonry or metal
fencing at least six (6) feet in height and in residential areas screened by landscaping approved by the
department of community development unless excused by the village president and board of trustees for good
cause shown.
In any event, all refuse containers located on such properties which are designed to hold one cubic yard
or more of refuse, garbage, other waste material or materials for recycling which are visible from a public rightof-
way shall be screened from view by wooden, masonry, other synthetic materials as approved by the
department of community development or opaque metal fencing at least six (6) feet in height.
Any refuse container not maintained in accordance with this section hereby is declared to be a nuisance
detrimental to the public health and welfare and may be abated by the village manager or his designate
pursuant to section 12-292 et seq of the Code of Ordinances of the Village of Palatine, Illinois.
Any existing refuse container not in compliance herewith on the date of adoption of this paragraph (e)
or located on property newly annexed to the village after the adoption of this paragraph (e) shall be brought
into compliance within ninety (90) days following written notice to do so from the village served upon the
owner or occupier of the premises where such refuse container is located.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-7
(f) All multifamily residential dwellings which have refuse collected in a bulk container shall meet the
following minimum capacity and/or service requirements: One yard of container capacity or service for the first
four (4) units and one additional yard of container capacity or service for each additional four (4) units or
portion thereof per week. These capacity and/or service requirements shall be in effect unless the property
owner has a written variance signed by the Director of Environmental Health. (Ord. No. O-38-76, ? 1, 4-12-
76; Ord. No. O-54-88, ? 1, 5-9-88; Ord. No. O-143-91, ? 1, 10-14-91; Ord. No. O-75-92, ? 1, 5-27-92)
Cross reference(s)--Deposits in streets prohibited, ? 8-5; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 16.
Sec. 12-29. Possession of marijuana prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly grow, possess, sell, give away, barter, deliver,
exchange, distribute, or administer any marijuana.
Any person who violates this section with respect to not more than ten (10) grams of marijuana shall
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. No. O-
37-76, ? 1, 4-12-76; Ord. No. O-69-83, ? 1, 10-10-83; Ord. No. 0-5-98, ?15, 1-26-98)
Editor's note--Ord. No. O-37-76, ? 1, amended the 1961 Code by adding the provisions codified
herein as ? 12.29.
Sec. 12-30. Betting messenger services prohibited.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to accept for placement, delivery or communication to or with
another any wager on any horse race, game or other event, when such person receives payment of any kind to
perform such service. Each such acceptance of a wager shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this
Code.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, rents or leases property within the village to
knowingly permit the occupation of said premises or any building thereon by a person who engages in any act
which violates section 12-30(a) above in said building or on said premises. Each day the owner, landlord or
tenant knowingly permits the building or premises to be so occupied shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation of this Code.
(c) Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation and not in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
violation. (Ord. No. O-11-77, ? 1, 3-14-77)
Sec. 12-31. Sale, display for sale, or distribution of items designed primarily for use with illegal drugs.
No person shall sell, display for sale, or distribute within the Village of Palatine any item, effect,
paraphernalia, accessory or thing which is designed primarily for use with illegal drugs, except as a special use
within a B-1 Shopping Center District or a B-2 General Service District, provided also that no such sales,
display for sale, or distribution may take place in a B-1 or B-2 District within twenty-five hundred (2500) feet
of any public or private school, day care center, nursery, church, synagogue or other place of worship, or any
facility holding a liquor license. Violation of this section shall be considered cause for revocation of a business
license in addition to any other penalty provided in this Code. (Ord. No. O-6-78, ? 3, 2-13-78)
Cross reference(s)--B-1 district regulations, App. A, ? 6.02; B-2 district regulations, App. A, ? 6.03.
Sec. 12-32. Persons responsible for premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons who are the occupants of any premises to knowingly
allow, initiate or maintain any gathering on that premises in which tenants, invitees, visitors or trespassers
engage in any unlawful activity. Unlawful activity shall include, but not be limited to, drinking of alcoholic
beverages by persons under twenty-one (21) years of age, disorderly conduct pursuant to section 12-3 of this
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-8
Code, curfew violations in the immediate vicinity of the premises and littering pursuant to Article XII of this
chapter of this Code. A person will be deemed to have permitted the gathering if that person is on the premises
while the unlawful activity is occurring and has not informed the police thereof. For purposes of this section, a
gathering shall consist of two (2) or more persons who are not occupants of the premises. (Ord. No. O-4-83, ?
1, 1-25-83)
Sec. 12-33. Knowingly providing false information.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly furnish false information to the village's police
department, fire department, health department or other code enforcement department. This section shall apply
to all information furnished, whether by telephone, in person, in writing, by way of the filing or furnishing of
information for a report or otherwise. (Ord. No. O-38-83, ? 1, 6-13-83; Ord. No. 0-31-95, ?8, 4-10-95)
Editor's note--Ord. No. O-38-83 added a ? 12-32 to the Code; in order to avoid duplicate section
numbers, the editor has redesignated these provisions as ? 12-33.
Sec. 12-34. Reckless Conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause bodily harm to, or endanger the bodily safety of an
individual by any means by performing recklessly the acts which cause the harm or endanger safety, whether
they otherwise are lawful or unlawful.
Sec. 12-35. Intimidation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to, with intent to cause another to perform or to omit the
performance of any act, communicate to another, whether in person, by telephone or by mail, a threat to
perform without lawful authority any of the following acts:
(a) Infliction of physical harm on the person threatened or any other person or
on property; or
(b) Subjecting any person to physical confinement or restraint; or
(c) Committing any criminal offense; or
(d) Accusing any person of an offense; or
(e) Exposing any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule.
Sec. 12-36. Mob Action.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in mob action which consists of any of the following:
(a) The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace by 2 or more persons acting together
and without authority of law; or
(b) The assembly of 2 or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
(c) The assembly of 2 or more persons, without authority of law, for the purpose of doing
violence to the person or property of any one supposed to have been guilty of a violation of
the law, or for the purpose of exercising correctional powers or regulative powers over any
person by violence; or
(d) Being a participant in a mob action, who does not immediately withdraw on being
commanded to do so by any peace officer.
Sec. 12-37. Resisting or obstructing a peace officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly resist or obstruct the performance by one known to the
person to be a peace officer of any authorized act within his official capacity. For the purposes of this section,
failing to provide accurate information as to one's true identity, date of birth, and residence address when so
requested by a peace officer shall constitute obstructing a peace officer.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-9
Sec. 12-38. Truancy
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, who is subject to the compulsory attendance requirement
of the Illinois School Code and is enrolled in grades 1 through 12 in a public, private or
parochial school within the incorporated limits of the Village of Palatine to absent himself or
herself from attendance at school for a school day or portion thereof without a valid cause. A
valid cause for absence shall include absence from school because of illness, observance of a
religious holiday, death in the immediate family, family emergency, situations beyond the
person's control as determined by the Board of Education, or such other circumstances which
cause reasonable concern to the parent or custodian for the safety or the health of the person.
(b) Any person, who is: (1) subject to the compulsory attendance requirement of the Illinois
School Code, (2) enrolled in grades 1 through 12 in a public, private or parochial school
located outside the incorporated limits of the Village of Palatine; and (3) present within the
incorporated limits of the Village of Palatine, without a valid cause for absence from the
school in which he or she is enrolled, shall be reported to the municipality having jurisdiction
over the person. Jurisdiction shall be determined by the school at which the person is
enrolled.
(c) Any person who shall so absent himself or herself shall be guilty of the offense of truancy
and be subject to penalties hereinafter set forth in this Chapter.
(Ord. 0-201-06, §1, 12/4/06)
Sec. 12-39. Motorized Equipment.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a lawn mower, leaf blower, edge trimmer, street cleaner,
industrial vacuum or any other motorized equipment between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any
weekday and between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the weekend or holidays. (Ord. No. 0-83-16;
6/20/16)
None of the terms or prohibitions hereof shall apply to or be enforced against:
1. Village vehicles; Any vehicle of the Village while engaged upon necessary public business.
2. Emergency operations: The operation of motorized equipment in case of urgent necessity in the
interest of public health and safety.
3. Snow removal equipment. (Ord.No.0-85-99;?1-3;6-28-99)
4. Park District Golf Courses: Any vehicle utilized and necessary for the maintenance of a park
district owned and operated golf course. The prohibition exemption is between the hours of 4:00
a.m. to 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 4:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. on weekends. (Ord. No. 0-101-16;
8/8/16)
Sec. 12-40. Penalty.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of Sections 12-1 through 12-39 shall be fined not
less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. No. 0-31-
95, ?9, 4-10-95;Ord.No.0-5-98, ?15,1-26-98;Ord.No.0-85-99;?1-3;6-28-99)
Editor's note--former ? 12-34 Sales by minors, Possession of tobacco products. added by Ord.No. O-
109-94, subsequently deleted by Ord. No. 0-120-96, 7-08-96, ?2)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-10
ARTICLE II. FIRES*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7.
----------
Sec. 12-41. Prohibited except in incinerator or fireplace.
It shall be unlawful to build or light any bonfire or to burn any rubbish, leaves or other combustible
refuse, anywhere in the village except in a properly constructed incinerator or fire place. (Code 1961, ?
25.015)
Cross reference(s)--Fire protection and protection generally, Ch. 7; burning of refuse, etc., prohibited,
? 8-4.
Sec. 12-42. Grass fires; permit required.
It shall be unlawful to start or maintain any grass fire in the village without first securing a permit from
the president and board of trustees.
The fire chief shall supervise any such grass fire and he shall be informed by the applicant of the
issuance of a permit. (Code 1961, ? 25.017)
Sec. 12-43. Regulations.
It shall be unlawful to burn refuse of any kind anywhere in the village except as provided below:
(1) It shall be unlawful to burn leaves anywhere in the village.
(2) It shall be unlawful to burn off vegetation from any area in the village except under the
supervision of and subject to the direction of the fire department.
(3) It shall be unlawful to light or maintain any outdoor fires to burn wood, papers, paper goods
and cardboard except in an approved incinerator as outlined in pamphlet #82 of the National
Fire Protection Association, 1969 edition, and subject to the approval of the fire department;
provided that the burning of charcoal or wood for outdoor cooking shall be permitted in grills
or other structures designed for that purpose.
(4) Trees found to be afflicted with Dutch Elm disease may be removed and burned in areas
designated by the director of public works.
(5) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, it shall be lawful for structures to be
removed by burning under the direct supervision and control of the fire department.
(Code 1961, ? 25.018)
Secs. 12-44--12-56. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-11
ARTICLE III. FIREWORKS
[Editor’s Note: Sec. 12-56 was deleted in its entirety by Ord. 0-98-05, passed on May 16, 2005]
Sec. 12-57. Definitions.
“Fireworks” means and includes any explosive composition, or any substance or combination of
substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary
exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges,
toy cannons in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the
same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, bombs, sparklers or other fireworks of like
construction and any fireworks containing any explosive compound, or any tablets or other device containing
any explosive substances, or containing combustible substances producing visual effects; provided, however,
that the term “fireworks” shall not include snake or glowworm pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers
known as “party poppers”, “booby traps”, “snappers”, “trick matches”, “cigarette loads”, and “auto burglar
alarms”; or toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper caps containing twenty-five
hundredths grains or less of explosive compound are used, providing they are so constructed that the hand
cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and toy pistol paper caps which contain
less than twenty-hundredths grains of explosive mixture. (Code 1961, §24.102; Ord. 0-69-13 §2, 6/10/13)
Sec. 12-58. Prohibitions.
No person shall have, keep, store, use, manufacture, assemble, mix, sell, discharge, handle, or transport
any fireworks; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be held to apply to the possession or use of
signaling devices for current daily consumption by railroads, vessels and others requiring them or to the
possession, sale or use of normal stocks of flashlight compositions by photographers or dealers in photographic
supplies. (Code 1961, §24.103; Ord. 0-49-05, §1, 3/14/05; Ord. 0-69-13 §2, 6/10/13)
Sec. 12-59. Penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of Section 12-58 shall be fined not less than seventy five
dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Code 1961, §24.106; Ord. 0-49-05, §2,
3/14/05; Ord. 0-69-13 §2, 6/10/13; Ord. O-124-17, 12/4/17)
Sec. 12-60. Nitro-glycerine; T.N.T. prohibited; exception; storage limit.
It shall be unlawful to keep or store any nitro-glycerine or the explosive commonly known as T.N.T. in
the village in any quantities, excepting for medicinal or laboratory purposes and for such purposes no more
than one-quarter (1/4) ounce shall be stored in any one (1) building or premises. (Code 1961, §24.104)
Sec. 12-61. Rules of state fire marshal to govern.
All explosives must be kept or stored in accordance with the rules of the state fire marshal, subject to
the provisions of this article. (Code 1961, §24.105)
Sec. 12-62. Outdoor pyrotechnical displays
All outdoor fireworks displays shall be electronically fired from an approved electronic firing unit, and
all fireworks displays shall comply with the current NFPA 1123 standard.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-12
Sec. 12-62.1 Deleted Articles.
The following articles in NFPA 1123, 2000 edition shall be deleted:
5.1.6 Delete the exception
5.2.6 Delete this article entirely
5.2.9.2 Delete this article and exception entirely
(Ord. 0-49-05, §3, 3/14/05)
Secs. 12-63-12-69. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. PLANTS AND WEEDS
[Editor’s Note: Article IV was replaced in its entirety by Ord. #0-91-08, passed on July 14, 2008]
Sec. 12-70. Definitions.
(1) “Owner” means the legal or beneficial owner of an improved or unimproved parcel of real estate.
(2) “Responsible party” means the occupant of any real estate or any person or entity charged with the
care or management of any real estate.
(3) “Growing season” means the period of time which weeds and grass are generally growing on the
majority of real estate in the Village of Palatine, beginning no later than May 1 and ending no earlier
than November 1.
Sec. 12-71. Enumeration of prohibited plants; declared a nuisance.
Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, poison ivy, poison oak, poison
sumac, or other weeds of a like kind or barberry bush found growing in any lot or tract of land in the village are
hereby declared to be nuisances, and it shall be unlawful to permit any such weeds to grow or remain in such
places. (Code 1961, §§24.201, 24.203)
Sec. 12-72. Height limitation.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or responsible party of real estate located in the Village of Palatine
to permit any weeds, grass or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants to grow to a
height exceeding one (1) foot anywhere on the property and on the parkway abutting their property; and any
such weeds, grass or plants exceeding such heights are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Code 1961,
§24.202; Ord. No. O-124-79, §1, 11-13-79; Ord. No. 0-186-96, §1, 10-14-96)
Sec. 12-73. Notice.
(1) It shall be the duty of the village manager or his designee to cause to be served a notice upon
the owner and any responsible party of any such premises on which weeds, grass or plants are permitted to
grow in violation of the provisions of this article, and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within three (3)
days. Upon service of the notice, the owner and any responsible party shall be required to continuously
maintain the premises in accordance with the provisions of this Article. Only one three (3) day notice shall be
required to be served per growing season. (Code 1961, §24.204; Ord. No. O-124-79, §1, 11-13-79; Ord.No.0-
78-98, §1, 6-8-98)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-13
(2) The notice shall:
a. Be in writing.
b. Identify the property on which the nuisance violation was observed.
c. Provide a description of the nuisance violation.
d. Provide the date and time the violation was observed.
e. State that the owner and any responsible party shall have three (3) days to abate the
nuisance.
(3) Notice shall be served upon the owner and any responsible party of the property personally or
by first class mail addressed to the owner and any responsible party. If the nuisance has not been abated four
(4) days after the mailing of such notice by first class mail, service may be made upon such persons or entities
by posting the notice in a prominent place on or about the property identified in the notice.
Sec. 12-74. Abatement.
If the owner so served with notice under Section 12-73 does not abate the nuisance within three (3)
days after such notice, or fails to maintain the property during the growing season, the Village Manager or his
designee may proceed to cause the abatement of such nuisance, pursuant to Section 12-292, at any time
subsequent, keeping an account of the expense thereof, and such expense shall be charged to and paid by the
owner. (Code 1961, §24.205; Ord. No. O-124-79, §1, 11/13/79; Ord.No.0-78-98, §2, 6/8/98)
Sec. 12-75. Lien--Procedure for filing.
Charges for weed, grass or plant cutting shall be a lien upon the premises as provided by statute.
Whenever a bill for weed, grass or plant cutting remains unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered, the
clerk may file with the county recorder of deeds of Cook County, a statement of lien claim. This statement shall
contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the village
claims a lien for this amount.
After the nuisance has been abated, but prior to the filing of a lien, notice of the bill for weed, grass or
plant cutting shall be served personally on, or by certified mail to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for
the general taxes on the property for the last preceding year. The notice shall contain a description of the
property on which the abatement occurred and a description of the nuisance.
(Code 1961, §24.206; Ord. No. O-124-79, §1, 11/13/79)
State law reference(s)--Power of municipality to enforce lien for cutting weeds, 65ILCS5/11-20-7.
Sec. 12-76. Same--Foreclosure.
Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed, grass or plant cutting charges shall be sold for nonpayment
of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the
case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosures shall be by bill in equity in the name of the village.
The manager for the village is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings, in the
name of the village, in any court having jurisdiction over such matters, against any property for which a bill for
weed, grass or plant cutting has remained unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered. (Code 1961,
§24.207; Ord. No. O-124-79, §1, 11/13/79)
Secs. 12-77--12-90. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-14
ARTICLE V. TAG DAYS
Sec. 12-91. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to go from house to house soliciting funds or subscriptions from the
public or to publicly solicit either in person or by agent, upon the public streets, sidewalks, or any other public
place in the village, subscriptions for charitable or religious or educational or other organizations or purposes,
whether presents or gifts or money or promises are sought, without having first secured a permit therefor.
(Code 1961, §24.301)
Sec. 12-92. Application.
Applications for permits for tag day sales shall be made to the Village Manager who shall determine
that the purposes for which such solicitations are proposed are consistent with the provisions of section 12-91.
No such permit shall be issued except upon the order of the Village Manager. (Code 1961, §24.302; Ord. No.
0-15-16, §1, 2/16/16)
Sec. 12-93. Solicitation of charitable contributions on streets and highways within the Village.
(1) No person shall stand on any street or roadway within the Village, or on any right-of-way of
same, for the purpose of peddling or soliciting except those persons soliciting for charitable contributions
from the occupant of any vehicle and may do so only upon satisfying all of the requirements within Section
12-93 of this Code.
(2) The soliciting organization shall submit a completed Tag Day Permit Application and provide
a Certificate of Insurance showing that the charitable organization is insured against any claims for injuries
or damage to property which is causally related to an act or ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent
acting on behalf of the organization. The submitted Tag Day Permit Application shall contain, at a
minimum, the following information:
a. The name, address, and telephone number of the soliciting organization, agency or project
and proof that the organization, agency or project is registered with the attorney general as
a charitable organization as provided by the Solicitation for Charity Act;
b. A description of the fundraising activity in which the soliciting organization, agency or
project is engaged;
c. The intersections at which approval is being sought and the number of persons proposed
to solicit at such intersections (there shall be no more than four (4) solicitors within an
intersection at any time); and
d. The dates and times at which such Tag Day event is proposed to take place (applications
for solicitation may be submitted up to a maximum of one (1) year prior to the requested
Tag Day event).
(Ord. No. 0-15-16, §1, 2/16/16)
(3) Any person engaged in the solicitation of charitable contributions shall be at least sixteen (16)
years of age and shall wear a highly visible vest and identification of the organization undertaking the
solicitation. (Ord. No. 0-15-16, §1, 2/16/16)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-15
(4) The Village Manager must find that the locations, times, and durations of the proposed Tag
Day event, as well as the number of proposed solicitors, shall not result in interference with the flow of
vehicular traffic. No permits shall be issued when street conditions, weather, or other factors, at the
discretion of the Village Manager, pose significant safety concerns to either the solicitors or the general
public. (Ord. No. 0-15-16, §1, 2/16/16)
(5) No Tag Day events will be permitted from November 1 through March 31.
(6) Solicitation shall only occur during daylight hours, as reasonably determined by the Village
Manager. (Ord. No. 0-15-16, §1, 2/16/16)
(7) Solicitation shall only be permitted at the following intersections:
(Ord. No. 0-15-16, §1, 2/16/16; Ord. No. 0-45-16 4/11/16)
Baldwin Road and Rohlwing Road
Cunningham Drive and Hicks Road
North Court and First Bank Drive
Northwest Highway and Rohlwing Road
Palatine Road and Plum Grove Road
Palatine Road and Quentin Road
Palatine Road and Roselle Road (south and east legs of intersection)
Palatine Road and Rohlwing Road
Palatine Road and Winston Drive
Plum Grove Road and Colfax Street
Plum Grove Road and Illinois Avenue
Plum Grove Road and Northwest Highway
Quentin Road and Dundee Road (north and east legs of intersection)
Quentin Road and Illinois Avenue
Quentin Road and Northwest Highway
Smith Street and Colfax Street
Smith Street and Northwest Highway
(8) Tag Day events shall not be permitted at the same intersection in consecutive weeks. The
Village Manager may waive this limitation if the requested Tag Day event is in conjunction with a regional
or national Tag Day event being held on a specific date(s). (Ord. No. 0-35-16, 4-4-16)
(9) No more than two Tag Day events in any calendar year are permitted within the Village by any
qualifying solicitation organization and no approved Tag Day event shall continue for more than three (3)
consecutive days.
(Ord. No. O-108-79, §1, 10/8/79; Ord. No. 0-17-11, §1, 2/22/11)
Sec. 12-94. Fines for violation of section 12-93.
Any person, corporation, unincorporated association or other entity violating any provision of section
12-93 shall upon a judicial finding of such violation, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such separate violation. (Ord. No. O-108-79, §1, 10/8/79;
Ord.No.0-5-98, §15, 1/26/-98)
Secs. 12-95--12-100. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-16
ARTICLE VI. PUBLIC GATHERINGS
Sec. 12-101. Regulations.
It shall be unlawful to hold, manage or conduct any meeting or entertainment of any kind in the
village, in any premises other than a building constructed in full compliance with the ordinances and laws
pertaining thereto for auditorium, theater or lodge room purposes, excepting in compliance with the provisions
of this article. (Code 1961, §24.401)
Sec. 12-102. Inspections.
No public gathering or entertainment shall be held or presented in any premises other than a building
as described in the preceding section, unless such premises have been examined by the fire marshal or building
commissioner not more than three (3) days before the date of such gathering and found to be free from any fire
hazard and found to be suitable for the purpose. No structure enclosed by a roof shall be used for such
purposes unless the same is constructed of nonflammable materials. Provided that tents or structures covered
by canvas or similar materials may be so used if such canvas or other material have been properly treated so as
to be rendered fire resistive. (Code 1961, §24.402)
Sec. 12-103. Exits.
Adequate unobstructed exits shall be provided in all premises and used for such purposes to permit
rapid egress of all persons attending, and there shall be at least two (2) separate exits located at least thirty (30)
feet from each other. There shall be two (2) lineal feet of doorway or exit space for each one hundred (100)
people accommodated. (Code 1961, §24.403)
Sec. 12-104. Seats.
Any stands or rows of seats used in such premises shall be so constructed as to be safe for the use
designed, and shall be sufficiently strong to carry the same weight and stress as is required for the construction
of the auditorium floors of theater buildings, not less than one hundred (100) pound per square foot.
It shall be unlawful to admit to any such premises a number of persons to exceed the number of actual
seats maintained for their accommodation. (Code 1961, §24.404)
Sec. 12-105. Doors.
All doors or gates on exits from premises used for such purposes shall open outward and no such exits
shall be so constructed or locked that egress from inside the premises is blocked. (Code 1961, §24.405)
Sec. 12-106. Notice.
It shall be the duty of any person conducting, calling for or managing any gathering in any premises
other than a theater, lodge or auditorium building constructed as provided in section 12-101, to notify the clerk
of the date of such intended use at least ten (10) days before such meeting is to take place; upon such notice the
fire marshal and/or the building inspector shall inspect the premises to determine whether or not they comply
with the provisions hereof. Any permit issued for any such gathering shall be subject to the condition that this
article be fully complied with, whether or not such condition is embodied in the permit.
(Code 1961, §24.406)
Secs. 12-107--12-115. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-17
ARTICLE VII. PUBLIC BUILDINGS*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Fire prevention generally, Ch. 7, Art. III.
----------
Sec. 12-116. Responsibility.
The owner, agent, occupant or person charged with the custody of any public building, auditorium,
hotel, theater, lodge hall, or church and in the case of schools, the president of the board of education, or the
person in charge thereof and owning the same, shall be held liable for the equipment and maintenance of such
apparatus as is required in this article for the maintenance and safety of all exits, stairs, doors, windows or
passageways. (Code 1961, §24.501)
Sec. 12-117. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the fire marshal or his assistants to inspect all apparatus to be installed, and their
location, and to make or cause to be made periodic inspections concerning the operation and accessibility of
regular and emergency exits in such public places. (Code 1961, §24.502)
Sec. 12-118. Fire drills.
It shall be the duty of the principal or other person in charge of pupils in every school in the village to
establish and maintain a good and efficient fire drill which shall be practiced at least once a month during the
time the building is used for school purposes. A written report shall be made by the principal or person in
charge of such building on each fire drill held, and of the time elapsed from the first fire signal until the last
person was out. (Code 1961, §24.504)
Sec. 12-119. Removal of apparatus prohibited except in emergency.
It shall be unlawful to remove from its proper place any fire apparatus or appliances except for
inspection or in case of emergency. (Code 1961, §24.505)
Secs. 12-120--12-135. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. SOUND AMPLIFIERS
[Editor’s Note: Article VIII was replaced in its entirety by Ord. 0-71-06]
Sec. 12-136. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any loud speaker or amplifier connected with any radio,
phonograph, microphone, or other device by which sounds are magnified and made heard over any public
street or public place without first having secured a permit therefor.
Sec. 12-137. Applications.
Any person desiring a permit for the use or operation of such devices, shall file an application therefor
with, no less than seven (7) days before the intend date of the event, to the Village Manager or his designee,
upon a form provided by him, setting forth the name and address of the applicant, the name of the owner of
such device, the date upon which it is intended to be used, and such other information as may be prescribed.
School and Park District properties are exempt from the sound amplification regulations, for any school, park,
or other established affiliate function, which is occurring on School or Park District property. (Ord. No. 0-155-
16, 12/19/16)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-18
Sec. 12-138. Restrictions.
All events for which a permit is granted will be subject to the following restrictions:
1. The permit shall be limited per the hours granted by the Village Manager.
2. A permit holder shall not operate or employ any such device within a radius of two (2) blocks from
any hospital or within the radius of two (2) blocks from any church while services are being held
there.
3. The only sounds permitted shall be either music or human speech, or both;
4. Speakers for sound amplification equipment shall be directed, to the extent feasible toward open or
unoccupied space and away from residentially occupied property.
5. In any event, the volume of sound shall be so controlled that it will not be unreasonably loud,
raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness within the
area of audibility.
The Village Manager or his designee may include additional restrictions or conditions to the
permit.
This section shall not apply to radios in homes or in private pleasure vehicles, when the same are
operated in such a manner as not to be audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from such vehicle, nor to
noise devices, bands or other musical devices used in any public parade, community event, or
procession which is operated under a permit in accordance with the ordinances of the village or
approval of the Village Council.
No permit shall cause or permit to be emanated or emitted from any such device any lewd, obscene,
profane, or indecent language or sounds, or any false representation of any matter, product, or project
advertised thereby, the sale of which is prohibited by any provision of this Code or other ordinance or statute.
The Village Manager or his designee may revoke any permit if the sound is deemed to be in violation
of any of the above restrictions.
Secs. 12-139--12-150. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. STATE OF EMERGENCY*
----------
*Editor's note--Ord. No. O-129-86, §1, adopted Sept. 29, 1986, repealed Art. IX, §§12-151--12-155,
pertaining to civil emergencies and curfew which derived from Code 1961, §§24.701--24.705 and enacted new
provisions designated as Art. IX, §§12-151--12-155, pertaining to state of emergency, to read as herein set out.
Cross reference(s)--Civil defense organization, §2-501 et seq.
----------
Sec. 12-151. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless their
context clearly requires otherwise:
State of emergency means the occurrence of:
(1) A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or violence or any threat
to use force if accompanied by immediate power to execute by three (3) or more persons
acting together without authority of law; or
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-19
(2) Any disaster which; shall mean an occurrence or threat from widespread or severe damage,
injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or man-made cause, including but
not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, oil spill or other water contamination
requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight,
extended periods of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, critical shortages of
essential fuels or energy, explosion, riot, or hostile military or paramilitary action. Disaster
includes but is not limited to all occurrences and threats thereof which are contemplated by
the concept of ``emergency services and disaster operations.''
Curfew means a prohibition against any person or persons walking, running, loitering, standing or
motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the
village, excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference to
said state of emergency. (Ord. No. O-129-86, §1, 9-29-86)
Sec. 12-152. Proclamation; contents; curfew.
Whenever a state of emergency exists, the president shall proclaim its existence by means of a written
declaration. Said declaration shall be signed by him, under oath and contain the following:
(1) A statement to the effect that a state of emergency, as defined by this article, does exist.
(2) Set forth the facts supporting such findings.
(3) A declaration of the nature of the state of emergency and his reasons for his action.
(4) A declaration that a state of emergency does exist. Such statement shall be promptly filed with
the clerk.
After proclaiming a state of emergency, the president, by executive order, and after consultation with
the village manager and chief of police, may establish a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas
of the village, including the village as a whole, as he deems advisable, to be applicable during such hours of the
day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare. (Ord. No. O-129-86, §1, 9-
29-86)
Sec. 12-153. Enforcement.
After the proclamation of a state of emergency, the president may also, in the interests of public safety
and welfare, take any or all of the following actions by executive order:
(1) Order the closing of all liquor stores and establishments, including taverns and private clubs
or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor and beer is permitted.
(2) Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any wholesaler or retailer.
(3) Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline or other liquid
flammable or combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly
affixed to a motor vehicle.
(4) Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms or
ammunition of any character whatsoever.
(5) Call into service the village's emergency services and disaster agency (ESDA) pursuant to
section 2-501 et. seq. of this Code.
(6) Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property.
(Ord. No. O-129-86, §1, 9-29-86)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-20
Sec. 12-154. Effective period.
The proclamation shall be effective for a period of forty-eight (48) hours unless sooner terminated by
the president but, in no event, shall continue later than the adjournment of the first meeting of the president and
board after the state of emergency is declared. The president shall have the power to reproclaim the existence
of a state of emergency at the end of each forty-eight- hour period during the time said state of emergency
exists. (Ord. No. O-129-86, §1, 9-29-86)
Sec. 12-155. Notice; posting.
Upon issuance of the proclamation, the village manager or his designee shall notify the news media
covering and serving the village, and shall cause three (3) copies of the proclamation, declaring the existence of
the emergency to be posted in not less than three (3) prominent places in the village. (Ord. No. O-129-86, §1,
9-29-86)
Secs. 12-156--12-165. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. DUTCH ELM DISEASE AND EMERALD ASH BORER INFESTATION
----------------
Editor’s Note – Article X was replaced in it’s entirety by Ordinance #0-24-08, passed on February 19, 2008.
----------------
Sec. 12-166. Control of infected or infested trees.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises in the village to permit any tree or portion thereof
infected with Dutch Elm disease or infested with the Emerald Ash Borer to remain on such premises. (Code
1961, §24.801)
Sec. 12-167. Inspection.
The officers, agents, servants, and employees of the Village are hereby authorized and directed to enter
on and upon private property whereon there is located any Elm tree or Ash tree having the appearance of or
suspected of being diseased with the Dutch Elm disease or infested with the Emerald Ash Borer, for the
purpose of inspecting said suspected tree and removing there from samples or portions thereof to be tested to
establish whether said tree is in fact diseased or infested. (Code 1961, §24.802)
Sec. 12-168. Declared a nuisance.
Any tree or part thereof affected with the Dutch Elm disease or Emerald Ash Borer infestation is
hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Code 1961, §24.803)
Sec. 12-169. Abatement--By owner.
The owner or occupant of the parcel of land on which said diseased Elm tree or infested Ash tree exists
shall forthwith remove and destroy said Elm tree or Ash tree and properly dispose of all materials in
accordance with guidelines established by the Illinois Department of Agriculture, within ten (10) days of
notification to such owner, occupant, or agent that said Elm tree or Ash tree is in fact diseased or infested.
(Code 1961, §24.804)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-21
Sec. 12-170. Same--By village.
In each case where the owner or occupant of the parcel of land on which said diseased Elm tree or
infested Ash tree is located cannot be found, or if found and notified as aforesaid neglects or refuses to abate
said nuisance, it shall be lawful for the Village to abate the same by the removal and proper dispose of all
materials in accordance with guidelines established by the Illinois Department of Agriculture, of said diseased
Elm tree or infested Ash tree and in that event the said owner, occupant or agent or any of them shall be
charged with those expenses which may be incurred by the village in the removal or abatement of the diseased
Elm tree or Ash tree as aforesaid, which expenses shall be collected by the village by suit or otherwise in
addition to the fine for the violation. (Code 1961, §24.805)
Sec. 12-171. Permit Required
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or who commences any work prior to obtaining
said permit shall be subject, upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, to a fine not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) per offense.
(Ord. No. 0-152-12, §1, 11/19/12)
Secs. 12-172-12-180. Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. VILLAGE JAIL
Sec. 12-181. Establishment.
The place in the village heretofore established and used as the jail, or any other place which may be
hereafter used for that purpose, is hereby declared to be the village jail. (Code 1961, ? 8.301)
Sec. 12-182. Keeper.
The chief of police shall be the keeper of the jail and shall have custody over all persons confined
therein and of all property pertaining thereto.
Whenever a female is confined in the village jail, the chief of police is authorized to employ, on a parttime
basis, a female to have charge of such female prisoner during the time of incarceration. In addition, the
chief of police may employ a female, on a part-time basis, whenever deemed necessary for the arrest, custody
or detention of a female. (Code 1961, §8.302)
Sec. 12-183. Prisoners.
The jail shall be used for the incarceration of all persons arrested for violating any laws of the state, the
United States, or for violating any village ordinance until such person shall be lawfully brought before a judge
for a hearing or until such person shall be lawfully transferred to some other place of incarceration or otherwise
lawfully released.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-22
Sec. 12-184. Escape.
It shall be unlawful for any person to escape or attempt to escape, or to assist any prisoner to escape or
attempt to escape from jail. (Code 1961, §8.304)
Sec. 12-185. Communication with prisoners.
It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate with any prisoner held in the jail without the
permission of the chief of police or the police officer in charge. (Code 1961, §8.305)
Secs. 12-186--12-190. Reserved.
ARTICLE XII. ANTILITTER REGULATIONS*
----------
*Editor's note--Ord. No. O-63-75, ? 1, adopted Aug. 11, 1975, amended the 1961 Code by adding the
provisions codified herein as Art. XII, ?? 12-191--12-205.
----------
Sec. 12-191. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meaning given herein:
Aircraft is any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designated for flight in the air.
The word "aircraft" shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
Commercial handbill is any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet,
pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature:
(1) Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing; or
(2) Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other
activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
or
(3) Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or
event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or
profit; or
(4) Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and
essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for
the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
Garbage is putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food.
Litter is garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and all other waste material.
Newspaper is any newspaper of general circulation or any newspaper duly entered with the post office
department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation and, in addition thereto, shall
mean and include any periodical or magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year,
and sold to the public.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-23
Noncommercial handbill is any printed or written matter, any sample, or device, dodger, circular,
leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original
or copies of any matter of literature not included in the definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper.
Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind
Private premises is any dwelling, house, building, or other structure designed or used either wholly or
in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or
appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
Public place is any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all
public squares, spaces, grounds, public parks, tot lots and public buildings.
Refuse is all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage,
rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes.
Rubbish is nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes,
such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
Vehicle is every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn
upon a highway including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
Village is the Village of Palatine, Illinois.
(Ord. No. O-63-75, §2, 8-11-75)
Sec. 12-192. Litter in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the
village except in public receptacles, in authorized receptacles for collection, or in duly licensed landfills.
For special gatherings and events held on public property and approved in writing by the Village of
Palatine, proper receptacles for litter must be provided by the person or organization authorized to use the
public property. Within forty-eight (48) hours after any such gathering or event, all litter must be disposed of as
provided herein. If inclement weather prevents such removal, additional time may be provided through direct
request to the office of the director of environmental health. If said gathering or event is of a continuous nature,
daily clearing of the litter must be provided, with the litter deposited in suitable receptacles for removal. (Ord.
No. O-63-75, §1, 8-11-75)
Sec. 12-193. Private property to be kept free of litter; nuisance.
Persons owning or occupying property shall keep their property free of litter. The failure of persons
owning or occupying property to properly dispose of litter located on such property is a public nuisance, and
shall be subject to the abatement provisions of Article XXII of this chapter and the penalty provisions of
Article XXIII of Chapter 12 of this Code. (Ord. No. O-63-75, §1, 8-11-75; Ord. No. O-1-84, §1, 1-9-84)
Sec. 12-194. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
No persons, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or
other public place within the village, or upon private property. (Ord. No. O-63-75, §1, 8-11-75)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-24
Sec. 12-195. Litter in lakes and fountains.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay, creek, or any other
body of water within the village. (Ord. No. O-63-75, §1, 8-11-75)
Sec. 12-196. Throwing or distributing handbills in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk,
street or other public place within the village. (Ord. No. O-63-75, §1, 8-11-75)
Sec. 12-197. Placing commercial and noncommercial handbills on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle.
Provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute,
without charge, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. (Ord. No.
O-63-75, §1, 8-11-75)
Sec. 12-198. Depositing commercial and noncommercial handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private
premises which are continuously uninhabited or vacant. (Ord. No. O-63-75, §2, 8-11-75)
Sec. 12-199. Distributing commercial and noncommercial handbills at inhabited private premises.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon
private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the
owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such private premises, or by placing or depositing the
same in such manner as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises of
sidewalks, streets or other public places. Mailboxes may not be used for this purpose when prohibited by
federal postal law or regulations. (Ord. No. O-63-75, §2, 8-11-75)
Sec. 12-200. Exemption for mail or newspapers.
The provisions of the foregoing section 12-199 shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United
States, nor to newspapers (as defined herein). (Ord. No. O-63-75, §2, 8-11-75)
Sec. 12-201. Dropping litter from aircraft.
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit any litter upon any property in the village.
(Ord. No. O-63-75, §2, 8-11-75)
Sec. 12-202. Reserved.
(Ord. No. O-63-75, §2, 8-11-75; Ord.No.0-82-98, §1,6-8-98; Ord.No.0-167-98, §1, 10-26-98; Ord. 0-127-06,
§1, 7/17/06)
Sec. 12-203. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the village. (Ord.
No. O-63-75, §1, 8-11-75)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-25
Sec. 12-204. Penalties.
Except as otherwise provided in section 12-193, any person violating any provision of this article shall
be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first
such offense. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second such violation and a fine of not
less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the third and
subsequent violations within a one year period. (Ord. No. O-63-75, §1, 8-11-75; Ord. No. O-1-84, §3, 1-9-84;
Ord.No. 0-5-98, §16,1-26-98))
Editor's note--Section 2 of Ord. No. O-1-84, adopted Jan. 9, 1984, repealed §12-204 as said section
pertained to the notification to owners to properly dispose of litter on open private property and as derived from
Ord. No. O-63-75, §1, adopted Aug. 11, 1975. Section 3 of Ord. No. O-1-84 then renumbered §12-205 as §
12-204 and amended said section as herein set out.
Secs. 12-205--12-214. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII. REGULATION OF PARADES AND MOTORCADES
Sec. 12-215. Definitions.
Parade "Parade" means any march or procession consisting of people, animals or vehicles or a
combination thereof, except funeral processions, upon any public street, sidewalk or alley, which does not
comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls.
Motorcade: "Motorcade" means an organized procession containing twenty-five (25) or more vehicles,
except funeral processions, upon any public street, sidewalk or alley. (Ord. No. O-56-77, §1, 6-13-77)
Sec. 12-216. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a parade or motorcade in or upon any public street,
sidewalk or alley in the village, or knowingly participate in any such parade unless and until a permit to
conduct such a parade or motorcade has been obtained from the village manager, or, as hereinafter provided,
from the president and board of trustees of the Village of Palatine. (Ord. No. O-56-77, §1, 6-13-77)
Sec. 12-217. Parade or motorcade for commercial purpose prohibited.
No permit shall be issued authorizing the conduct of a parade or motorcade which is to be held for the
sole purpose of advertising any product, goods, wares, merchandise and is designed to be held purely for
private profit. (Ord. No. O-56-77, §1, 6-13-77)
Sec. 12-218. Interference with parade or motorcade.
No person shall knowingly join or participate in any parade or motorcade conducted under permit from
the Village of Palatine in violation of any of the terms of said permit or knowingly join or participate in any
permitted parade or motorcade without the consent and over the objection of the permittee, nor in any manner
interfere with its progress or orderly conduct. (Ord. No. O-56-77, §1, 6-13-77)
Sec. 12-219. Application for permit.
Any person who desires to conduct a parade or motorcade shall apply to the village manager for a
permit at least ten (10) days in advance of the date of the proposed parade or motorcade. The application for
such permit shall be in writing on a form approved by the president and board of trustees of the Village of
Palatine or in a form acceptable to the village manager. The village manager may waive the ten-day
requirement as provided herein. In order that adequate arrangements may be made for the proper policing of
the parade or motorcade, the application shall contain the following information:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-26
(1) The name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization, the parade or motorcade chairman,
and the addresses and telephone numbers of each.
(2) The nature of the parade or motorcade, the date when it is proposed to be conducted, the
location of the assembly area, the location of the disbanding area, route to be traveled and the
approximate time when the parade or motorcade will assemble, start and terminate.
(3) A general description of the units to be used.
The village manager shall immediately forward a copy of the application to the chief of police and the
fire chief. (Ord. No. O-56-77, §1, 6-13-77)
Sec. 12-220. Issuance or denial of permit.
(a) Standards of issuance. The village manager shall issue a parade or motorcade permit conditioned
upon the applicant's written agreement to comply with the contents of such a permit as hereinafter specified,
unless it is found that:
(1) The time, route and size of the parade or motorcade will disrupt to an unreasonable extent the
movement of other traffic.
(2) The parade or motorcade is of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so great a number
of police officers of the village to properly police the line of movement and the areas
contiguous thereto that allowing the parade or motorcade would deny reasonable police
protection to the village.
(3) Such parade or motorcade will interfere with another parade or motorcade for which a permit
has been issued.
(b) Standards for denial. The village manager shall deny an application for a parade or motorcade
permit and notify the applicant of such denial where:
(1) The village manager makes any finding contrary to the findings required to be made for the
issuance of a permit as above specified.
(2) The information contained in the application is found to be false or nonexistent in any
material detail.
(3) The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all the contents of the permit.
(c) Time for issuance or denial. The applicant shall be informed of the issuance or denial of the permit
within seven (7) days of the filing of the application for same. (Ord. No. O-56-77, §1, 6-13-77)
Sec. 12-221. Contents of permit.
In each permit, the following shall be specified:
(1) The assembly area and time therefor.
(2) The starting time.
(3) The minimum and maximum speeds of any motor vehicles.
(4) The route of the parade or motorcade.
(5) What portions of streets to be traversed may be occupied by such parade or motorcade.
(6) The maximum length of such parade or motorcade in miles or fractions thereof.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-27
(7) The disbanding area and disbanding time.
(8) The permittee shall advise all participants in the parade or motorcade, either orally or by
written notice, of the terms and conditions of the permit prior to the commencement of such
parade or motorcade.
(9) That the parade or motorcade continue to move at a fixed rate of speed and that any willful
delay or willful stopping of said parade or motorcade except that which is reasonably required
for the safe and orderly conduct of the parade or motorcade shall constitute a violation of the
permit, all conditions of the permit shall be complied with so far as reasonably practical.
(Ord. No. O-56-77, §1, 6-13-77)
Sec. 12-222. Appeal procedure.
Upon a denial by the village manager of an application made pursuant to section 12-219 of this article,
the applicant may appeal from the determination of the village manager within five (5) days thereafter to the
village president and board of trustees by filing a written notice of appeal at its next meeting. Upon such
appeal, the president and board of trustees may reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the determination of the
village manager. In the event the application is not filed within the required time as specified in section 12-219,
the applicant may request a waiver of such requirement by the president and board of trustees at its next regular
meeting, or at a special meeting which may be called prior thereto by said president and board of trustees to
consider such a matter. The president and board of trustees, if they find unusual circumstances and in the
exercise of their sound discretion, may waive such requirement. (Ord. No. O-56-77, §1, 6-13-77)
Sec. 12-223. Officials to be notified.
Immediately upon the granting of a permit for a parade or motorcade, the village manager shall send a
copy thereof to:
(1) The president and board of trustees.
(2) The chief of police.
(3) The fire chief.
(Ord. No. O-56-77, §1, 6-13-77)
Secs. 12-224--12-229. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-28
ARTICLE XIV. REGULATION OF ADULT BOOKSTORES AND ADULT MOVIE THEATERS*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Indecent publications, §12-9.
----------
Sec. 12-230. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
(1) Adult bookstore: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in
trade explicit sexual material or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale
or display of such materials.
(2) Adult movie theater: An enclosed building with the capacity of fifty (50) or more persons
used for the presentation of explicit sexual material.
(3) Explicit sexual material:
(a) Any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture or other pictorial representation which depicts
actual or simulated acts of human sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, masturbation,
excretory functions, torture in the context of sexual relationship or exhibition of the genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal.
(b) Any artificial human penis or vagina or device primarily designed to stimulate genitals. Any
description, advertisement or offer to sell or distribute such an artificial organ or device that presents either a
pictorial representation or a detailed verbal description of such artificial organ or device or its manner of use.
(d) Any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material which is made up in whole or
in dominant part of depictions or descriptions of human sexual intercourse, oral copulation, bestiality, sodomy,
masturbation or torture in the context of the sexual relationship. (Ord. No. O-54-77, §2, 6-13-77)
Sec. 12-231. Regulations.
No adult bookstore or adult movie theater shall operate or do business within the Village of Palatine,
except as a special use in a B-2 General Service District. Said adult bookstore or adult movie theater granted a
special use shall be subject to the following restrictions:
(1) No adult bookstore or adult movie theater:
(a) Shall be located within a one thousand-foot radius of any other adult bookstore or
adult movie theater.
(b) Shall be located within a two thousand-foot radius of any public or private school,
day care center or nursery.
(c) Shall be located within a thirteen hundred twenty-foot radius of any facility holding a
liquor license.
(d) Shall be located within a thirteen hundred twenty-foot radius of a church, synagogue,
or other place of worship.
(Ord. No. O-54-77, §2, 6-13-77)
Secs. 12-232--12-240. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-29
ARTICLE XV. VANDALISM*
----------
*Editor's note--Ord. No. O-97-80, §§1, 2, enacted Dec. 8, 1980, amended Art. XV by repealing
§§12-241, 12-243 and 12-244, renumbering § 12-242 as 12-241 and by adding a new § 12-242. Former §§12-
241, 12-243 and 12-244 defined terms applicable to Art. XV and set forth the penalty and liability for violation
of the article. Said former sections were derived from Ord. No. O-90-76, §1, adopted Oct. 11, 1976; Ord. No.
0-94-77, §1, adopted Sept. 12, 1977; and Ord. No. O-96-80, §1, 2, adopted Dec. 8, 1980.
Cross reference(s)--Injury to public property, §12-1; see also Art. XVIII.
----------
Sec. 12-241. Offenses.
No person shall commit any of the following acts within the corporate limits of the Village of Palatine:
(1) Maliciously, recklessly, or knowingly damage, deface, or destroy any property of another
person without his consent; or
(2) Maliciously, recklessly, or knowingly start a fire on the land of another person without his
consent; or
(3) Maliciously, recklessly, or knowingly deposit on the land or in a building of another person,
without his consent, any stink bomb, or any offensive smelling compound and thereby
interfere with the use and occupancy by another of the land or building; or
(4) Maliciously, recklessly, or knowingly and without authority enter into any building,
housetrailer, motor vehicle, aircraft or water craft or any part thereof of another person
without his consent.
(Ord. No. O-90-76, §1, 10-11-76; Ord. No. O-97-80, §1, 12-8-80)
Sec. 12-242. Penalty.
A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be fined not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) or in excess of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord. No. O-97-80, §2,
12-8-80;Ord.No.0-5-98, §15,1-26-98)
Secs. 12-243--12-249. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-30
ARTICLE XVI. THEFT*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--See Art. XVIII.
----------
Sec. 12-250. Elements of the offense.
A person commits theft when he knowingly:
(1) Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
(2) Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
(3) Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
(4) Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been stolen by another or
under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him to believe that the property was
stolen, and:
(a) Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property; or
(b) Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as to deprive the
owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
(c) Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use, concealment or
abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit.
(Ord. O-92-78, §1, 10-9-78)
Sec. 12-251. Value of goods.
This article shall apply only to goods having a value of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) or under.
(Ord. No. O-92-78, §1, 10-9-78)
Sec. 12-252. Penalty.
A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be fined not less than thirty-five
dollars ($35.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the initial conviction, and not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any subsequent conviction.
(Ord. No. O-92-78, §1, 10-9-78; Ord.No. 0-5-98, §15,1-26-98)
Secs. 12-253--12-259. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-31
ARTICLE XVII. RETAIL THEFT (SHOPLIFTING)*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--See Art. XVIII.
----------
Sec. 12-260. Legislative declaration.
It is recognized by the village that a substantial burden is placed upon the economy of the village
because of the rising incidence of retail theft. This is a matter of great concern to the people of this village who
have a right to be protected in their safety and welfare from the effects of this offense. (Ord. No. O-93-78, §1,
10-9-78)
Sec. 12-261. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the words and phrases defined in this section have the meanings
ascribed to them unless a contrary meaning is clear from the context:
Conceal: To "conceal" merchandise means that, although there may be some notice of its presence,
that merchandise is not visible through ordinary observation.
Full retail value: "Full retail value" means the merchant's stated or advertised price of the
merchandise.
Merchandise: "Merchandise" means any type of tangible personal property.
Merchant: "Merchant" means an owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment or any
agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee or independent contractor of such owner or
operator.
Minor: "Minor" means a person who is less than nineteen (19) years of age, is unemancipated and
resides with his parents or legal guardian.
Peace officer: "Peace officer" means any person who by virtue of his office or public employment is
vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make arrests for offenses whether that duty extends to
all offenses or is limited to specific offenses.
Person: "Person" means any natural person or individual.
Premises of a retail mercantile establishment: "Premises of a retail mercantile establishment" includes,
but is not limited to, the retail mercantile establishment, any common use areas in shopping centers and all
parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf of a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience
of the patrons of such retail mercantile establishment.
Retail mercantile establishment: "Retail mercantile establishment" means any place where
merchandise is displayed.
Shopping cart: "Shopping cart" means those push carts of the type or types which are commonly
provided by grocery stores, drugstores or other retail mercantile establishments for the use of the public in
transporting commodities in stores and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the store.
Under-ring: "Under-ring" means to cause the cash register or other sales recording device to reflect
less than the full retail value of the merchandise. (Ord. No. O-93-78, §1, 10-9-78)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-32
Sec. 12-262. Offense of retail theft.
A person commits the offense of retail theft when he knowingly:
(1) Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or transferred, any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment
with the intention of retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying
the full retail value of such merchandise; or
(2) Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of value or any other
markings which aid in determining value affixed to any merchandise displayed, held, stored
or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such
merchandise personally or in consort with another at less than the full retail value with the
intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
(3) Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile
establishment from the container in or on which such merchandise is displayed to any other
container with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such
merchandise; or
(4) Under-rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the
merchandise; or
(5) Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile establishment without the
consent of the merchant given at the time of such removal with the intention of depriving the
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart.
(Ord. No. O-93-78, §1, 10-9-78)
Sec. 12-263. Presumptions.
If any person:
(1) Conceals upon his person or among his belongings, unpurchased merchandise displayed,
held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment; and
(2) Removes that merchandise beyond the last-known station for receiving payments for that
merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment;
such person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred such merchandise with the
intention of retaining it or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or
benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise. (Ord. No. O-93-78, ? 1,
10-9-78)
Sec. 12-264. Detention.
Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a person has committed retail theft may
detain such person, on or off the premises of a retail mercantile establishment, in a reasonable manner and for a
reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes:
(1) To request identification;
(2) To verify such identification;
(3) To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in his possession unpurchased
merchandise and, to make reasonable investigation of the ownership of such merchandise;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-33
(4) To inform a peace officer of the detention of the person and surrender that person to the
custody of a peace officer;
(5) In the case of a minor, to inform a peace officer, the parents, guardian or other private person
interested in the welfare of that minor of this detention and to surrender custody of such minor
to such person.
A merchant may make a detention as permitted herein off the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment only if such a detention is pursuant to an immediate pursuit of such person. (Ord. No. O-93-78,
§1, 10-9-78)
Sec. 12-265. Affirmative defense.
A detention as permitted in this article does not constitute an arrest or an unlawful restraint, as defined
in Section 10-3 of Chapter 38 of the Illinois Revised Statutes, nor shall it render the merchant liable to the
persons so detained. (Ord. No. O-93-78, §1, 10-9-78)
Sec. 12-266. Value of goods.
This article shall apply only to goods having a value or full retail value of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) or under. (Ord. No. O-93-78, §1, 10-9-78)
Sec. 12-267. Penalty.
A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be fined not less than thirty-five
dollars ($35.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the initial conviction, and not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any subsequent conviction.
(Ord. No. O-93-78, §1, 10-9-78; Ord.No. 0-5-98, §15,1-26-98)
ARTICLE XVIII. PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
Sec. 12-268. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to Articles XV, XVI, XVII and XVIII:
(1) Knowingly. Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which
warrants further inquiry or inspection.
(2) Legal Guardian. A person appointed guardian, or given custody, of, a minor by a Circuit Court of this
State but does not include a person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the Juvenile
Court Act.
(3) Parent. A natural or adoptive parent or court designated guardian.
(4) Person shall include any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
(5) Property shall include any real estate, including improvements thereon, and tangible personal
property.
(6) Unemancipated Minor. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years still under the care and custody
of his or her parents.
(7) Wilful. Proceeding from a conscious and voluntary intentional motion of the will.
(Ord. No. O-97-80, §3, 12-8-80; Ord. No. 0-27-95, §10, 4-10-95)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-34
Sec. 12-269. General Parental Responsibility
It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with said
parent or legal guardian to knowingly allow or to knowingly permit said minor to violate or attempt to violate
any state law or municipal ordinance or to knowingly or negligently act, or fail to act, in such a manner as to
facilitate or contribute to any violation or attempted violation of any state law or municipal ordinance by said
minor.
Sec. 12-270. Liability of Parent or Legal Guardian of Minor Offender
Subject to the conditions contained in 12-269 the parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor
who has custody of such minor shall be jointly and severally liable for any fine, condition or reparation
imposed by a court and, for full restitution to any injured or damaged party or parties for the willful or
malicious acts of said minor child provided that said amount shall not exceed $1,000; provided however, that
said parent or legal guardian has been served with a summons or notice to appear and written notice setting
forth the charges against said minor child in the original cause as provided by law. Any person who willfully
fails or refuses to answer said summons or notice to appear and to make payment in full of any amount found
due to the court and to the injured or damaged party, as provided herein, or who violates any of the provisions
of this section shall additionally be fined in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Sec. 12-271. Penalty
Subject to the requirements contained in Section 12-269 and 12-270 any parent or legal guardian who
fails or refuses to appear in court to answer a summons or notice to appear issued in conjunction with a charge
or charges brought under this section against their unemancipated minor or who fails to make payment in full
of any amount found due to the court and to the injured or damaged party (provided that said amounts shall not
exceed $1,000) shall be fined not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each such instance and shall be liable for said fine in addition to any fines, fees, costs, or
restitution ordered to any injured or damaged party by the court. (Ord. No. 0-31-95, §10, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 0-
5-98, §15,1-26-98)
Secs. 12-272--12-275. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIX. TRESPASS
Sec. 12-276. Trespass prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to commit a trespass within this municipality
upon either public or private property; provided, however, nothing herein shall prevent duly authorized
representatives of the village from being upon public or private property in the performance of their official
duties and responsibilities under applicable statutes and ordinances. (Ord. No. O-91-79, §1, 7-9-79)
Sec. 12-277. Specifically enumerated trespasses; suppression.
Without constituting any limitation upon the provisions of section 12-276, any of the following acts by
any person, firm or corporation shall be deemed included among those that constitute trespasses in violation of
the provisions of said section 12-276, and appropriate action may be taken hereunder at any time, or from time
to time, to prevent or suppress any violation or violations of this article, the aforesaid enumerated acts so
included, being as follows, to wit:
(a) An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another, including any public property in
violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or at any point
of approach or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in
writing, by any owner or occupant thereof; or
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-35
(b) The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making of an entry upon the land
of another in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or
at any point of approach or entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally
or in writing by any owner or occupant thereof; or
(c) A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case of being requested, either
orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or occupant thereof; or
(d) An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made without the consent of the
person having the right to the possession or control thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any
such vehicle, aircraft or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such
right.
(Ord. No. O-91-79, §1, 7-9-79)
Sec. 12-278. Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined in an amount not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. No. O-91-79, §1, 7-
9-79; Ord. No. 0-5-98, §15,1-26-98)
Secs. 12-279--12-281. Reserved.
ARTICLE XX. OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC EASEMENTS
Sec. 12-282. Blockage of easement or right-of-way.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupier of real property, under, over, upon or through which the
village owns an easement or right-of-way, to block or obstruct or knowingly permit the blockage or obstruction
of said easement or right of way. (Ord. No. O-81-80, §1, 10-27-80)
Sec. 12-283. Removal required; notice.
It shall be the duty of the director of the department of community development, upon discovery of any
obstruction which blocks or obstructs a village easement or right-of-way, to serve notice upon the owner or
occupant of such premises and to demand the removal of said obstruction forthwith. (Ord. No. O-81-80, §1,
10-27-80)
Sec. 12-284. Abatement.
If the person, firm or corporation so served with notice, as provided in section 12-283 above, does not
cause removal of such obstruction or blockage within thirty (30) days following receipt of said notice, the
director of the department of community development may proceed to cause the same to be removed, keeping a
true and correct account of the expenses thereof, and such expenses shall be charged to and paid to the village
by said owner or occupant; provided, however, that in the event, in the opinion of the village manager, it is
urgently necessary for the health, safety, morals and welfare of the public that such obstruction be removed
immediately or at any time prior to the expiration of said thirty-day period, the village may forthwith remove
the obstruction immediately following personal delivery of said notice to the owner or occupant, or if such
premises are not occupied, by certified or registered mail to the record owner thereof.
(Ord. No. O-81-80, §1, 10-27-80)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-36
Sec. 12-285. Lien--Procedure for filing.
The village's reasonable expenses of removal of said obstruction, as provided in section 12-284 above,
shall be and constitute a lien upon said premises. Whenever a bill or statement from the village to the owner or
occupant of such premises for such expenses remains unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered, the
village clerk may file with the county recorder of deeds of Cook County a statement of lien claim. This
statement shall contain the legal description of the premises involved, the amount of the unpaid bill and a
notice that the village claims a lien for this amount.
A copy of the said lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises; provided, however, that
failure of the clerk to record such lien or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice
shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for such expenses as provided in the following section 12-286.
(Ord. No. O-81-80, §1, 10-27-80)
Sec. 12-286. Same--Foreclosure.
Property subject to a lien claim hereunder may be sold for nonpayment of the same upon foreclosure of
said lien by the village in any court of competent jurisdiction. Proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the
village's charges and expenses after deducting costs, as in the case of foreclosure of statutory liens.
(Ord. No. O-81-80, §1, 10-27-80)
ARTICLE XXI. BURGLARY OR ROBBERY ALARM SYSTEMS
Sec. 12-287. Alarm user permits required; fee; application.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to have or maintain on any premises any type of
burglary or robbery alarm, calling for emergency response by the Palatine Police Department, without first
having obtained a Village of Palatine permit for such alarm issued by the Palatine village manager.
Applications for alarm permits shall be on forms furnished by the village. A permit fee in the amount of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) must accompany each application. All applications shall be reviewed and
approved by the Palatine Police Department prior to issuance of any license. There shall be an annual permit
renewal fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00). (Ord. No. O-59-81, §1, 6-9-81)
Sec. 12-288. Unlawful use prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any user of any type burglary or robbery alarm to fail to appear and turn off or
reset any such alarm within one hour after being notified by the police to do so. (Ord. No. O-59-81, §1, 6-9-
81)
Sec. 12-289. False alarms prohibited; fees for response; suspension or revocation of permit.
(a) For the purposes of this section:
(1) False alarm. The term "false alarm" shall mean the activation of a burglary or robbery alarm
at a time when no burglary or robbery is being committed or attempted on the premises, and
when the person activating such alarm has no reasonable cause to believe a burglary or
robbery is being committed.
(2) Police response. The term "police response" shall mean the actual physical presence of one or
more village law enforcement officers at the premises of the alarm system in question in
response to a report of activation of said alarm system.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-37
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to activate a false alarm or for any person to notify the police of
the activation of an alarm having the knowledge that such activation was caused by an electrical or other
malfunction of the alarm system without also notifying the police of such malfunction.
(c) In the event the Palatine police respond to any false alarm, the following reports shall be required
and fees imposed:
(1) First response. For a response to premises at which no other false alarm has occurred within
the preceding six (6) months' period, no fee shall be charged, but the person having or
maintaining such burglary or robbery alarm shall, within three (3) working days after notice to
do so, make a written report to the chief of police on forms prescribed by him setting forth the
cause of such false alarm, the corrective action taken, whether such alarm has been inspected
by an authorized serviceman, and such other information as the chief of police may
reasonably require to determine the cause of such false alarm and prescribe corrective action.
(2) Second response. For a second response to premises within six (6) months after the first
response, no fee shall be charged, but a written report shall be required as for a first response
and the chief of police shall be authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected the alarm system
at such premises, prescribe necessary corrective action, and shall give notice to the person
having or maintaining such alarm system of the conditions and requirements of this section.
(3) Third and succeeding response. For a third response to premises within six (6) months after
such a second response, and for all succeeding responses within six (6) months of the last
response, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged.
(4) Revocation or suspension of permit; disconnection of alarm. If a third response to a false
alarm or any succeeding false alarm is as a result of failure to take necessary corrective action
prescribed by the chief of police, the village manager, following written notice, may revoke or
suspend the alarm permit of the person maintaining such burglary or robbery alarm, and
disconnect or cause to be disconnected or order the disconnection of such alarm system. It
shall be unlawful to reconnect, or operate such alarm system until the village manager is
satisfied that the cause or causes of the false alarms have been eliminated and authorizes the
reissuance of the alarm permit therefor.(Ord. No. O-59-81, §1, 6-9-81)
Sec. 12-290. Automatic dialing of police department or fire department prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall use or cause or permit to be used, or engage in the business of
providing any telephone device or telephone attachment that automatically selects a public trunkline of the
police or fire department of the Village of Palatine and then reproduces any prerecorded message or sound to
report any robbery, burglary, fire or other emergency. (Ord. No. O-59-81, §1, 6-9-81)
Sec. 12-291. Penalty for violations.
Any person who intentionally activates an alarm system for the purpose of summoning police, except
in the event of an actual or attempted robbery, burglary or other bona fide police emergency, or notifying the
police of the activation of an alarm having knowledge that such activation was caused by malfunction of the
alarm system without also first notifying the police of such malfunction; or any person, firm or corporation that
fails to:
(a) Obtain an alarm system user permit as required in section 12-287;
(b) File a written report as required by section 12-289;
(c) Submit to inspection of the alarm system as required by section 12-289;
(d) Pay the fee required by section 12-289;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-38
(e) Obey any lawful order of the village manager of suspension, revocation or disconnection of an
alarm user permit;
shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense, and each day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense. (Ord. No.
O-59-81, §1, 6-9-81; Ord. No. 0-5-98, §15, 1-26-98)
ARTICLE XXII. ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
Sec. 12-292. Abatement procedure.
The following shall be the procedure for the abatement of nuisances within the jurisdiction of the
Village of Palatine.
(1) Notice. Unless otherwise provided for in this Code, upon the determination that a nuisance exists,
the village authorities shall give notice as follows:
(a) Notice shall be given to the owner of the nuisance or of the property on which the nuisance
exists. For purposes of this section, the person to whom the last general tax bill on the
property was sent shall be presumed the owner.
(b) Notice shall be served upon the owner personally or by first class mail addressed to the owner.
If the nuisance has not been abated four (4) days after the mailing of such notice by first class
mail, notice may be served upon such owner by posting the notice in a prominent place on or
about the property identified in the notice.
(c) Notice shall state the location and nature of the nuisance.
(d) Notice may apprise the owner that if the nuisance is not abated within a specified number of
days, the village shall, at the expense of such owner, have such nuisance abated. Ten (10)
days shall be such specified number unless otherwise stated in this code.
(2) Abatement. If upon the giving of notice, the owner fails to abate said nuisance within the time
specified in the notice, the village authorities are hereby authorized to effect the abatement of said nuisance,
and to assess the cost thereof against the owner of the land upon which the nuisance exists. The amount of
such costs shall be paid by such owner to the village. No building permit shall be required for the village
authorities to abate a nuisance.
(3) If the nuisance is of such threat to the welfare and comfort of the community that it must be abated
immediately, the village manager or his designee is hereby authorized to take whatever steps are necessary to
effect the abatement of same.
(Ord. No. O-105-82, §1, 11-8-82; Ord. 0-91-08, §2, 7/14/08)
Sec. 12-293. Assessment of liens for the costs of nuisance abatement.
The cost of such abatement shall constitute a lien upon the real estate effected, superior to all
subsequent liens and encumbrances, except tax liens, if within sixty (60) days after such cost or expense is
incurred the village, or the person performing the service by authority of the village in his or the village's name,
files notice of lien in the office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County, or in the office of the Registrar of
Titles if the real estate effected is registered under the Torrens System.
The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out:
(1) A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-39
(2) The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service.
(3) The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the municipality.
However, the lien of the village shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to such real
estate have arisen subsequent to the abatement and prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien of the village
shall not be valid as to any mortgages, judgment creditor, or other lienor whose rights in and to such real estate
arise prior to the filing of such notice. Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or persons
interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the village of the
person in whose name the lien was filed and such release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice
of lien.
The cost of such abatement shall not be a lien upon the real estate effected unless a notice shall be
served according to 12-292, paragraph (1) of this chapter. (Ord. No. O-105-82, §1, 11-8-82)
ARTICLE XXIII. PENALTY FOR NUISANCE VIOLATIONS
Sec. 12-294. Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation causing any nuisance enumerated in this Code shall be subject to a
fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each time such
person shall continue or recause a nuisance after being found guilty for the same, a new cause of action shall
immediately accrue; provided however that the offender shall be given notice for each offense as set forth in
section 12-292 of this chapter, and shall be allowed a reasonable time to abate such additional nuisance unless
it was willful or resulted in actual damage to another. (Ord. No. O-105-82, §1, 11-8-82; Ord. No. 0-5-98,
§17,1-26-98; Ord. No. 0-91-08, §3&4, 7/14/08)
ARTICLE XXIV. SPRAY PAINT
Sec. 12-294.1. Sale to minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person holding a retail business license to sell paint in spray cans to any
person under the age of seventeen (17) years.
Any person holding a retail business license to sell paint in spray cans shall have posted in a
conspicuous place, a sign which clearly states that "It is unlawful to sell spray paint to any person under the age
of seventeen (17) years." (Ord. No. O-13-88, §1, 2-8-87)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-40
ARTICLE XXV. GENERAL PENALTY; CITATIONS*
----------
*Editor's note--Ord. No. O-13-88, §2, adopted Feb. 8, 1987, renumbered Ch. 12, Art. XXIV as Art.
XXV.
----------
Sec. 12-295. Definitions.
(a) The word "officer" shall mean the health officer and inspectors or agents of the health officer.
(b) The word "person" includes a natural person, firm, partnership, association, sole proprietorship, or
corporation, as well as any agents, representatives or employees thereof upon whom responsibility or liability is
imposed by this code for the violation cited. (Ord. No. O-173-86, §1, 12-22-86)
Sec. 12-296. Citation and settlement in lieu of prosecution for certain offenses.
Whenever an officer observes a violation of certain provisions of this code as specified in section 12-
299 of this chapter or has probable cause to believe that such a violation has occurred and that a particular
person is responsible, said officer may, in lieu of the filing of a complaint in court, issue the alleged violator a
citation which shall:
(1) Advise said person that the same has violated a specified ordinance.
(2) Request said person to make payment in an amount applicable to said alleged violation as set
forth in section 12-299 as settlement of said claim.
(3) Advise said person, where applicable, to cease and/or abate said violation forthwith and to
refrain from like violations in the future.
(4) Inform said person that, upon failure to settle the claim and to cease and/or abate said
violations, a complaint will be filed with the Circuit Court of Cook County.
(Ord. No. O-173-86, §1, 12-22-86)
Sec. 12-297. Service of citation.
Citations as provided by section 12-296 of this chapter shall be personally served upon the person
responsible for the violation, his agent, representative, independent contractor, or employee. In the event the
owner, occupant, contractor, or other person responsible for the violation cannot be located, the citation may be
served by posting a copy at the property, structure or vehicle where the violation has occurred and sending a
copy certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of such person. (Ord. No. O-173-86,
§1, 12-22-86)
Sec. 12-298. Settlement of claim.
(a) Any person served with a citation pursuant to section 12-297 may settle and compromise the
violation claim in respect of such ordinance violation and paying to the village the applicable amount as shown
and within the time period set forth in the schedule set forth in section 12-299 of this chapter.
(b) In the event that payment is not made within the time prescribed and a complaint has been filed in
the Circuit Court of Cook County, payment of any fine and costs shall be in such amounts as may be
determined by and established by the Circuit Court of Cook County within the limits established by this Code.
(Ord. No. O-173-86, §1, 12-22-86)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-41
Sec. 12-299. Violation and settlement schedule.
(a) Citations may be issued, pursuant to section 12-297 for violations of the following provisions of the
Palatine Municipal Code:
Chapter 4. Ambulances and Mobile Intensive Care Units-All sections
Chapter 5. Animals-All sections
Chapter 8. Garbage and Refuse-All sections
Chapter 10. Housing-All sections
Chapter 11. Licenses, Permits, and Business Regulations-All sections
Chapter 12. Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions
Art. IV. Plants and Weeds
Art. VII. Sound Amplifiers
Art. XII. Anti-litter Regulations
Art. XX. Obstructing Public Easements
Chapter 16. Streets and Sidewalks
Art. V. Trees and Shrubs
(b) Citations issued for violation of those sections of the code specified above may be settled and
compromised by payment of the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) if paid within seven (7) days of service of
the citation and fifty dollars ($50.00) if paid after such seven-day period, but before filing of a complaint in the
Circuit Court of Cook County. (Ord. No. O-173-86, §1, 12-22-6)
Secs. 12-300--12-309. Reserved.
ARTICLE XXVI. REGULATION OF LIGHTING*
----------
*Editor's note--Ordinance No. O-109-89, adopted Aug. 14, 1989, amended Ch. 12 by adding a new
Art. XXVI consisting of provisions numbered §§12-300--12-306. In order to conform to established Code
format, and in order to provide possible future expansion of Art. XXV without the necessity of pointnumbering,
the editor has renumbered these new provisions as §§12-310--12-316. The original section
numbers of these provisions have been preserved in the history notes following each section and in the Code
Comparative Table at the back of this volume in order to aid the user in tracking.
Cross reference(s)--Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 16; street lighting requirements in subdivisions, App.
B, §8.09.
----------
Sec. 12-310. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
Flood light. A luminare designed so that at least ninety (90) percent of the emitted light is within an
angle of thirty (30) degrees to the centerline of the light beam.
Foot lambert. One (1) foot lambert is the brightness of a perfectly diffusing surface uniformly emitting
or reflecting one (1) lumen per square foot of surface.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-42
Footcandle. One (1) footcandle is the amount of illumination provided by a light source of one (1)
international candle at a distance of one (1) foot from the light source.
International candle or candle power. One (1) international candle is the unit of luminous intensity as
established by standard light sources as maintained by the U.S. Bureau of Standards. This is more commonly
called one (1) candle power.
Lumen. One (1) lumen is that quantity of luminous energy included in one (1) steradian unit solid
angle from a uniform point source of one (1) candle power. It is also defined as the luminous flux intercepted
by a surface of one (1) square foot, all points of which are one (1) foot from a uniform point source of one (1)
candle power.
Luminare. A device or fixture containing a light source and means for directing and controlling the
distribution of light emitted therefrom. (Ord. No. O-109-89, §1 (12-300), 8-14-89)
Sec. 12-311. Regulations of intensity of light.
It is unlawful for any person, association or other legal entity owning, occupying or controlling any
property within the Village of Palatine to exceed the following light intensity regulations:
(1) No lighting source shall cause more than one-tenth (0.1) footcandle of illumination to fall on
adjoining R1, R1A, R1B, R1C and R2 residentially zoned property and any property zoned P
or PUD which is improved with one (1) or more single-family detached dwellings.
(2) No lighting source shall cause more than two-tenths (0.2) footcandle of illumination to fall on
adjoining R3 or R3A residential property and any property zoned P or PUD which is
improved multifamily property.
(3) No lighting source shall cause more than two (2) footcandles of illumination to fall on any
adjoining commercially zoned property and any property zoned P or PUD which is improved
commercial property.
(4) No lighting source shall cause more than five (5) footcandles of illumination to fall on any
public way in commercially zoned property.(Ord. No. O-109-89, §1 (12-301), 8-14-89)
Sec. 12-312. Regulations on glare.
Regulations on glare shall be as follows:
(1) No floodlight shall be mounted higher than twenty-five (25) feet above the ground nor shall
any part of any floodlight's beam strike the ground at any angle of more than forty-five (45)
degrees from vertical.
(2) No light source shall present a surface brightness when viewed between horizontal and an
angle of forty-five (45) degrees above horizontal from adjoining property in accordance with
the following:
a. 750 foot lamberts from R1, R1A, R1B, R1C and R2 zoned property.
b. 1,500 foot lamberts from R3 and R3A zoned property.
c. 2,200 foot lamberts from any commercially zoned property.
d. 10,000 foot lamberts from any public way.
(Ord. No. O-109-89, §1 (12-302), 8-14-89)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-43
Sec. 12-313. Standards of measurement.
(a) Light intensity shall be measured in footcandles with a direct reading portable low range light meter
having a range of zero to twenty (0--20) footcandles. Values set forth in this article are maximum values
measured at ninety (90) degrees to the incidence of light from the source.
(b) Measurement methods and techniques shall be those recommended by the Illuminating
Engineering Society in their "Standard Methods for Measuring and Reporting Horizontal Footcandle."
(c) Brightness measurement based on foot lambert must be governed by the definition of the foot
lambert and lumen. Calculated values for source brightness may be obtained by using comparable
measurement techniques. Calculations shall be in accordance with the following:
(1) Spherical bare sources (incandescent lamps). The brightness shall be calculated as total
lumens divided by one-tenth the square of the diameter of the source measured in inches.
(2) Cylindrical bare sources (fluorescent lamps). The brightness shall be calculated as total
lumens divided by one-fiftieth the product of length and diameter of the source in inches.
(3) Floodlight sources. The brightness of floodlight sources shall be calculated as the eight-tenths
of the total lumens divided by the area of the face of the floodlight in square feet.
If the light source is mounted in a diffuse luminare, seven-tenths of the above values shall be
used.
The values of lumens to be used shall be based on the following efficiencies:
Incandescent Filament Lamps
Gaseous Discharge Lamps
25 watt-- 250 lumens
40 watts-- 1,200 lumens
40 watt-- 500 lumens
100 watts-- 3,000 lumens
60 watt-- 800 lumens
250 watts--11,000 lumens
100 watt-- 1,600 lumens
400 watts--25,000 lumens
200 watt-- 3,300 lumens
1,000 watts--65,000 lumens
300 watt-- 5,000 lumens
500 watt-- 9,000 lumens
1,000 watt—20,000 lumens
(Ord. No. O-109-89, §1 (12-303), 8-14-89)
Sec. 12-314. Enforcement.
Any existing lighting condition determined by the director of environmental health to be in violation of
any of the provisions of this article shall, within the time determined on a written notice to the violator, be
corrected. Service of notice may be made by personal service, publication in a local newspaper generally
circulated within the village, conspicuous posting on the premises where the violation occurs or by U.S. mail.
(Ord. No. O-109-89, §1 (12-304), 8-14-89)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-44
Sec. 12-315. Hearing of variations.
Where practical difficulties or particular hardship, not created by any person having interest in the
property, prevents carrying out the strict letter of any of the provisions of this article, the board of health, on
petition, may determine and vary the requirements of this article to the extent that they are still in harmony with
its general purpose and intent. However, any such variation shall be made by the board as specified only after a
hearing before the board, of which hearing there shall be notice of time and place of the hearing given by
publication not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days before said hearing, and also by
United States mail addressed to the person(s) or entity seeking a variation from the requirements of this article
and the owners of any adjacent property. (Ord. No. O-109-89, §1 (12-305), 8-14-89)
Sec. 12-316. Violations declared a nuisance.
The failure of persons owning or occupying the property to abate any lighting violation(s), as stated in
this article, is declared a public nuisance and shall be subject to the abatement provisions of Article XXII of
this chapter and the penalty provisions of Article XXIII of chapter. (Ord. No. O-109-89, §1 (12-306), 8-14-89)
ARTICLE XXVII. GRAFFITI
Sec. 12-317. Graffiti Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property to not remove or paint over any prohibited sign painted
directly on an exterior wall of a building or on any structure upon that property. A prohibited sign includes but
is not limited to any permanent display of any letter, numeral, figure, emblem, insignia, picture, outline,
character, spectacle, delineation, announcement or any combination thereof which are painted of a color
different from the color of the exterior of the structure on which it is painted and which are viable beyond the
boundaries of the property including signs commonly known as graffiti. A painted area on the side of a
structure used to cover a prohibited sign or graffiti which is of a different color or surface material than the
remaining exterior surface of that side of the structure is unlawful.
Sec. 12-318. Failure to remove graffiti declared a nuisance.
The failure of an owner of property to remove from the exterior of structures upon the owner's property any
permanent display of a prohibited sign or graffiti in compliance with the regulations of this Code, within
fourteen (14) days of notification, is declared a public nuisance and shall be subject to the abatement
provisions of Article XXII of this chapter and the penalty provisions of Article XXIII of this Chapter. (Ord.
No. 0-60-93 6-14-93)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-45
ARTICLE XXVIII. DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Sec. 12-319. Definitions.
As used herein, unless the context requires otherwise.
Cannabis. The term ”cannabis” shall include marijuana, hashish and other substances which are
identified as including any parts of the plan Cannabis Sativa, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any
part of such plant, whether growing or not, and any compound, manufacture, salt derivative, mixture or
preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol
derivatives.
Controlled Substance. The term ”controlled substance” shall have the meaning ascribed to it in
Section 102 of the ”Illinois Controlled Substances Act”
(720 ILCS 570/102), as if that definition were incorporated herein.
Deliver or Delivery. The terms “deliver” or “delivery” mean the actual, constructive or attempted
transfer of possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency relationship.
Drug Paraphernalia. The term ”drug paraphernalia” means all equipment, products and materials of
any kind which are peculiar to and marketed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the Cannabis Control Act, the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act, or Palatine Ordinance Section 12-29. Possession of marijuana prohibited. Drug Paraphernalia
includes, but is not limited to:
1. Kits peculiar to and marketed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled substance.
2. Isomerization devices peculiar to and marketed for use in increasing the potency of any
species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled substance.
3. Testing equipment peculiar to and marketed for private home use in identifying or in
analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis or controlled substance.
4. Diluents and adulterants peculiar to and marketed for cutting cannabis or a controlled
substance by private persons.
5. Objects peculiar to and marketed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing
cannabis, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body including, where applicable,
the following items:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-46
a. water pipes
b. carburetion tubes, pipes and devices
c. smoking and carburetion masks
d. miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials
e. electric pipes
f. air-driven pipes
g. chillums
h. bongs
I. ice pipes or chillers
j. roach clips
6. Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for use in violation of
this Ordinance.
Sec. 12-320. Sale or Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia
(a) It is unlawful for any person to keep for sale, offer for sale, sell, or deliver for any commercial
consideration any item of drug paraphernalia.
(b) Any store, place, or premises from which or in which any item of drug paraphernalia is kept
for sale, offered for sale, sold, or delivered for any commercial consideration is declared a public nuisance.
Sec. 12-321. Possession of drug paraphernalia
(a) It is unlawful for any person to knowingly possess an item of drug paraphernalia with the
intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the
human body, or in preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for that use.
(b) In determining intent under subsection (a), the trier of fact may take into consideration the
proximity of the cannabis or controlled substance to drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or
controlled substance on the drug paraphernalia.
Sec. 12-322. Exempt items
(a) Items marketed for use in lawful research, teaching or chemical analysis of cannabis and not
for sale
(b) Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used in connection with the use of tobacco
or any other lawful substance, to include, but not limited to, garden hoses, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco
pipes, and cigarette rolling papers.
(c) Items used for decorative purposes providing such items have been rendered completely
inoperable or incapable of being used for any illicit purposes prohibited in this Ordinance.
Sec. 12-323. Forfeiture and seizure of prohibited property
(a) All drug paraphernalia is subject to forfeiture.
(b) Property subject to forfeiture may be seized by any police officer upon process issued by a
court having jurisdiction.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-47
(c) Seizures may be made by police officers if there is probable cause to believe that the property
has been used to introduce cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body, or has cannabis or a
controlled substance on it, including its residue, or is dangerous to health or safety and existing circumstances
do not allow reasonable time for the officer to obtain lawful process.
(d) The presence of items which are deemed violative of this Ordinance or are otherwise subject to
its forfeiture provisions in an inventory shall not subject the entire inventory to seizure or forfeiture.
(e) When property is seized under this Ordinance, the Chief of Police may have the property
removed to a place designated by him.
(f) The Circuit Court shall determine the validity of any seizures made under this Ordinance and
determine the disposition of all seized property.
(g) When property is forfeited under this Ordinance, the Chief of Police may retain the property
for official use or have the property destroyed.
Sec. 12-324. Penalty
Any person who is found guilty of violating section 12-320 or 12-321 shall be subject to a fine of not
less than two hundred ($200.00) dollars nor more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars for each separate
occurrence
ARTICLE XXIX. CONFLICTS WITH CERTAIN HOME RULE
COUNTY ORDINANCES
------------
Editor’s Note: Article XXIX was adopted by Ord. #O-50-17 on 5/1/17
A. Employers located within the Village shall comply with all applicable Federal and/or State
laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time with regard to
both the payment of minimum hourly wages and paid sick leave. Employee eligibility for paid
sick leave and minimum hourly wages shall also be in compliance with all applicable Federal
and/or State laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time.
B. No additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave, or minimum hourly wages, including,
without limitation, any additional obligations by Ordinances adopted by the County of Cook
Board of Commissioners, including but not limited to file numbers 16-4229 and 16-5768,
shall apply to employers located within the Village, except those required by Federal and/or
State laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time.
C. For the purposes of this Section, the term “employee” means an individual permitted to work
by an employer regardless of the number of persons the employer employs, and the term
“employer” means any person employing one or more employees, or seeking to employ one or
more employees, if the person has its principal place of business within the Village or does
business within the Village.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12-48
D. For the purposes of this Section, the term “employer” does not mean:
(a) The government of the United States or a corporation wholly owned by the
government of the United States;
(b) An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian tribe;
(c) The government of the State or any agency or department thereof; or
(d) The government of any municipality.”
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 13 - POLICE DEPARTMENT
13-1
Chapter 13 POLICE DEPARTMENT*
----------
*Editor's note--Ord. No. O-108-76, 1, enacted Dec. 13, 1976, repealed former Ch. 13, relative to
the police department, and enacted in lieu thereof a new Ch. 13, pertaining to the same subject matter. Former
Ch. 13 was derived from Code 1961, 5.001--5.016.
Cross reference(s)--Police and fire commission. 2-361 et seq.
----------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-16-02 passed on 1/28/02 replaced Secs. 13-1 through 13-8.
-----------------------
Sec. 13-1. Creation; composition.
There is hereby created a police department for the Village of Palatine which shall consist of a chief of police
and as many employees as the Corporate Authorities may designate from time to time. (Ord. No. O-108-76,
§1, 12-13-76) (Ord. No. 0-16-02 §4, 1/28/02)
Sec. 13-1.1. Reserved. (Ord. No. 0-16-02 §4, 1/28/02)
Editor's note--Section 13-1.1, pertaining to agreements for police services for state and federally owned
facilities located in the village, and derived from Ord. No. O-180-88, ' 2, adopted Dec. 27, 1988, was deleted
by Ord. No. O-88-91, §1, adopted June 24, 1991. (Ord. No. 0-16-02 §4, 1/28/02)
Sec. 13-2. Appointment and removal of the chief of police.
The chief of police shall be appointed by the village manager with the approval by a majority vote of the
Corporate Authorities.. The person appointed as chief of police must have achieved a baccalaureate degree
from an accredited college or university prior to the date of appointment. The chief of police shall serve at the
pleasure of the village manager and may be removed by the village manager at any time thereafter. (Ord. No.
O-108-76. §1, 12-13-76; Ord. No. O-4-86, §1, 1-13-86) (Ord. No. 0-16-02 §4, 1/28/02)
Sec. 13-3. Supervision and control of the chief of police.
The village manager shall be the immediate supervisor of the chief of police, and all policies, directives and
orders from the village to the chief of police shall be made by or transmitted through the village manager. The
chief of police shall report directly to the village manager and not to the Mayor and Village Council or to
individual members thereof. (Ord. No. O-108-76, §1, 12-13-76) (Ord. No. 0-16-02 §4, 1/28/02)
Sec. 13-4. Powers and duties of the police chief generally.
The chief of police shall direct the administration and operation of the police department and in addition to
policies transmitted to him by the village manager, shall establish such other policies, directives, rules and
regulations for the administration and operation of the department as he sees fit, and provided in written form
to all employees. The chief of police shall have the authority and responsibility for fiscal management of the
police department within the fiscal policies and procedures established by the village manager and Corporate
Authorities. The chief of police shall serve as appointing authority for appointment to any position within the
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 13 - POLICE DEPARTMENT
13-2
department other than his own, and shall have the power to suspend, demote or dismiss any employee, subject
to and in accordance with the provisions of this Code governing the fire and police commission, Chapter 2,
Article XX, and the village work rules. (Ord. No. O-108-76, §1, 12-13-76; Ord. No. O-4-86, §1, 1-13-86)
(Ord. No. 0-16-02 §4, 1/28/02)
Sec. 13-5. Civil service exempt command positions.
The chief of police, with the concurrence of the village manager, shall have the authority to recruit and appoint
individuals to civil service exempt command positions within the department. Civil service exempt command
positions will not have certified status and rights. Individuals appointed to exempt command positions shall
serve at the pleasure of the chief of police and may be removed by the chief with concurrence of the village
manager at any time thereafter. If an individual is appointed to such a position who holds certified status within
the department in another position, the individual shall retain a guaranteed right to return to the former position
with certified status upon termination from the exempt command position, subject to section 2-380 of this
Code. (Ord. No. O-108-76, §1, 12-13-76) (Ord. No. 0-16-02 §4, 1/28/02)
Sec. 13-6. Dismissals.
No full-time, certified member of the police department, except the police chief, shall be dismissed until after a
hearing by the fire and police commission, in accordance with its rules and the provisions of Chapter 13 of this
Code. The chief of police, without the requirement of a hearing shall have the power to dismiss a patrol officer
who is serving in an original appointment probationary period. (Ord. No. O-108-76, §1, 12-13-76) (Ord. No.
0-16-02 §4, 1/28/02)
Sec. 13-7. Residency requirement for all police officers.
All persons who are appointed police officers of the village of Palatine shall maintain residence in one of the
following Illinois Counties: Cook, DuPage, Kane, McHenry, or Lake. (Ord. No. O-136-77, §1, 12-27-77;
Ord. No. 0-97-94 §1, 7-25-94) (Ord. No. 0-16-02 §4, 1/28/02)
Sec. 13-8. Auxiliary police unit. Intentionally omitted. (Ord. No. 0-16-02 §4, 1/28/02)
Sec. 13-9. Disposition of abandoned property.
(a) Office of property custodian created. There hereby is created a property custodian for the village,
who may be an officer of the police department, appointed by and to serve at the pleasure of the chief of police,
or a civilian employee whose appointment shall be approved by the chief of police and who shall serve at the
pleasure of the chief of police.
(b) Duties of property custodian. The property custodian shall act as custodian of all personal property
seized, taken, or otherwise transferred to the possession of the police department. All officers and members of
the department into whose possession may be transferred any such personal property shall deliver the same
promptly to the property custodian, unless it is needed for immediate use as evidence, in which case, a report
and inventory of the same shall be forwarded promptly to the property custodian. Provided, however, that
nothing herein contained shall be deemed to require the property custodian to take possession or make
disposition of any lost or stolen property, the possession or disposition of which is otherwise provided for by
this Code.
(c) Custody and disposition of personal property. The property custodian shall maintain a complete
and accurate record of all personal property which may be seized or otherwise transferred to the possession of
the police department and shall make reasonable efforts to identify and notify the owner or other person
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 13 - POLICE DEPARTMENT
13-3
entitled to possession thereof, and shall return the property after such person provides satisfactory proof of
ownership or right to possession and reimburse the police department for reasonable expenses and costs.
If the identity or location of the owner or other person entitled to possession of such personal property
has not been ascertained within sixty (60) days after the police department obtains possession thereof, the
property custodian shall proceed to dispose of said personal property. If such personal property is deemed
saleable, the property custodian shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the
village a notice of sale, his intent to sell the same at public auction for cash, describing it in general terms and
not by individual item. Thereupon, such personal property will be sold at public auction at such place as the
chief of police may direct in such manner as to expose to the inspection of the bidders all such personal
property so offered for sale. Property offered, but not sold, at such auction may be offered and sold at a
subsequent public auction without such notice.
If any such personal property is deemed to be of use to any village department, such property may be
retained for use of such department upon approval of the village manager. Any such personal property deemed
by the property custodian to be unsaleable shall be confiscated or destroyed. The proceeds of any sale or sales
so made, after deducting the cost of storage, advertising, and other expenses incident to the handling and sale
of such property, shall be paid by the property custodian to the Village of Palatine finance director who shall
deposit said proceeds in the general fund of the village.
(d) Exception; weapons. The preceding provision of this section shall not apply to pistols, revolvers,
knives, dirks, slingshots, metallic knuckles, or other deadly weapons of like character. All such weapons,
except those that the chief of police shall order retained for the use of the police department, shall be presented
to the chief of police by the property custodian, within one year after their receipt, for destruction.
(e) Perishable property. Any personal property seized or transferred to the possession of the police
department which is of a perishable nature so as to make it dangerous or inadvisable to retain possession
thereof for the length of time specified in the preceding subsections, the property custodian upon certifying
such fact to the chief of police and setting forth his reason why such property should not be retained for the
period hereinabove fixed, and with the approval of the chief of police, shall cause such property, if deemed by
the property custodian to be saleable, to be advertised forthwith in a newspaper of general circulation within
the village and shall sell such personal property at public auction at any time after three (3) days have elapsed
from the seizure or taking possession thereof; provided, however, that any such personal property deemed to be
unsaleable or dangerous shall be disposed of as refuse or in other reasonable manner as the chief of police shall
direct. (Ord. No. O-16-79, 1, 3-12-79)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 14 - REAL ESTATE DISCLOSURE ACT
14-1
Chapter 14 REAL ESTATE DISCLOSURE ACT*
----------
*Editor's note--Ord. No. O-59-80, 1, enacted July 14, 1980, amended this Code by deleting former
Ch. 14, relative to real estate disclosure, and enacting in lieu thereof a new Ch. 14 pertaining to the same
subject matter. Former Ch. 14 was derived from Code 1961, 28.101, 28.201--28.206, 28.301--28.303,
28.401--28.404, 28.502, 28.601--28.603; Ord. No. O-1-79, 4, adopted Jan. 8, 1979; Ord. No. O-92-79, 5,
adopted July 9, 1979.
----------
Art. I. In General, 14-1--14-15
Art. II. Disclosure of Interests, 14-16--14-35
Art. III. Disclosure Notices, 14-36--14-50
Art. IV. Condemnation Proceedings, 14-51--14-80
Art. V. Violation; Penalty, 14-81--14-83
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 14-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless their
context clearly requires otherwise:
Contract means any agreement concerning real estate including but not limited to the purchase, sale,
lease, license, trading, granting of easements, gifts, air rights, mineral rights, oil or gas rights, options, or
contracts to purchase.
Disclosure notice means the writing provided in section 14-36.
Interest in real estate means any holder of the legal title, equitable title, beneficial interest, direct or
indirect financial interest, leasehold, lien, tax sale certificate, option, or any other interest whatsoever
concerning the real estate, any right to receive rents or proceeds from real estate, any interest in a land trust,
including that of beneficiary, or person entitled under the law to make a claim to any portion of a
condemnation award pursuant to a judgment order.
Land trust means any express agreement or arrangement whereof a use, confidence or trust is declared
of any real estate or of any charge upon real estate, for the use or benefit of any person, public body, corporate
or other entity, under which the title to real property, both legal and equitable, is held by a trustee, subject only
to the execution of the trust, which may be enforced by the beneficiaries, and under which the interest of the
beneficiary is personal property only. (Ord. No. O-59-80, 1, 7-14-80; Ord. No. O-104-84, 1, 12-10-84)
Secs. 14-2--14-15. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 14 - REAL ESTATE DISCLOSURE ACT
14-2
ARTICLE II. DISCLOSURE OF INTERESTS
Sec. 14-16. Disclosures required.
Whenever any of the following having an interest in real estate, to wit: A corporation, partnership,
association, business trust, estate, two (2) or more persons having a joint or common interest, other commercial
or legal entity, trustee of a land trust, or any beneficiary or beneficiaries thereof make application to the village
for action requiring an ordinance or ordinance amendment, village board of trustees approval, or other village
agency approval, with respect to sale or purchase of said real estate, or zoning, annexation, vacation of streets
and alleys, leases and contracts with respect thereto, issuance by the village of industrial revenue bonds,
residential or housing revenue bonds, or similar revenue bonds, a disclosure notice in the form set forth in
section 14-36 shall be certified and attached to the application by said applicant or applicants.
In the case of corporation, all shareholders owning shares equal to or in excess of five (5) per cent of
the issued and outstanding capital stock of said corporation shall be disclosed on said disclosure notice.
Whenever any interest required to be disclosed hereunder is held by an agent or agents, or a nominee
or nominees, the principals for whom such agents or nominees hold such interest shall also be disclosed. The
application of a spouse or any other party, if constructively controlled by another person, or legal entity as set
forth above, shall state the name and address of such person or entity possessing such constructive control and
the relationship under which such control is being or may be exercised. Whenever any of the following is held
by a corporation, to wit: A stock interest required to be disclosed, a partnership interest, an interest in an
association or other legal entity or other beneficial interest, all shareholders of such corporation owning shares
equal to or in excess of five (5) per cent of all issued and outstanding capital stock of said corporation shall
also be disclosed. If such an interest is held by another legal entity, all individuals or beneficiaries owning five
(5) per cent or more of such entity shall be disclosed.
All disclosure notices and updated disclosure notices shall be filed with and retained in the custody of
the clerk. The clerk shall only accept such subject disclosure notices or updated disclosure notices for filing as
comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. No. O-59-80, 1, 7-14-80; Ord. No. O-104-84, 2, 12-
10-84)
Sec. 14-17. Payments by village.
No monies may be paid out by the village until all disclosure notices are filed and the procedures of
section 14-16 are completed. (Ord. No. O-59-80, 1, 7-14-80)
Sec. 14-18. Change in interest.
Before the final execution of the contract or during the term of any continuing contract between the
village and any person having an interest in real estate, or before the village takes final action on any
application described in section 14-16, if there is any change in any interest in the property of any party
disclosed in any disclosure notice, the person who transfers his interest and the persons obtaining the interest in
the real estate must file updated disclosure notices with the clerk within ten (10) days of any change; provided,
however, that this article is inapplicable to a change caused by death or bankruptcy. Failure to so file shall be a
violation of this chapter. (Ord. No. O-59-80, 1, 7-14-80)
Sec. 14-19. Contract voidable.
Any contract which is in violation of this chapter shall be voidable at the option of the village but only
on the grounds of a fraudulent failure to disclose or a wilfully inaccurate disclosure by a party prohibited by
law from having an interest in the contract or by another party conspiring with such a party to prevent
discovery of the prohibited interest. (Ord. No. O-59-80, 1, 7-14-80)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 14 - REAL ESTATE DISCLOSURE ACT
14-3
Sec. 14-20. Actions to compel filing.
Any person or persons may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel the
filing of disclosure notices by any party or entity required to file the same under this chapter or to compel the
village to follow the procedures specified in this chapter. If the court finds that there is a party who is required
to file, and who is able to file but has not done so, or that the village has not followed the procedure specified
in this chapter, it shall order the appropriate parties to file or to procure the filing of such disclosure notices
upon penalty of contempt. The court may award reasonable attorneys' fees where warranted. (Ord. No. O-59-
80, 1, 7-14-80)
Secs. 14-21--14-35. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. DISCLOSURE NOTICES
Sec. 14-36. Description.
A disclosure notice shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of disclosing party (including individual names as well as names of
business firms, partnerships, corporations);
(2) Brief description of the contract or condemnation case number and court, or the zoning,
special use variation or other proceeding under the zoning ordinance, as the case may be;
(3) Common street address of real estate or general description (including county);
(4) Legal description of real estate;
(5) Nature and extent of the interest (percentage of total) of the person(s) filing the notice;
(6) The name, address, legal nature and extent of interests of any and all persons deriving an
interest from or through the disclosing or filing party; and
(7) Each disclosure notice shall contain the following statement clearly visible to the person
disclosing:
"I swear (or affirm) that there are no other persons deriving any interest from or through me or
from or through any other person or entities above set forth in the property which is the
subject of the contract or application for which I am filing this disclosure notice whom I have
not disclosed. I understand that if there are any changes in the interest disclosed in this
disclosure notice during the terms of the subject contract or before the village has taken final
action on the matter for which this disclosure notice is filed, I shall file a subsequent
disclosure notice disclosing such changes."
(Ord. No. O-59-80, 1, 7-14-80)
Sec. 14-37. Affirmation or swearing required.
A disclosure notice shall be affirmed or sworn to by the individual or individuals filing it. (Ord. No.
O-59-80, 1, 7-14-80)
Sec. 14-38. To be public records.
All disclosure notices shall be public records. Any person requesting copies shall be promptly
furnished the same at a charge of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per page. (Ord. No. O-59-80, 1, 7-14-80)
Secs. 14-39--14-50. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 14 - REAL ESTATE DISCLOSURE ACT
14-4
ARTICLE IV. CONDEMNATION PROCEEDINGS
Sec. 14-51. Disclosure notice.
In any condemnation proceeding instituted by the village, it shall be the duty of each defendant who
files an appearance or answer, to file a disclosure notice as described in section 14-36 within thirty (30) days
after his filing of said appearance or answer or prior to any order vesting an interest in the real estate in a
condemning body, whichever comes first. (Ord. No. O-59-80, 1, 7-14-80)
Sec. 14-52. Refusal or failure to disclose.
The refusal or failure of any party to disclose in this chapter does not affect the taking of the property
by the village. The village, however, shall not pay the proceeds of the deposit to any person entitled to a
portion thereof because of his interest in real estate unless a disclosure notice has previously been filed by that
person. (Ord. No. O-59-80, 1, 7-14-80)
Secs. 14-53--14-80. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. VIOLATION; PENALTY
Sec. 14-81. Additional information.
Notwithstanding any of the above provisions, the village may require any such additional information
as is reasonably necessary to achieve full disclosure relevant to the action under consideration by the village
president and board of trustees or other village agency. (Ord. No. O-59-80, 1, 7-14-80)
Sec. 14-82. Failure to comply.
In the event of a failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the village president and board
of trustees or other village agency may refuse to act upon the application; or, if any ordinance, ordinance
amendment or other village action in connection with the real estate has been approved or taken, such approval
or other action shall be voidable at the option of the village. (Ord. No. O-59-80, 1, 7-14-80)
Sec. 14-83. Violation; penalty.
Any person required under this chapter to file the disclosures required hereunder who fails to do so or
who willfully furnishes false, inaccurate or incomplete information is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. (Ord.
No. O-59-80, 1, 7-14-80)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 14-1/2 - CONVEYANCE OF REAL ESTATE, ETC.
14.5-1
Chapter 14-1/2 CONVEYANCE OF REAL ESTATE OWNED BY THE VILLAGE*
----------
*Editor's note--Ord. No. O-30-84, 1, adopted May 14, 1984, added Ch. 14A to the Code, which
chapter the editor has redesignated Ch. 14 1/2 to conform to the system of numbering in the Code.
Cross reference(s)--Village board of trustees, 2-16 et seq.; real estate disclosure act, 14-1 et seq.;
eminent domain, 20-1 et seq.
----------
Art. I. In General, 14 1/2-1--14 1/2-4
Art. II. Deed of Conveyance, 14 1/2-5
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 14 1/2-1. Power to convey.
The board of trustees of the Village of Palatine has the power to direct the conveyance of any real
estate owned by the village when, in the opinion of the board, the real estate is no longer necessary,
appropriate, required for the use of, profitable to, or for the best interests of the village. This power shall be
exercised by an ordinance passed by three-fourths of the board of trustees then holding office, at any regular
meeting or at any special meeting called for that purpose. (Ord. No. O-30-84, 1, 5-14-84)
Sec. 14 1/2-2. Ordinance directing conveyance.
An ordinance directing the conveyance of real estate owned by the village shall specify the location of
the real estate, the use thereof, and such conditions with respect to further use of the real estate as the board of
directors may deem necessary and desirable to the public interest. (Ord. No. O-30-84, 1, 5-14-84)
Sec. 14 1/2-3. Publication of notice.
Except as hereinafter provided in section 14 1/2-4 hereof, before the board of trustees shall convey real
estate by virtue of the ordinance described in section 14 1/2-2, notice of the proposal to sell shall be published
once each week for three (3) successive weeks in a daily or weekly paper published in the village, or if there is
none, then in some paper published in Cook County. The first publication shall be not less than thirty (30) days
before the day provided in the notice for the opening of bids for the real estate. The notice shall contain an
accurate description of the property, state the purpose for which it is used and at what meeting the bids will be
considered and opened, and shall advertise for bids therefor. All such bids shall be opened only at a regular
meeting of the board of trustees. The board of trustees may accept the high bid or any other bid determined to
be in the best interest of the village by a vote of three-fourths of the members of the board then holding office,
but by a majority vote of those holding office, they may reject any and all bids. The consideration for such a
sale may include but need not be limited to the provision of off-street parking facilities by the purchaser, which
parking facilities may be made part of the municipal parking system. Such consideration also may include the
provision of other public facilities by the purchaser. (Ord. No. O-30-84, 1, 5-14-84)
Sec. 14 1/2-4. Authority to convey without publication.
If publication for bids fails to attract a bid acceptable to the board or if a majority of the members of
the board then holding office determines that publication of notice and advertising for bids would be futile for
any reason whatsoever, including but not limited to, matters concerning the condition or marketability of the
real estate, as the board in its sole discretion shall determine, the board may authorize and direct appropriate
municipal officers to negotiate the sale or other conveyance of real estate on behalf of the village without
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 14-1/2 - CONVEYANCE OF REAL ESTATE, ETC.
14.5-2
further publication. Such designated officers shall negotiate with any and all responsible persons or firms
expressing an interest in the real estate and shall submit promptly any firm proposals or offers to the board of
trustees of the village, who shall accept or reject the proposals or offers as provided in this Chapter 14 1/2.
(Ord. No. O-30-84, 1, 5-14-84)
ARTICLE II. DEED OF CONVEYANCE
Sec. 14 1/2-5. Conveyance of real estate.
When the ordinance described in section 14 1/2-1 has been adopted and the consideration paid or
secured, the president and the municipal clerk, may convey the real estate and transfer it, by proper deed of
conveyance, stating therein the consideration therefor, with the seal of the village. (Ord. No. O-30-84, 1, 5-
14-84)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 15- EMERGENCY ENERGY PLANS
15-1
Chapter 15 EMERGENCY ENERGY PLANS
----------
*Editor's note--Ord. No. O-31-88, 2, adopted March 14, 1988, repealed Ch. 15 in its entirety
pertaining to signs which derived from Code 1961, 27.201--27.226, 27.301--27.306, 27.401--27.404,
27.501--27.508, 27.601--27.606, 27.701--27.704, 27.801--27.804, 27.901--27.903; Ord. No. O-52-69, adopted
Sept. 22, 1969; Ord. No. O-91-76, 1, 2, adopted Oct. 11, 1976; Ord. No. O-96-76, 1, adopted Oct. 25,
1976; Ord. No. O-18-79, 3, adopted March 12, 1979; Ord. No. O-48-79, 1, adopted May 29, 1979; Ord.
No. O-100-82, 1--7, adopted Oct. 11, 1982 and Ord. No. O-85-84, 1, adopted Oct. 5, 1984.
----------
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 15.1 Definitions.
As used in this Section Article, unless the context otherwise requires:
Control Area means an electrical system bounded by interconnection (tie-line) metering and
telemetry. It controls generation directly to maintain its interchange schedule with other control areas and
contributes to frequency regulation of the interconnection.
Control Area Emergency means that Control Area is at risk of having to shed firm load, having
taken or committed to take all feasible mitigating action short of shedding firm load and firm sales.
"Controlled rotating interruptions of electrical service" means the implementation of a plan to curtail
electric service to firm load customers for a short period of time and rotating this curtailment of electric service
through different areas within the electric utility's service territory in a situation where the demand has
exceeded or is at significant risk of exceeding the supply of electricity available to the electric utility. The
action of an electric utility to interrupt or curtail electric service to a customer participating in or taking service
under an interruptible or curtailable rate is not included in this definition of a "controlled rotating interruption
of electric service."
Emergency energy plan means the portions of the Emergency load conservation procedures, which
immediately precede and include the controlled rotating interruption of electrical service to firm load customers
within the Village. The Emergency energy plan shall include the following steps:
(1) a request for emergency help from neighboring utilities;
(2) a declaration of a control area emergency;
(3) a public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electricity use; and,
(4) implementation of the plan for controlled rotating interruptions of electrical service.
"Emergency load conservation procedures" means a planned course of action developed by an electric
utility company to be implemented in emergency situations when the demand for electricity exceeds, or is at
significant risk of exceeding, the supply of electricity available to the electric utility.
"Electric utility company" or "electric utility" means any person or entity engaged in the business of
distributing, transmitting, or otherwise delivering electricity, regardless of its source, for use or consumption
within the Village. This term shall not include any person or entity that delivers electricity to fewer than 50
customers within the Village.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 15- EMERGENCY ENERGY PLANS
15-2
Sec. 15.2 Submittal of emergency energy plan.
Every electric utility company must have adopted an emergency energy plan no later than 30 days after
the effective date of this chapter, or within 30 days after becoming an electric utility company, whichever is
later. Every such electric utility company shall submit to the Village Manager an emergency energy plan
adopted by the company no later than 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, or within 24 hours of the
time the plan is adopted, whichever is later. The electric utility company shall be required to examine and
update as needed its emergency energy plan at least annually. The electric utility company shall notify the
foregoing public official(s) in writing of any material revisions to its plan and the rationale for said revisions
within five (5) business days of the time said revisions are made.
The emergency energy plan shall include, at a minimum, information detailing:
(1) Circumstances that would require the implementation of the emergency energy plan;
(2) Stages of the emergency energy plan;
(3) The approximate geographic limits of each outage area provided for in the emergency energy
plan;
(4) The approximate number of customers within each outage area provided for in the emergency
energy plan;
(5) The police facilities, fire stations, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, day care centers, senior
citizen centers, community health centers, dialysis centers, community mental health centers,
correctional facilities, stormwater and wastewater treatment or pumping facilities, and waterpumping
stations that have been identified by the Village and persons on life-support systems
that are known to the company, and that could be affected by controlled rotating interruptions
of electric service under the emergency energy plan; and
(6) The anticipated sequence and duration of intentional interruptions of electric service to each
outage area under the emergency energy plan.
Sec. 15.3 Review of Plan.
(a) Upon submittal of the emergency energy plan to the Village, the Village shall review the
emergency energy plan in order to determine if the emergency energy plan is complete and to assure
appropriate coordination with public health and safety agencies. The Village may reject the emergency energy
plan if it does not contain all the information required under Section 15.2(b), in which case the Village shall
notify the electric utility company in writing of said rejection and the reasons therefor. The electric utility
company shall thereafter submit a complete emergency energy plan to the Village no later than thirty (30) days
after such notice is sent by the Village.
(b) The Village and the electric utility shall work cooperatively to:
(1) Identify customers and facilities for which a controlled rotating interruption of electric service
would require heightened response by Village public health and safety agencies,
(2) Mitigate the potential impact of the plan on public health and safety, and
(3) Mitigate the potential impact of the plan on the duties of the Village s public health and
safety agencies.
Sec. 15.4 Implementation of emergency energy plan.
(a) Whenever an electric utility company determines that it may be necessary to implement a
controlled rotating interruption of electrical service due to the demand for electricity exceeding, or being at
significant risk of exceeding, the supply of electricity available to the electric utility company, the electric
utility company shall do the following:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 15- EMERGENCY ENERGY PLANS
15-3
(1) Take appropriate action in preparation for implementing a controlled rotating interruption of
electric service and notify the appropriate electric utility company personnel, and
(2) Notify the Village Manager that the electric utility company will be implementing its
emergency energy plan. The notification shall be made pursuant to a notification procedure
approved by the Village Council. The Village Manager may waive the notice requirement to
accommodate exigent circumstances.
(b) Subsequent to providing the notice as required above, an electric utility company shall reasonably
and separately advise the designated Village officials when it implements each of steps of the emergency
energy plan. Such steps shall include the following:
(1) A request for emergency help from neighboring utilities;
(2) A declaration of a control area emergency;
(3) A public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electricity use.
(c) The electric utility company shall give a separate notice to the Village Manager immediately upon
the determination that there will a controlled rotating interruption of electric service pursuant to the emergency
energy plan. The notification shall include the areas to be interrupted; the sequence and estimated duration of
the service outage for each area; and the affected feeders and number of affected customers in each area.
Whenever practical, the notification shall be made at least two hours prior to the time of the outages, and in no
case shall the notification be made less than 30 minutes prior to the outages, if the company is aware that
controlled rotating interruptions may be required.
(d) Notification required by this section shall be in addition to any notification requirements set forth
in any applicable franchise agreement or franchise ordinance, or as may be required by applicable Federal or
State law or regulation.
Sec. 15.5 Violations; enforcement.
Any electric utility company that knowingly violates this chapter or any rules promulgated thereunder
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $2,500 and not more than $10,000 for each offense. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
The Village may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction or order to compel the
other party to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 15.6 Construction.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to preclude or interfere with the implementation by an
electric utility company of measures necessary to assure the provision of adequate, efficient, reliable and
environmentally safe service, as required by the Illinois Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.).
Nothing set forth in this Chapter shall be deemed to modify the terms of any existing franchise agreement or
franchise ordinance otherwise applicable to any electric utility company, or to excuse any performance required
by such agreement or ordinance, or to limit any authority that may be exercised pursuant to such agreement or
ordinance, or to limit any remedy that may be available under such agreement or ordinance.
Sec. 15.7 Severability.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this Chapter be declared invalid or
unconstitutional by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not
affect any of the remaining words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Chapter, since the
same would have been enacted by the Village Council without the incorporation in this Chapter of any such
invalid or unconstitutional word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ord.No. 0-72-99; 2;6-14-99]
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-1
Chapter 16 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Director of public works to have charge of construction and care, ?§2-172;
building codes and building regulations, Ch. 6; public improvements as a condition precedent to issuance of
building permit, ?§ 6-56; deposits in streets prohibited, ?§ 8-5; housing, Ch. 10; refuse, refuse, etc., on streets,
etc., ?§12-28; antilitter regulations, ?§12-191 et seq.; water and sewer services, Ch. 19; zoning, App. A;
subdivision regulations, App. B.
----------
Editor’s note: Chapter 16 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS, was deleted in its entirety by Ordinance
#0-109-99, passed August 9, 1999. A new Chapter 16 was adopted by the same ordinance.
----------
Editor’s note: Ordinance #0-22-15, passed March 16, 2015, replaced Chapter 16 in its entirety.
----------
Art. I. In General and Utilities ?§§ 16-1--16-26
Art. II. Streets, Sidewalks and Rights-of-way §§ 16-27--16-60
Art. III. Driveways §§ 16-61--16-70
Art. IV. Excavations, §§ 16-71--16-85
Art. V. Sub-Sidewalk Space, §§ 16-86--16-100
Art. VI. Trees & Shrubs, §§ 16-101--129
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL AND UTILITIES.
Sec. 16-1. Purpose and Scope.
a) Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing
and/or maintaining facilities on rights-of-way within the Village’s jurisdiction, which will provide public
benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the Village rights-ofway
and the Village as a whole.
b) Facilities Subject to This Chapter. This Chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the public ways and public rights-of-way within the jurisdictional limits of the
Village and outside the jurisdictional limits of the Village in the event the Village has authority or maintenance
responsibility over it. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this Chapter may continue to
be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be
otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement. Facilities constructed in
conjunction with a new subdivision to be dedicated to the Village, and which is subject to Appendix B -
Subdivisions, Site Development and Floodplain Regulations shall be exempt from this Chapter until completed
and accepted by the Village.
c) Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements. The Village, in its discretion and as provided by
law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating
their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the Village ways and rights-of-way.
Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the Village enter into
such an agreement. In such an agreement, the Village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this Chapter.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-2
d) Effect of Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements.
1) Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers. In the
event that a utility other than a telecommunications
provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with
the Village, such franchise, license or similar agreement
shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
2) Telecommunications Providers. In the event of any conflict
with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this
Chapter and the provisions of any franchise, license or
similar agreement between the Village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such
franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and
control during the term of such agreement and any lawful
renewal or extension thereof.
e) Conflicts with Other Chapters. This Chapter supersedes all Chapters or parts of Chapters
adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
f) Conflicts with State and Federal Laws. In the event that applicable federal or State laws or
regulations conflict with the requirements of this Chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this
Chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or State laws or regulations.
g) Sound Engineering Judgment. The Village shall use sound engineering judgment when
administering this Chapter and therefore may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this
Chapter when deemed necessary under sound engineering judgement. Nothing herein shall be construed to
limit the ability of the Village to regulate its ways and rights-of-way for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare.
Sec. 16-2. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section. Any term not defined in this Section shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code ? 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
“AASHTO” - American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
"ANSI" - American National Standards Institute.
"Applicant" - A person applying for a permit under this Chapter.
"ASTM" - American Society for Testing and Materials.
"Backfill" - The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
"Bore" or "Boring" - To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical
conductor.
"Caliper" - Shall mean the diameter of any tree trunk six inches above ground level.
"Carrier Pipe" - The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
"Casing" - A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors,
and fiber optic devices.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-3
"Circuit" - The complete assembly of generators, conductors, fibers, switches, and lines by which an electrical
or optical current or signal is transmitted.
"Clear Zone" - The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by
errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear
run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the roadside
geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design Guide.
"Coating" - Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external
corrosion.
"Code" - The Code of Ordinances of the Village of Palatine.
"Conductor" - Wire carrying electrical current.
"Conduit" - A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
"Construction or Construct" - The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement,
demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities.
"Cover" - The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
“Crossing Facility” - A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way.
?
“Director of Public Works” - The Village Director of Public Works or his or her designee.
"Disrupt the Right-of-Way" - For the purposes of this Chapter, any work that obstructs the right-of-way or
causes an adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of
materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil,
and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the
flow of traffic on a highway.
"Driveway" - Shall mean a place improved for vehicular traffic on street right of way which connects the
traveled portion of the street with the lot or parcel of land adjacent thereto.
"Driveway, residential" - Shall mean a driveway serving property used exclusively for residence purposes.
"Driveway, non-residential" - Shall mean a driveway serving property used in whole or in part for other than
residence purposes.
“Easement” - Any land, public or private, upon which any utility has any right(s) granted for access, usage,
placement, construction, or maintenance of or relative to the operation of its utility system(s).
“Emergency” - Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the
vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public
served by the utility.
"Encasement" - Provision of a protective casing.
"Engineer" - The Village Engineer or his or her designee.
“Equipment” - Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction and/or
maintenance of facilities.
"Excavation" - The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-4
"Extra Heavy Pipe" - Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
"Facility" - All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic
cable, communications and video cables and wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and
appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within public ways or rights-ofway
as herein defined under this Chapter, except those owned by the Village.
“Freestanding Facility” - A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna,
transformer, pump, or meter station.
"Frontage Road” - Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where control
of access on highway exists.
“Hazardous Materials” - Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location,
or other characteristics, is determined by the Village Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and
imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products
or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be
hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
"Highway Code" - The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
"Highway" - A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets.
Highway includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments,
bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient
for vehicle traffic.
"IDOT" - Illinois Department of Transportation.
"ILCC" - Illinois Commerce Commission.
"Jacking" - Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
"Jetting" - Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
"Joint Use" - The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or more utilities.
“Major Intersections” - The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
"Municipal Property" - Shall mean all property owned or under the control or jurisdiction of the Village.
"Occupancy" - The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
"Overhead Utility Lines" - Wires, cables, or fibers used for the distribution and/or the transmission of public
services, including but not limited to electricity, cable television, telecommunications, or data, that are located
above ground.
“Parallel Facility” - A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way.
"Parkway" - Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
"Parkway Tree" - Shall mean any tree in a public place.
"Pavement Cut" - The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction and/or
maintenance of a facility.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-5
"Permittee" - That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to this Chapter.
“Practicable” - That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
"Pressure" - The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square
inch gauge (psig).
"Petroleum Products Pipelines" - Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but
not limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
"Prompt" - That which is done within a period of time specified by the Village. If no time period is specified,
the period shall be 30 days.
"Public Entity" - A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal
level.
"Public Highway" - Shall mean all land lying between the sidewalks, all alleys, and all roadways including
adjacent municipal property.
"Public Way(s)" - See Right-of-Way.
"Removal" - When used regarding trees, shall mean the actual removal or causing the effective removal
through damaging, poisoning, or other direct or indirect actions resulting in the death of a tree.
"Replacement" - The act of repairing, taking, or filling the place of a facility or circuit, in whole or in part, that
is to be removed, discarded or that has exceeded its useful life.
"Restoration" - The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction
and/or maintenance of a facility.
"Right-of-Way" - Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes,
including easements as herein defined, public and private, within the jurisdictional limits of the Village and
outside the jurisdictional limits of the Village in the event the Village has authority or maintenance
responsibility over it. "Right-of-way" shall not include any real or personal Village property that is not
specifically described in the previous two sentences and shall not include Village buildings, fixtures, and other
structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way.
“Roadway” - That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
"Sale of Telecommunications at Retail" - The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and
all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such
corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.
“Security Fund” - That amount of security required pursuant to Section 16-11 or as otherwise set forth in this
chapter.
"Shoulder" - A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and
providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
"Sidewalk" - Shall mean that portion of the street right of way between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a
roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians and generally separated from the
curb or roadway surface by a parkway or grass plot.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-6
"Sound Engineering Judgment" - A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles,
practices and experience.
"Telecommunications" - This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through
use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange service, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any other transmission
of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
"telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications as defined in the Illinois
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, 35 ILCS 635/1 et seq. "Telecommunications" shall
not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form,
content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications"
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or
terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a
component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges
as sales for resale. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable
system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following) as now or
hereafter amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the
Village through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47
C.D.F. 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter amended.
“Telecommunications Provider” - Means any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the
public right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
"Telecommunications Retailer" - Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
"Trees" - Shall include shrubs which grow higher than ten feet.
"Trench" - A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
"Utility" - The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as defined in this Chapter.
"Vent" - A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
“Village” - The Village of Palatine.
"Water Lines" - Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
"Wet Boring" - Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a
sluice for the excavated material.
Sec. 16-3. Supervision.
All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the Village
Director of Public Works. He shall have the supervision over all work thereon, and the cleaning thereof, and
shall be charged with the enforcement of all provisions of this Code and other ordinances relating to such
public places (except traffic ordinances) and is hereby authorized to enforce such provisions.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-7
Sec. 16-4. Registration and Annual Updates Required.
a) Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the Village shall register on or before January
15 every five (5) years with the Director of Public Works, providing the utility's name,
address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more
contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving
the utility's facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such
person, and evidence of insurance as required in Section 16-9 of this Chapter, in the form of a
certificate of insurance. This registration shall be valid for a period of five (5) years. The
herein required information shall be updated annually to the extent any information changes.
b) In addition, the registering utility shall provide a letter of acknowledgment, on the registrant’s
letterhead, acknowledging the utility’s awareness of this Chapter and its full agreement to the
terms and conditions herein contained. A telecommunications provider that has registered
under this Section, shall be deemed to have satisfied the registration requirement under
Section 16-4 of this Code. Registrants under this Chapter shall provide and maintain an
annual security in the minimum amount of Thirty Thousand Dollars ($30,000). Such security
shall be in the forms prescribed under, and be in accordance with Section 16-11 of this
Chapter and be in lieu thereof; except that the Village reserves the right to request an increase
in said security amount in the event that the scope of any permit request exceeds the security
amount herein required. In the event that an increase in the amount of the security is
warranted and requested by the Village, the amount of such increase will be based upon and
in accordance with Section 16-11 of this Chapter. In the event the Village utilizes any portion
of the security amount, the utility shall immediately replenish the security amount back to the
initial minimum Thirty Thousand Dollar ($30,000) amount, or the increased security level,
whichever is greater. Furthermore every utility that occupies right-of-way within the Village
shall, upon written request of the Village, provide the Village with maps (paper and electronic
if available) of the utility’s facilities which are located within the jurisdiction of the Village.
The Village shall treat these maps (paper and electronic) as confidential and proprietary
information and they shall not be released to any other entity except as required by law.
Sec. 16-5. Permit Required; Applications and Fees.
a) Permit Required. No person shall construct (as defined in this Chapter) any facility on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within any right-of-way located within the corporate limits of the Village
which (1) changes the location of the facility, (2) adds a new facility, (3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined
in this Chapter), or (4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over,
above, along, under across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an application with the Village
Director of Public Works and obtaining a permit from the Village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this
Chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers'
premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way. Application for, or granting of a permit from
the Village shall in no way release or exempt the utility from any other permit requirements as may be required
by any other entity having jurisdiction of any kind over the right-of-way involved. (Ord. No. 0-65-10, §1,
6/14/10)
b) Permit Application. All applications for permits pursuant to this Chapter shall be filed on a
form provided by the Village and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the Village may
designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that is reasonably believes
contain proprietary or confidential information as proprietary or confidential by clearly marking each page of
such materials accordingly.
c) Minimum General Application Requirements. The application shall be made by the utility or
its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
1) The utility’s name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-8
2) The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy
numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
3) The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of
all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the
application;
4) A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility
and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of such
description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be
performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted
by the work proposed;
5) Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the Village:
i) A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and
devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
ii) An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential
emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and/or maintenance
and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the
applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the Village and
shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public.
Compliance with ILCC regulations for emergency contingency plans
constitutes compliance with this Section unless the Village finds that
additional information or assurances are needed;
6) Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the
certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with
applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
7) Evidence of insurance as required in Section 16-9 of this Chapter;
8) Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in Section 16-11 of this Chapter;
9) Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this Chapter (See Section
16-23).
10) Evidence of approved Zoning Variation from the Village Community Development
Department, if so required (See Section 16-16 and 16-17); and
11) Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the Village.
d) Supplemental Application Requirements for Specific Types of Utilities. In addition to the
requirements of Subsection c) of this Section, the permit application shall include the following items as
applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
1) In the case of new electric power, communications or natural gas distribution system
installation, evidence that any "Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity" has
been issued by the ILCC that the applicant is required by law, or has elected, to
obtain;
2) In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction
class, and operating pressures;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-9
3) In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied;
4) In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water
Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District and/or other local
or state entities with jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or
5) In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum
products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design standard to be
followed.
e) Applicant’s Duty to Update Information. Throughout the entire permit application review
period and the construction and/or maintenance period authorized by the permit, any amendments to
information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the Village within
thirty (30) days after the change necessitating the amendment.
f) Application Fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all
applications for permits pursuant to this Chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established in
Fee Schedule Supplement to the Village Code of Ordinances. This application fee is to reimburse the Village
for regulatory and administrative costs with respect to the work being performed, which costs the Village
represents have been or will be incurred, and is not deemed to be compensation for the use of the rights-of-way
as herein defined in this chapter. No application fee is required to be paid by any telecommunications retailer
that is paying the municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to Chapter 20 of this
Code or the optional state telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, or by any electricity utility that is paying
the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance
Fee Act.
Sec. 16-6. Action on Permit Applications.
a) Village Review of Permit Applications. Completed permit applications, containing all
required documentation, shall be examined by the Village Director of Public Works within a reasonable time
after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws,
rules, and regulations, the Village Director of Public Works shall reject such application in writing, stating the
reasons therefor. If the Village Director of Public Works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this Chapter and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Village
Director of Public Works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. NOTE: All above ground
facilities and appurtenances located on private property are subject to the Village Code of Ordinances
(Appendix A - Zoning).
b) Additional Village Review of Applications of Telecommunications Retailers.
1) Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village that it intends to commence work
governed by this Chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications
services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation
sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be
provided by the telecommunications retailer to the Village not less than ten (10) days
prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty
(30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Village
Director of Public Works shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the
facility may be placed, used and constructed.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-10
2) In the event that the Village Director of Public Works fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either (i) ten (10)
days after service of notice to the Village by the telecommunications retailer in the
case of work not involving excavation for new construction and/or maintenance or
(ii) twenty-five (30) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in
the case of work involving excavation for new construction and/or maintenance, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under
this Chapter.
3) Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a permit is required
for work pursuant to Section 16-5 of this Chapter the telecommunications retailer
shall submit to the Village an application for a permit and any and all plans,
specifications and documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed.
Such application shall be subject to the requirements of Subsection (a) of this
Section.
Sec. 16-7 Effect of Permit.
a) Authority Granted; No Property Right or Other Interest Created. A permit from the Village
authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this Chapter on Village rights-ofway,
and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others
who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way.
b) Compliance with All Laws Required. The issuance of a permit by the Village does not excuse
the permittee from complying with other requirements of the Village and all applicable statutes, laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations.
c) Notifications Required. Any utility or other entity which has received a permit to perform
construction and/or maintenance in the Village Rights-of-Way shall provide notification, either written or
verbal, to each individual resident of properties affected by such construction and/or maintenance. This shall
include all properties upon which construction and/or maintenance is to be performed and/or which abut rightsof-
way upon which construction and/or maintenance is to be performed. Such notice shall be given not less
than five days prior to commencement of such permitted construction and/or maintenance.
Sec. 16-8 Revised Permit Drawings.
The installation of the facilities shall substantially conform to the approved plans, except as the plans
may be changed to conform to Village Codes and Ordinances. In the event that the actual locations of any
facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications
submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the
Village within ninety (90) days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the
permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this Chapter, it shall be treated
as a request for variance in accordance with Section 16-23 of this Chapter. If the Village denies the request for
a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so
that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor.
Sec. 16-9 Insurance.
a) Required Coverages and Limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and
maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the Village,
and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies
listed in paragraphs 1 and 2 below:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-11
1) Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion,
collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as X, C, and U coverages)
and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
i) Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily injury or death to each person;
ii) Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for property damage resulting from any
one accident; and
iii) Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for all other types of liability;
2) Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a combined
single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000) for personal injury and property
damage for each accident;
3) Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and
4) Employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000) per employee and per accident.
b) Excess or Umbrella Policies. The coverages required by this Section may be in any
combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess
coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary
policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover
such loss.
c) Copies Required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this
Section to the Village within ten (10) days following receipt of a written request therefor from the Village.
d) Maintenance and Renewal of Required Coverages. The insurance policies required by this
Section shall contain the following endorsement:
?It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the Village Manager of such intent to cancel or
not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to
said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this Section.
e) Self-Insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit
requirements required by Subsection a) of this Section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent
of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under Subsection
a), or the requirements of Subsections b), c) and d) of this Section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall
provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance
coverage and limit requirements required under Subsection a) of this Section, such as evidence that the utility
is a private self insurer under the Workers Compensation Act.
f) Effect of Insurance and Self-Insurance on Utility's Liability. The legal liability of the utility to
the Village and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this Section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of
any amounts thereunder.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-12
Sec. 16-10. Indemnification.
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend,
indemnify and hold the Village and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses
and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or
alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or
misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the
construction and/or maintenance of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering
service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Chapter
or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations
hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out
of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this Chapter by the Village, its officials, officers,
employees, agents or representatives.
Sec. 16-11. Security.
a) Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and in an amount as set forth
in this Section, or in the minimum amount of Thirty Thousand Dollars ($30,000) for utilities registering under
the provisions of Section 16-4, except that the Village reserves the right to request an increase in said security
amount in the event that the scope of any permit request exceeds the minimum security amount of Thirty
Thousand Dollars ($30,000). In the event that an increase in the amount of the security is warranted and
requested by the Village, the amount of such increase will be based upon and in accordance with this section.
The Security Fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this Section at the permittee’s sole cost
and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit, or for the entire registration period
as required under Section 16-4 Registration and Annual Updates Required. The Security Fund shall serve as
security for:
1) The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this Chapter;
2) Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned by the
permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and
other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this Chapter; and
3) The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that
the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or non-performance by
permittee in violation of this Chapter including, without limitation, any damage to
public property or restoration work the permittee is required by this Chapter to
perform that the Village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence
solely of the permittee’s failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due
the Village from the permittee pursuant to this Chapter or any other applicable law.
b) Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the Village in the form, at the
permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the Village, or an unconditional letter of
credit in a form acceptable to the Village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this
Subsection shall, at a minimum:
1) Provide that it will not be canceled without 30 days prior written notice to the Village
and the permittee;
2) Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the Village of any
amounts covered by it; and
3) Shall provide a location convenient to the Village and within the State of Illinois at
which it can be drawn.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-13
c) Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to provide for the
reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction and/or maintenance under the permit, as determined by the Village Director of Public Works, and
may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the Village estimates are likely to be incurred if the
permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction and/or maintenance of facilities proposed
under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the Village, with each phase consisting of
construction and/or maintenance of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where
construction and/or maintenance in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of
restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Village Director of Public Works may, in the exercise of sound
discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of
the construction and/or maintenance under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased
construction and/or maintenance shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the
provisions of this Subsection (c) for any single phase.
d) Withdrawals. The Village, upon fourteen (14) days advance written notice clearly stating the
reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this Subsection, may withdraw an amount from
the Security Fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village for such amount within the
fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
1) Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2) Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3) Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the
Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance
by the permittee; or
4) Fails to comply with any provision of this Chapter that the Village determines can be
remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
e) Replenishment. Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the Village that
any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the
amount specified in Subsection c) of this Section.
f) Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the
Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the Village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the
Village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance
required in Subsection c) of this Section.
g) Closing and Return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the work authorized under the
permit, or the expiration of the registration term for utilities registered as required under Section 16-4, the
permittee shall be entitled to the return of the Security Fund, if Security was established on a by permit basis,
or for those who have provided the blanket security under Section 16-4, any amount in excess of the minimum
of Thirty Thousand Dollars ($30,000), within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary
to compensate the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this Chapter or other
applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest
therein, shall become the property of the Village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or
damage incurred by the Village as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said
costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.
h) Rights Not Limited. The rights reserved to the Village with respect to the Security Fund are in
addition to all other rights of the Village, whether reserved by this Chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and
no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect any other right the
Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary
recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-14
i) Annual Security. Any Utility which has established an Annual Security Fund under Section
16-4 of this Chapter shall be deemed to have met the requirements of this Section; except as noted in Section
16-11 of this Chapter.
Sec. 16-12. Permit Suspension and Revocation.
a) Village Right to Revoke Permit. The Village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant
to this Chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
1) Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit
application;
2) Non-compliance with this Chapter;
3) Permittee’s physical presence or presence of permittee’s facilities on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way presents a direct or
imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4) Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the
permit and approved plans.
b) Notice of Revocation or Suspension. The Village shall send written notice of its intent to
revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or
suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this Section 16-12.
c) Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt of Notice of Revocation or Suspension. Upon receipt of
a written notice of revocation or suspension from the Village, the permittee shall have the following options:
1) Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation
or suspension;
2) Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the deficiencies stated in the
written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the Village within five
(5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3) Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across,
or within the public rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of
the Village providing written proof of such removal to the Village within ten (10)
days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this Subsection.
d) Stop Work Order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the
Village may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth
within Subsection a) of this Section.
e) Failure or Refusal of the Permittee to Comply. If the permittee fails to comply with the
provisions of Subsection c) of this Section, the Village or its designee may, at the option of the Village: (1)
correct the deficiencies; (2) upon not less than twenty (20) days notice to the permittee, remove the subject
facilities or equipment; or (3) after not less than thirty (30) days notice to the permittee of failure to cure the
non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the Village. The permittee shall be liable in all events
to the Village for all costs of removal.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-15
Sec. 16-13. Change of Ownership or Owner's Identity or Legal Status.
a) Notification of Change. A utility shall notify the Village no less than thirty (30) days prior to
the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner
of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the
permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this Chapter, with respect to
the work and facilities in the right-of-way.
b) Amended Permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show
current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner
shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if the
new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the Village's right-of-way.
c) Insurance and Bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to
reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
Sec. 16-14. General Construction and Maintenance Standards.
a) Standards and Principles. All construction and/or maintenance in the right-of-way shall be
consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, and commonly recognized and
accepted traffic control and construction and/or maintenance principles, sound engineering judgment and,
where applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications:
1) Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
2) Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
3) Highway Design Manual;
4) Highway Standards Manual;
5) Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
6) Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm. Code ? 545);
7) Flagger's Handbook; and
8) Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
b) Interpretation of Municipal Standards and Principles. If a discrepancy exists between or
among differing principles and standards required by this Chapter, the Village Director of Public Works shall
determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be
final. If requested, the Village Director of Public Works shall state which standard or principle will apply to
the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future.
Sec. 16-15. Traffic Control.
a) Minimum Requirements. The Village’s minimum requirements for traffic protection are
contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and this Code.
b) Warning Signs, Protective Devices, and Flaggers. The utility is responsible for providing and
installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state,
and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any work on the
public rights-of-way.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-16
c) Interference with Traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
d) Notice When Access is Blocked. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that
will partially or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify, in
writing, the resident, business, or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work;
provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to Section 16-22 of this Chapter, the
utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
e) Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection
requirements that are brought to the utility's attention by the Village.
Sec. 16-16. Above Ground Utility Structures and Facilities.
Utilities shall be prohibited from placing any above ground structure or facility on rights-of-way within the
jurisdictional limits of the Village and outside the jurisdictional limits of the Village in the event the Village
has authority or maintenance responsibility over it, except as allowed under and accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance - Appendix A and Subdivisions, Site Development and Floodplain Regulations Ordinance -
Appendix B, unless approved by the Mayor and Council. This section shall be preemptive over all other
sections in this Chapter. Any other section regarding location of above ground facilities shall be in addition to,
rather than in lieu of, this section.
Sec. 16-17. Location of Facilities.
a) Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways.
1) Overhead Parallel Facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be located within the
right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
i) Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly
parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit;
ii) Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb
with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of the curb,
where available;
iii) Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as
practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the outer
shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
iv) No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
v) Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
2) Underground Parallel Facilities. An underground parallel facility may be located
within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
i) The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than eight (8) feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right-of-way line;
ii) A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if
other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering
judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without
disrupting the pavement); and
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-17
iii) In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility
shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more
than five (5) feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way
line or as near as practicable. NOTE: All above ground facilities and
appurtenances located on private property are subject to the Village Code of
Ordinances (Appendix A - Zoning).
b) Facilities Crossing Highways.
1) No Future Disruption. The construction and/or maintenance and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of Village highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or
additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from
the installation of such crossing facilities.
2) Cattle Passes, Culverts, or Drainage Facilities. Crossing facilities shall not be located
in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3) 90 Degree Crossing Required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety
(90) degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
4) Overhead Power or Communication Facility. An overhead power or communication
facility may cross a highway only if:
i) It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ILCC‘s rules entitled,
Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines (83 Ill. Adm.
Code 305);
ii) Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line of the
highway and outside of the clear zone; and
iii) Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5) Underground Power or Communication Facility. An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
i) The design materials and construction and/or maintenance methods will
provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and
ii) Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in
the initial installation.
6) Markers. The Village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way
line where an underground facility other than a power or communication facility
crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an
emergency phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current
Federal regulations. (49 C.F.R. 192.707 (1989)).
c) Facilities to be Located Within Particular Rights-of-Way. The Village may require that
facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular
highways. NOTE: All above ground facilities and appurtenances located on private property are subject to the
Village Code of Ordinances (Appendix A - Zoning).
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-18
d) Freestanding Facilities.
1) The Village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located
within a right-of-way.
2) The Village may require any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be
screened from view.
e) Appearance Standards.
1) The Village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order
to preserve visual quality.
2) A facility may be constructed only if its construction and/or maintenance does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the
highway user or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
f) Above Ground Installation. Above ground facilities may be installed only if:
1) No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2) New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3) The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design
and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area
being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are
not limited to, self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical
configuration of conductors and cable.
4) NOTE: All above ground facilities and appurtenances located on private property are
subject to the Village Code of Ordinances (Appendix A - Zoning).
g) Facility Attachments to Bridges or Roadway Structures.
1) Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where
the utility has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are
not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground,
underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are
completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting
commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those
under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.
2) A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge
or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate
routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge
or roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations:
i) The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted
and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the event
of damage to or failure of the facility;
ii) The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in
the transportation system;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-19
iii) The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative
practicability;
iv) The proposed method of attachment;
v) The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
vi) The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
vii) The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
viii) The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk
involved.
Sec. 16-18. Construction and Maintenance Methods and Materials.
a) Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Construction Methods.
1) Boring or Jacking. All boring and jacking construction methods shall comply with all
applicable requirements of governing railroad and/or highway authorities.
i) Pits and Shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the
Village Director of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for
boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of
boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or
jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly
marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
ii) Wet Boring or Jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the
roadway.
iii) Borings with Diameters Greater Than 6 Inches. Borings over six inches
(0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following
pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of
the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
iv) Borings with Diameters 6 Inches or Less. Borings of six inches or less in
diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or
auger and following pipe method.
v) Tree Preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of any tree
designated by the Village to be preserved shall be bored under or around the
root system. Such boring or tunneling shall be done in accordance with the
following specifications:
a) Borings or tunnels shall be kept at a minimum lateral distance from
the tree trunk as shown below:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-20
Lateral
Trunk Diameter: Minimum Distance
9" Diameter or Less 5 Feet
10"-14" Diameter 10 Feet
15"-19" Diameter 12 Feet
19" or Larger Diameter 15 Feet
b) Bore or trench depth shall be a minimum of twenty-four inches
(24") beneath the root structure of trees with a trunk diameter of
twelve inches (12") or less. Bore or trench depth shall be a
minimum of thirty-six inches (36") beneath the root structure of
trees with a trunk diameter in excess of twelve inches (12").
2) Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights-ofway
shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of Section 603 of IDOT's
"Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction."
i) Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum
consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only one-half of any
intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is
obtained from the Village Director of Public Works.
ii) Open Trench and Excavated Material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the
excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as
added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the
paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for
windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway,
excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location.
iii) The trenching within the drip line of any tree shall be done in accordance
with the following specifications:
a) Open trenches must maintain a minimum lateral distance from the
tree trunk of no less than one foot (1') for every one inch (1") of tree
diameter at the trunk.
b) Open trench spoils shall be placed on the side of the trench opposite
the tree.
c) Any roots one inch (1") or larger, damaged during the excavation
process shall be pruned to the trunk side of the trench with a single
clean cut.
d) Tree trunks shall be wrapped in snow fencing or other material
approved by the Village Forester. Trenching shall not commence
until preservation measures as herein specified have be reviewed
and approved by the Village Forester. Any tree which exhibits signs
of deterioration within one (1) year of the completed work shall be
removed and replaced at the sole expense of the utility.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-21
3) Backfilling.
i) Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities
shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and
materials in accordance with IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction. When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used. Where
trenches are within two (2') feet of existing or proposed pavement, the
trenches shall be backfilled with grade 9 gravel and compacted to a
minimum of 95%.
ii) For a period of three years from the date construction and/or maintenance of
a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction and/or maintenance of
the facility. If so ordered by the Director of Public Works, the utility, at its
expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the
installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and
restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades,
as determined by the Director of Public Works.
4) Pavement Cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall not be permitted
on any road or highway within the Village. If a variance to the limitation set forth in
this paragraph 4) is granted under Section 16-23, the following requirements shall
apply:
i) Pavement cuts shall not be done until traffic has been diverted from the
portion of the roadway to be cut and a Village approved traffic control plan
has been fully implemented.
ii) Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled as soon as practicable
with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by the
Director of Public Works, and compacted in accordance with this Chapter.
All structures in the affected area shall be replaced and set to the established
grade. Damaged structures shall be replaced with new structures of the same
type, material, and size.
iii) Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as
practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the Village.
iv) All saw cuts shall be full depth.
v) All work shall be constructed in accordance with the current Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction: adopted by the State of
Illinois, Department of Transportation and the requirements of Section 1.01
of the Village Sub-division Ordinance.
vi) For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a concrete
surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3)
years, a variance shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-22
5) Encasement.
i) Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any
other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by onepiece
fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
Village. As a minimum; Casing pipe shall be new steel pipe conforming to
the latest revised specifications requirements of ASTM A-134 with field
welded butt joints, a minimum yield strength of thirty-five thousand (35,000)
psi., and the following minimum wall thickness:
Minimum Wall Thickness -- Inches
Nominal Pipe Size Under Highway Under Railroad
16 inch 0.250 0.232
18 inch 0.250 0.312
20 inch 0.250 0.344
24 inch 0.312 0.406
30 inch 0.312 0.480
36 inch 0.375 0.532
42 inch 0.375 0.563
ii) The carrier pipe shall be supported for its entire length inside the casing by
pipe by means of hardwood planks strapped to the carrier pipe in such a way
as to support the pipe at the required elevation and slope and to prevent
shifting or flotation. The annular space between the carrier pipe and casing
pipe shall be blown full of sand to fill all voids.
iii) The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (0.3 m)
of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be located in the
area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
iv) In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished
between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village approved jointed pipe is
used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed
prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical
joints are of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall
be encased regardless of installation method.
v) In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
vi) In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations
of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if: (1) extra heavy
pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and (2) cathodic
protection of the pipe is provided;
vii) If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the
facility shall be located so as to provide that construction and/or maintenance
does not disrupt the right-of-way.
6) Protection of Street Light Wiring.
i) To insure wires are not cut when trenching or boring, the utility shall hand
dig in all areas within three (3') feet of the street light.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-23
ii) Ground faults:
a. Ground fault warranty:
Any street light which exhibits signs of a ground fault within two
years of completed construction and/or maintenance work, may be
repaired by the Village and, in that event, the Village will charge it
to the utility, and the utility shall pay the Village for the repair.
b. In the event of a street light cable fault, Department of Public Works
shall be notified immediately. The hole shall be left opened until an
inspection/repair of the fault is made by Village personnel.
7) Minimum Cover of Underground Facilities. Cover shall be provided and maintained
at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type
of facility:
TYPE OF FACILITY
MINIMUM COVER
Power or Communication Line (In General)
Communication Line Installed by the Plowed Method
30 Inches (0.8 m)
24 Inches (0.6 m)
Gas or Petroleum Products
30 Inches (0.8 m)
Water Line
Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection
Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or Drainage Line
Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection
b) Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Facilities.
1) Electric Power or Communication Lines.
i) Code Compliance. Electric power or communications facilities within
Village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code 305 (formerly General
Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled ?Rules for
Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines, and the National
Electrical Safety Code.
ii) Overhead Facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities shall use
single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be
used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation
so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is
no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for
maximum visibility.
iii) Underground Facilities. (1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing,
provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize
damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads. (2) If a crossing
is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between
jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: (a) the crossing
is installed by the use of moles, whip augers, or other approved method
which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or (b)
the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to
roadway construction. (3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the
National Electrical Safety Code.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-24
2) Underground Facilities Other than Electric Power or Communication Lines.
Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be
installed by:
i) the use of moles, whip augers, or other approved methods which
compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
ii) jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
iii) open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or
toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
iv) tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
3) Gas Transmission, Distribution and Service. Gas pipelines within rights-of-way shall
be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village approved manner and in
conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations,
Department of Transportation, Part 192 ? Transportation of Natural and Other Gas
by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR 192), IDOT’s Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, and all other applicable laws, rules,
and regulations.
4) Petroleum Products Pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way
shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping.
(Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5) Waterlines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines or Drainage Lines.
Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines within rightsof-
way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.
6) Ground Mounted Appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or
underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall be provided with
a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width beyond the
appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an
extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved
by the Director of Public Works. With the approval of the Director of Public Works,
shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area.
The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to
blend with the surroundings. NOTE: All above ground facilities and appurtenances
located on private property are subject to the Village Code of Ordinances (Appendix
A - Zoning).
c) Materials.
1) General Standards. The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way
shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the
applicable portions of IDOT’s Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, the requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the
standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate
industry.
2) Material Storage on Right-of-Way. All pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other
materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in
a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way
maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If material is to be
stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the Village. Any
equipment to parked overnight shall be parked well clear of the roadway and
barricaded.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-25
3) Hazardous Materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the Village shall identify
any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction and/or maintenance
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
d) Operational Restrictions.
1) Construction and/or maintenance operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion
of the Village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also
be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that
construction and/or maintenance would result in extensive damage to the right-ofway
or other property.
2) These restrictions may be waived by the Director of Public Works when emergency
work is required to restore vital utility services.
3) Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours of construction and/or
maintenance are those set forth and in accordance with Section 6-32 of the Village
Code of Ordinances.
e) Location of Existing Facilities. Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the Village shall
contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities
within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The Village will make its permit records
available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when
requested by the Village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities
Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.)
Sec. 16-19. Vegetation Control.
a) Tree Trimming Permit Required. Tree trimming shall not be considered a normal maintenance
operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit
required under this Chapter. All such work shall be subject to the legally applicable provisions of Article VI of
this Chapter.
1) Application for Tree Trimming Permit. Applications for tree trimming permits shall
include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with
supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming
permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will
be expeditiously accomplished.
2) Damage to Trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees
will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit
and for assessment of damages. The Village will require compensation for trees
extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula
developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for
determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees.
The Village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical
pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
b) Specimen Trees or Trees of Special Significance. The Village may require that special
measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may
consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
c) Chemical Use. Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be permitted on
rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works that such
spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-26
Sec. 16-20. Removal, Relocation, or Modifications of Utility Facilities.
a) Notice. Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the Village, a utility shall, at its
own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities
within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal, relocation,
change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
Village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or upon, the rights-of-way.
b) Removal of Unauthorized Facilities. Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the
Village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within
the public rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the public rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following
circumstances:
1) Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s license or franchise, unless
otherwise permitted by applicable law;
2) If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or
franchise, if required;
3) If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit
in violation of this Chapter; or
4) If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the
permittee’s license or franchise.
c) Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities. The Village retains the right and privilege to
cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-way of the Village, as the Village may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit,
the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall
notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.
d) Abandonment of Facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rights-ofway
of the Village, the utility shall notify the Village within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice
the Village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Village Director of Public
Works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the
event that the Village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of
abandonment to the Village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of
all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person.
e) Council Review Required. Expansion, additions to, or replacement of overhead utility lines
in excess 2,600 lineal feet shall be required to be buried unless the Village Council authorizes their expansion,
alterations, or construction above ground. The replacement of a majority of the lines in a circuit shall be
deemed a replacement under this paragraph. Plans for and implementation of all such construction, expansion,
additions, or replacements of utility lines in excess of 2,600 lineal feet, whether buried or overhead, shall be
subject to review and approval by the Village Council to ensure minimal impact on trees and property, both
public and private. The time period necessary to accomplish such review shall extend and be in addition to , by
the length of such period, any other relative time restrictions or deadlines herein or otherwise placed upon the
Village.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-27
16-21. Cleanup and Restoration.
Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the utility shall remove all excess
material and restore all turf and terrain in a timely manner and to the satisfaction of the Village. This includes
restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and
methods approved by the Village Director of Public Works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to
consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. All
restoration shall be completed within two (2) weeks of the completion of construction and/or maintenance.
Restoration not completed within this time may be done by the Village, and the full cost and expense thereof
billed to the utility or deducted from the utility’s security fund, at the Village’s discretion.
1) Utility shall perform all ditching, grading, and shaping necessary to restore the original
drainage in the area of work as soon as possible after backfilling. Culverts and other drainage
structures removed during the course of work shall be reinstalled. All culverts and other
drainage structures damaged by the utility shall be repaired to a condition equal to the original
or replaced with new culvert or structures of same size and material.
2) All lawns and parkway areas which where disturbed during the work, shall be restored to
original or better condition. Restored areas shall have at least four(4") inches of topsoil, raked
smooth, with no stones or debris. A 10-10-10 fertilizer shall be applied at the rate of ten(10)
pounds per one thousand(1000) square feet and shall be raked into the top one (1") inch of
topsoil. Sod shall be placed in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction: adopted by the State of Illinois, Department of Transportation. Sod shall
be staked in areas subject to erosion. After planting, the sod shall be watered thoroughly, and
then once a week for a minimum of two (2) weeks.
Sec. 16-22. Maintenance and Emergency Maintenance.
a) General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to
be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the Village and at the utility's expense.
b) Emergency Maintenance Procedures. Emergencies may justify non-compliance with normal
procedures for securing a permit:
1) If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the
utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the
highway or the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights,
barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature
of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment
required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on
the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of
access to the facility is available.
2) In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the Village Director of
Public Works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or
her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what
will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such
as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the Village police shall be notified
immediately.
3) In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly
as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-28
c) Emergency Repairs. The utility must file in writing with the Village of a description of the
repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after an emergency repair.
d) Maintenance Standards.
1) All facilities shall be maintained in good aesthetic and operational condition and so
as to be safe, structurally sound, and complete.
2) All ground mounted components shall be kept plumb and solidly mounted.
3) All poles and similar structures shall be kept within ten (10) degrees of vertical and
solidly buried or securely anchored to solidly buried bases. All components mounted
to poles or similar structures shall be secure and there shall be no free hanging wires
or other materials.
4) Any deficiencies shall be repaired immediately upon request of the Village.
e) Placement and Restoration of Temporary Facilities.
1) The utility shall notify the Village Director of Public Works in writing of the
placement of any temporary wires or other temporary facilities. Such notification
shall include a description of the temporary facility, location(s) employed.
2) No temporary facilities of any kind shall be attached to or suspended from any tree
without first obtaining the approval of the Village Forester, and shall only be done so
in accordance with his instructions/approval, if granted.
3) Temporary installations/repairs shall be restored to permanent condition, in
accordance with this ordinance, at the earliest possible time, and in any event shall be
restored immediately upon request of the Village.
Sec. 16-23. Variances.
a) Request for Variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of
this Chapter must do so in writing to the Village Manager or his designee as a part of the permit application.
The request shall identify each provision of this Chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons
why a variance should be granted.
b) Authority to Grant Variances. The Village Manager or his designee shall decide whether a
variance is authorized for each provision of this Chapter identified in the variance request on an individual
basis.
c) Conditions for Granting of Variance. The Village Manager or his designee may authorize a
variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
1) One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or
an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement
of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the
provision; and
2) All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with
the provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the
requested approach.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-29
d) Additional Conditions for Granting of a Variance. As a condition for authorizing a variance,
the Village Manager or his designee may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable
standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this Chapter but which carry out
the purposes of this Chapter.
Sec. 16-24. Penalties.
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of
this Chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be
times when the Village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will not
or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this Chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation
of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the Village's costs of
damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the
subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related
cost apportionment of the Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility who does not pay the costs
apportioned to it.
Sec. 16-25. Enforcement.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the
Village may have for enforcement of this Chapter.
Sec. 16-26. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter is for any reason held
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
hereof.
ARTICLE II. - STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
Sec. 16-27. Permit required for construction and/or maintenance.
a) It shall be unlawful to perform any construction and/or maintenance on any public street, sidewalk,
alley or other public way or right-of-way without having first secured a permit therefor. Applications for such
permits shall be made to the Village Director of Public Works, and shall state the location of the intended
construction and/or maintenance, the extent thereof, and the person or firm who is to do the actual construction
work. Construction and/or maintenance of legally installed landscaping, private fences or other such
improvements on private property shall be exempt from this provision. Any person who shall violate any
provisions of this Chapter; or who commences any construction and/or maintenance requiring a permit under
this Chapter without having first obtained such permit shall be subject upon conviction in a court of competent
jurisdiction to a fine not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) per offense, and shall, at such person’s own expense, restore or complete such construction and/or
maintenance as directed by, and to the satisfaction of the Village. In a prosecution under this Chapter, each
separate instance of disruption of the Right-of-Ways, excavation, or performance of the same without a permit
shall constitute a separate offense.
b) It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on any public street, sidewalk, alley or other
public way, or to repair the same without having first secured a permit therefor, which has been approved by
the Mayor and Council. Applications for such permits shall be made to the Village Director of Public Works,
and shall state the location of the intended pavement or repair, the extent thereof, and the person or firm who is
to do the actual construction work.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-30
Sec. 16-28. Bond - Generally.
Unless otherwise specifically herein modified or waived, each utility, commercial, or industrial
applicant shall file a bond in the amount of at least thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), with sureties to be
approved by the Mayor and Council conditioned to indemnify the Village from any loss or damage resulting
from the work undertaken or the manner of doing the same, and to insure the proper completion of the
permitted work and performance of the permittee. Utilities which have provided a security fund in accordance
with Article I of this Chapter shall be deemed to have met this requirement.
Sec. 16-29. Specifications.
All street and sidewalk pavement and all other public improvements within public ways, including
water mains, sewer mains, storm sewers, street lights, parkways, street signs and street trees shall be designed
and installed in conformity with the specifications contained in this Code.
Sec. 16-30. Injury to pavements.
It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon, or injure any newly laid street or
alley pavement while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade; or to knowingly injure any street,
sidewalk or alley pavement.
Sec. 16-31. Repairs.
All public streets, alley and sidewalk pavements shall be in good repair. Such repair work, whether
done by the Village or the abutting owner, shall be under the supervision of the Village Director of Public
Works.
Sec. 16-32. Defects.
It shall be the duty of every Village officer or employee becoming cognizant of any defect in any street,
alley or sidewalk, or any obstruction thereof, to report the same to the Village Director of Public Works as soon
as possible.
Sec. 16-33. Obstructions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any obstruction of any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public way, except as may be specifically authorized by ordinance.
Sec. 16-34. Barricades--Required.
Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or other public place or making an
excavation in the same shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury of any person or vehicle by reason
of the work; such barricades shall be protected by a light at night time.
Any defect in any such pavement shall be barricaded to prevent injury; and any person properly
maintaining any opening or excavation in any such place shall guard such opening or excavation while the
same remains open by proper barricades and lights.
Sec. 16-35. Same--Disturbing prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any barricade or lights lawfully placed to protect or
mark any new pavement or excavation or opening in any public street, alley or sidewalk.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-31
Sec. 16-36. Private use prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or other public place, as space for the
display of goods or merchandise for sale; or to write or mark any sign or advertisement on any such pavement.
Sec. 16-37. Encroachments.
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public
street or property.
Sec. 16-38. Obstruction of or damage to drains prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or damage any drain in any public street or alley.
Sec. 16-39. Permit required for erection of poles and wires.
It shall be unlawful to erect any poles or wires or maintain any poles or wires over any public place,
street, alley or other public way without having first secured permission from the Mayor and Council and
obtaining a permit as required in this chapter.
Sec. 16-40. Gas pumps prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to maintain or erect any gasoline pump or tank in any public street, alley or
sidewalk.
Sec. 16-41. Games prohibited; conditions.
It shall be unlawful to play any games upon any street, alley or sidewalk or other public place, where
such games cause unnecessary noise, or interfere with traffic or pedestrians.
Sec. 16-42. Permit required for openings.
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public street, sidewalk or
alley without approval of the Mayor and Council and a permit as required by this chapter. All such lawfully
maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing, subject to the approval of the
Village Director of Public Works.
Sec. 16-43. Fences; location standards.
It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct any fence composed in whole or in part of barbed wire, or
with any similar materials designed to cause injury to persons, or any wire charged with electric current,
anywhere within three (3) feet of any public street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public place, if such harmful
wire is within seven (7) feet of the ground level; or any wireless fence in such a manner as to include any
portion of any public street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public place within the area enclosed by such fence.
Sec. 16-44. Same--On parkways.
It shall be unlawful to erect, construct or maintain any fence, wireless fence, or similar obstructions on
any parkway in the village; provided that a temporary fence or other guard may be maintained to protect newly
seeded areas with the permission of the Village Director of Public Works.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-32
Sec. 16-45. Deposits--On streets; standards.
It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street or public right-of-way any material which may be harmful
to the pavement or public right-of-way thereof any dirt, mud, waste material, snow, grass or other articles
which may do injury, endanger or impede the flow of traffic or limit access to any person, animal or property.
Any contractor or property owner having supervision over the activity where such deposits may be generated
shall take such steps as necessary to either prevent such deposits from occurring or have on-site the appropriate
manpower and equipment needed to remove the deposits as necessary throughout the working day and not only
at the end of the day. Any deposit shall be cleaned up within one (1) hour after verbal or written notice by the
Village. Failure to do so or repeated violation of this provision shall result in an immediate stop work order of
the construction activity that is causing the deposit. Any cleaning performed by the Village because of failure
by the contractor or property owner to do so will be billed to that party. (Ord. No. 0-154-08, §1, 11/10/08)
Materials may be deposited in streets preparatory to delivery or use, provided that such deposit does
not reduce the usable width of the roadway at that point to less than eighteen (18) feet, and provided that such
material, other than material to be used in actual building construction, shall not be permitted to remain in such
street for more than three (3) hours.
Any such material shall be guarded by lights if the same remains upon any street after night time.
Cross reference(s)--Deposits of garbage or refuse in streets, etc., prohibited.
Sec. 16-46. Same--On sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the
sidewalk thereof, any dirt, mud, waste material, snow, grass or other articles which might cause injury or limit
access to persons, animals or property. (Ord. No. 0-154-08, §2, 11/10/08)
Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks preparatory to delivery, provided that the
usable width of the sidewalk is not thereby reduced to less than four (4) feet; and provided that no such article
shall remain on such walk for more than one-half (1/2) hour.
Sec. 16-47. Removal of snow and ice; immunity from civil damages.
Any person who removes snow or ice from the public sidewalks or streets shall not, as a result of such
person's acts or omissions in such removal, be liable for civil damages, except for acts or omissions amounting
to willful or wanton misconduct. Nothing herein shall affect liability with respect to the removal of snow or ice
from private driveways or from driveways located between a public sidewalk and roadway.
Sec. 16-48. Discharge of sump pumps prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the discharge from sump pumps to flow upon any public streets,
alleys, roadways or sidewalks.
Sec. 16-49. Mailboxes on parkway.
(a) Mailboxes shall be permitted in the parkways with the permission of the Director of Community
Services. The mailbox shall be set upon pre-treated wood, hollow metal or plastic posts not to exceed six (6)
inches in diameter. The supports shall be of adequate strength and size to properly support the mailbox. The
use above the surface of the ground of metal posts greater than six (6) inches in diameter, concrete posts or
brick structures for support of the mailboxes is prohibited. The mailbox shall be placed so as to comply with
the United States Post Office regulations. .(Ord. No. 0-154-08, §3, 11/10/08)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-33
(b) Any mailbox support which does not conform to the provisions of this section may continue in
existence, provided the following conditions are complied with on or before the effective date of Ordinance
No. O-29-90 [March 12, 1990], as amended. The owner of the property on which the mailbox is located shall:
(1) Apply to the village for a nonconforming permit; and
(2) Execute an indemnity agreement indemnifying the village against any and all claims, losses
and damage (including legal fees incurred in the defense of any claims against the village)
arising out of or resulting from said nonconforming support structures; and
(3) Deliver to the village a general liability insurance policy insuring the village against any such
claims, losses or damage in limits of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) which
policy shall be renewed on an annual basis thereafter.
The Village Manager shall maintain a list identifying all exempt mailboxes under this section.
(c) In the event any such nonconforming mailbox support structure is removed or destroyed, the same
shall not be rebuilt. Any replacement shall conform to all provisions of this section.
(d) In the event that a mailbox or support structure is damaged or destroyed as a result of
snowplowing operations, the Village’s total liability will be limited to the cost of replacing said mailbox
and/or support structure with a standard metal mailbox and standard pre-treated wood post support structure.
.(Ord. No. 0-154-08, §4, 11/10/08)
Sec. 16-50. Appeal.
Any person adversely affected by a decision in the enforcement or interpretation of any terms or
provisions of this article by the Village Director of Public Works may appeal such decision to the Village
Manager.
Sec. 16-51. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall be subject upon conviction in a court of
competent jurisdiction to a fine not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) per offense.
Sec. 16-52. --16-60. Reserved
ARTICLE III. - DRIVEWAYS
Sec. 16-61. Permit required--For construction generally.
Any person desiring to construct, build, establish or alter a residential driveway in the Village shall
make application to the Village for a permit. The application shall contain the name and address of the person
making the application, the location and dimensions of the proposed driveway, and any other information as
may be required by the Village.
A permit shall be issued upon the payment of fees in accordance with the current fee schedule
supplement to this Code, provided that the proposed driveway is constructed in conformance to the following
limitations and all other applicable requirements of this Article:
(1) Driveway widths measured at the property line shall not exceed twenty five (25) feet in total
for all drives.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-34
(2) Driveways may be flared out at the street except where a driveway crosses a curb line
sidewalk. Flared parts of such driveways shall be bounded by circular arcs. The maximum
radius of return, shall be seven (7) feet.
(3) Where two or more driveways are to serve a single parcel of land, there shall be an island
between the driveways of at least ten (10) feet measured along the sidewalk.
(4) The portion of the driveway which coincides with the public sidewalk shall be of Portland
cement concrete, six (6) bag mix, air entrained, with a minimum thickness of five (5) inches.
(5) Driveways connecting to curbed street pavements shall be constructed of either six (6) inches
of rock base with a one and one-half (1 ?) inch bituminous surface, or a five (5) inch
thickness of Portland cement concrete.
Sec. 16-62. Same--Non-residential; application; fees; specifications.
Any person desiring to construct, build, establish, or alter a non-residential driveway in the Village
shall make application to the Village for a permit. The application shall contain the name of the applicant and
the address of the proposed driveway, the use to which it is to be devoted and shall state whether in the
building thereof, it will be necessary to cut down or otherwise alter a street curb or to elevate or depress the
existing grade of the walk or parkway.
No permit shall be issued for the construction or alteration of driveways until plans and specifications
therefor have been submitted to and approved by the Village. A copy of such plans and specifications shall be
kept on file in the office of the Village.
A permit shall be issued upon the payment of a fees in accordance with the current fee schedule
supplement to this Code, provided that the proposed driveway(s) is constructed in conformance with the
following limitations and all other applicable requirements of this article:
(1) Driveway width measured at any point on the property line shall not exceed thirty-five (35)
feet.
(2) Driveways may be flared out at the street, except where the driveway crosses a curved line
sidewalk. Flared parts of such driveways shall be bounded by circular arcs. The minimum
radius of return shall be twelve (12) feet.
(3) Where two or more driveways are to serve a single parcel of land, there shall be an island
between the driveways of at least ten (10) feet measured along the sidewalk.
(4) Where two (2) or more driveways serve a single parcel of land there may be no more than one
two-way driveway, or two (2) one-way driveways for each sixty-five (65) feet or any fraction
thereof of frontage along right of way lines.
(5) The driveway shall be of Portland cement concrete of a minimum thickness of five (5) inches,
and where it adjoins the gutter line, it shall be faced with a raised vertical lip of not less than
one and five-eighths (1 5/8) inches which shall be rounded off in finishing.
(6) The portion of the driveway which coincides with the public sidewalks shall be of cement
concrete, six (6) bag mix, air entrained, with a minimum thickness of five (5) inches.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-35
Sec. 16-63. Culverts required in drainage ditches.
No person shall build, replace, alter or maintain a driveway over any drainage ditch unless a culvert is
provided at the owner's expense, adequate to permit the uninterrupted flow of storm water along such ditch. No
such culvert shall have a diameter of less than eight (8) inches, and a larger culvert shall be installed where
required to permit the adequate flow of storm water. The property owner is responsible for maintenance or
replacement of the driveway culvert. In the event that excess stormwater runoff is diverted onto a public street
or sidewalk or the proper flow within a drainage ditch is being obstructed due to the condition of the culvert,
the property owner shall be given written notice and be required to bring the driveway culvert into compliance.
Sec. 16-64. General regulations.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to alter or obstruct established or prescribed gutters or drainage
ditches.
(b) It shall be necessary for the owner or occupant of adjacent property to keep the gutter abutting a
private driveway free from foreign material or objects.
(c) It shall be unlawful to use driveways for parking areas.
(d) It shall be the duty of the person maintaining any such driveway to keep the same free from snow
and ice or any obstruction, and to keep the same in good repair where the same crosses a public walk.
Sec. 16-65. Appeal.
Any person adversely affected by a decision in the enforcement or interpretation of any terms or
provisions of this article by the Village Director of Public Works may appeal such decision to the Village
Manager.
Sec. 16-66. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall be subject upon conviction in a court of
competent jurisdiction to a fine not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) per offense.
16-67--16-70 Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. EXCAVATIONS
Sec. 16-71. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to tunnel under or to make any excavation in
any street, alley or other public place in the Village without having obtained a permit as is herein required, or
without complying with the provisions of this Chapter or in violation of or variance from the terms of any such
permit.
Sec. 16-72. Application.
Application for an excavation permit shall be made to the Village Director of Public Works, and shall
describe the location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose therefor, and the person
doing the actual excavating work, and the name of the person for whom or which the work is being done, and
shall contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to
be done.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-36
Sec. 16-73. Fees.
The fees for an excavation permit shall be in accordance with the current fee schedule supplement to
this Code.
Sec. 16-74. Barricades and lights required.
Any person making or maintaining any excavation in any street or alley shall keep the same adequately
guarded by barricades and lights to protect persons and property from injury.
Sec. 16-75. Standards.
It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation or tunnel in any way contrary to or a variance with
the terms of the permit therefor. Proper bracing shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining
ground; and in excavations, the excavation shall not have anywhere below the surface any portion which
extends beyond the opening at the surface.
No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits in the making of such excavations or tunnels;
and notice shall be given to the persons maintaining any such pipes, cables, or conduits or to the Village
department or officer charged with the care thereof, which are or may be endangered or affected by the making
of any such excavation or tunnel before such pipes, cables or conduits shall be disturbed.
No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any tree or shrub or the roots thereof. Excavations
shall be done in accordance with all applicable provisions of this Chapter with respect to trees.
Sec. 16-76. Temporary sidewalks required when access blocked.
If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed or provided
which shall be safe for travel and convenient for users.
Sec. 16-77. Time limit.
Each application for a permit shall state the length of time it is estimated will elapse from the
commencement of the work until the restoration of the surface of the ground, or until the refill is made ready
for the pavement to be put on by the village if the village restores such surface pavement. It shall be unlawful
to fail to comply with this time limitation unless permission for an extension of time is granted by the Village
Director of Public Works.
Sec. 16-78. Restoring surface.
Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any public street, alley, or public place in the
village shall restore the surface thereof to its original condition if there is no pavement there. Refills shall be
properly tamped down, and any bracing in such tunnel or excavation shall be left in the ground.
Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street shall be repaired and the surface relaid by the
applicant, in compliance with the ordinances and subject to the supervision of the Village Director of Public
Works; and if such work is not done within ten (10) days after restoration is possible, the Village may restore
the surface and charge the cost thereof to the permittee.
Sec. 16-79. Supervision.
The Village Director of Public Works shall, from time to time, inspect all excavations and tunnels
being made in or under any public street, alley or other public place in the Village to see to the enforcement of
the provisions of this article. Notice shall be given to him at least ten (10) hours before the work of refilling any
such excavation or tunnel, commences.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-37
Sec. 16-80. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article relative to securing permits shall not apply to officers or employees of the
Village engaged in doing work for the village, nor to persons or corporations doing work for the Village under
contract, nor to persons or corporations which are operating under a franchise or grant from the Village if such
franchise provides for the making of excavations and tunnels without securing a permit therefor. Utilities
permitted under Article I of this Chapter shall be exempt from this Article to the extent required by law.
Sec. 16-81. Appeal.
Any person adversely affected by a decision in the enforcement or interpretation of any terms or
provisions of this article by the Village Director of Public Works may appeal such decision to the Village
Manager.
Sec. 16-82. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall be subject upon conviction in a court of
competent jurisdiction to a fine not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) per offense.
Secs. 16-83--16-85 Reserved.
ARTICLE V. SUB-SIDEWALK SPACE
Sec. 16-86. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to use any vault, space, room or structure under any street or sidewalk in the
Village, where the Village owns the fee or has the power to control the use of such space, without having first
secured a permit therefor as is herein required. The permit shall be issued by the Village Clerk and shall be
approved by the Mayor and Council. No such permit shall be transferred excepting in accordance with the
provisions of this article. Utilities permitted under Article I of this Chapter shall be exempt from this Article to
the extent required by law.
Sec. 16-87. Applications.
Applications for a permit to use or maintain a vault, space, room or structure under any street or
sidewalk in the Village shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk, and shall state thereon specifically the
size of the space intended to be used or maintained, and the purpose for which it is to be used. Each application
shall contain an agreement by the applicant to abide by the regulations contained in this article.
Sec. 16-88. Bond.
Each applicant shall file with the application a bond in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00),
with surety approved by the Mayor and Council conditioned to save the Village harmless from any liability
resulting from or caused by such vault, room or structure. Whenever in the opinion of the Mayor and Council,
the sureties on such bond become insolvent or unlawful, different sureties may be required by order of the
Mayor and Council. Utilities which have provided a security fund in accordance with Article I of this Chapter
shall be deemed to have met this requirement.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-38
Sec. 16-89. Conveyance of premises.
Whenever any premises abutting on any such vault, room or structure for which a permit has been
issued shall be conveyed or whenever the interest or lease or right of occupancy of the person holding the
permit shall be transferred or conveyed, the grantee or transferee must make application for a transfer of the
permit to him or it, and must furnish a bond as is required in the preceding section. A fee of five dollars ($5.00)
shall be required for such transfer, and upon the payment of the fee and the full compliance with the contents
thereof a new permit shall be issued.
Sec. 16-90. Openings.
All openings through the sidewalk or street into any such vault, space, room or structure shall be kept
covered and guarded. If the opening is a man hole or trap door an adequate, strong metal cover must be
provided and must be equipped with a rough surface so that there will be no danger of any pedestrian slipping
on it. If a stairway is provided, the stairway must be properly guarded with a railing at least three (3) feet high
to protect pedestrians from injury.
Sec. 16-91. Fee.
The annual fee to be paid for such permits shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) for each four thousand
(4,000) cubic feet or fraction thereof included in the vault, room, space or structure used or maintained under
the permit.
Sec. 16-92. Compliance with article required.
Any person using or maintaining any such vault, space, room or structure subject to the provisions of
this article shall comply with the provisions of this article.
The Council may authorize the Village Director of Public Works to close up any vault, space, room or
structure for which no permit has been obtained.
Sec. 16-93. Limitations on use.
No vault, space, room or structure shall be used for the storage of explosives or hazardous or
flammable materials; nor shall a cesspool be located therein.
Sec. 16-94. Construction.
Sub-sidewalk vaults, rooms, spaces or structures shall be firmly constructed so as to support the
sidewalk or street over it or them, with the maximum load which the sidewalk or street will carry, with a
margin of safety of fifty per cent (50%) over its maximum load or weight.
The Village Director of Public Works shall inspect all such rooms, spaces, vaults, or structures to see
to the enforcement of the provisions of this section.
Sec. 16-95. Maintenance standards.
The surface of the sidewalk over any such structure shall be kept free of snow and ice, and free from
all dirt and obstruction of any kind, by the person holding the permit, and the permittee shall keep the sidewalk
over such structure in good repair.
Sec. 16-96. Revocation of permits.
Any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by order of the Mayor and
Council for a violation of any of the provisions of this article.
Sec. 16-97--16-100. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-39
ARTICLE VI. TREES AND SHRUBS
Sec. 16-101. Intent and Purpose.
The intent of this chapter is through the preservation, protection, and planting of trees, to: aid in the
stabilization of soil by the prevention of erosion and sedimentation, reduce storm water runoff and the costs
associated therewith and replenish ground water supplies, aid in the removal of carbon dioxide and generation
of oxygen in the atmosphere, provide a buffer and screen against noise pollution, provide protection against
severe weather, aid in the control of drainage and restoration of denuded soil subsequent to construction or
grading, provide a haven for birds which in turn assist in the control of insects, protect and increases property
values, conserve and enhance the Village’s physical and aesthetic environment, and generally protect and
enhance the quality of life and the general welfare of the Village.
Sec. 16-102. Applicability.
This ordinance provides full power and authority over all trees, plants, and shrubs located within street
rights-of-way and public places of the Village, and to trees, plants, and shrubs located on private property
which constitute a hazard or threat as described herein.
Sec. 16-103. License Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, trim, spray or otherwise treat trees for
compensation in any parkway or other public place within the Village unless such personnel shall be:
licensed/certified as provided for by the State of Illinois Department of Agriculture, Illinois Arborist
Association, and/or Illinois Nursery Association and be regularly engaged in the business of planting,
removing, trimming, spraying, or otherwise treating trees. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove,
trim, spray, or otherwise treat trees for compensation in any parkway or other public place within the Village
without first having obtained a license so to do.
Sec. 16-104. License Fee/Application/Insurance Required.
The annual fee for a license required by this Article shall be in accordance with the current fee
schedule supplement to this Code and application shall be made in compliance with the general provisions of
this Code relating to licenses and permits. No license shall be issued unless the applicant files a license with
the Village Director of Public Works, including a condition, indemnifying the Village and hold it harmless
against any claim for injury or damages caused by the tree trimming, spraying, or removal. (Ord. No. 0-153-
12, §1, 11/19/12)
Sec. 16-105. Bond Prerequisite to Issuance.
No license shall be issued under the provisions of this Section unless the applicant has provided a bond
or acceptable license in accordance with Article II of this Chapter. (Ord. No. 0-153-12, §1, 11/19/12)
Sec. 16-106. License Revocation.
Any license issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked for repeated violations of any
of the provisions thereof, or of any other ordinance relating to the work done.
Sec. 16-107. Authority to Plant.
The Village shall have the exclusive right to plant, maintain, and control all trees, shrubs, and plants
planted or to be planted on public highway and municipal property unless written authority is otherwise
granted from the Village Director of Public Works.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-40
Sec. 16-108. Planting.
It is unlawful for any person to plant any tree, shrub, or plant upon any public highway or municipal
property until he has secured a written permit from the Village Director of Public Works. The application for
such permit shall designate the location, species, and approximate size of the tree, plant or shrub to be planted
and the method proposed to be followed. It shall be the duty of the Village Director of Public Works or his
representative to remove or cause to be removed all trees, shrubs, or plants planted in a public highway or
municipal property when such removal is beneficial to the peace, health, or safety of the public or where such
tree, shrub, or plant is detrimental to the growth of adjacent trees, shrubs, or plants.
Sec. 16-109. Parkway Tree Selection.
Trees to be planted in parkways and other public ways shall be selected from a list of acceptable trees
on file with the Village Director of Public Works.
Sec. 16-110. Incorporation of Horticultural Standards.
The horticultural standards contained in Appendix B, Subdivisions, Site Development and Floodplain
Regulations, of the Municipal Code of Palatine are herein incorporated as a part of this Chapter.
Sec. 16-111. Removal of Trees.
It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree in any street, parkway, or other public place
without having first secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the Village
Director of Public Works for approval before permission shall be granted. If space permits, trees will be
replaced on a one-for-one basis.
Sec. 16-112. Injury to Trees and Plants.
No person shall damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, pick the
flowers or seeds of any tree or plant; attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant; dig in or
otherwise disturb grass areas; or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area,
tree, or plants in the parkways or in public places within the Municipality nor shall any person allow any
gaseous, liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to such trees and plants to come into contact with them.
Sec. 16-113. Tree Topping.
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person or firm or utility to top any street tree, park
tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger
than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this ordinance at the
determination of the Village Director of Public Works.
Sec. 16-114. Dangerous Trees.
Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, roadway, or other adjoining property in such a way
as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel on such public place shall be trimmed by the owner of the
abutting premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease. Any tree or limb of a
tree which has become likely to fall upon or across any public or private place shall be removed by the owner
of the premises on which such tree grows. (Ord. No. 0-153-12, §1, 11/19/12)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-41
Sec. 16-115. Removal of Dead Trees and Limbs.
Any owner or person in possession or control of any private property shall remove any dead, dying, or
dangerous trees or dead, dying, or dangerous limbs dangerous to life, limbs, or property located upon the
premises of such owner within thirty (30) days of notice from the Village Director of Public Works served by
mail upon the owner or person in possession or control of such property. (Ord. No. 0-153-12, §1, 11/19/12)
Sec. 16-116. Obstruction to Trees.
(a) Advertisement or Notices: It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement, or notice to
any tree in any street, parkway, or other public place.
(b) Wires: It shall be unlawful to attach any wire or rope or other foreign object to any public tree
without permission of the Village Director of Public Works.
(c) Any person or company given the right to maintain poles and wires in the streets, alleys, or
other public places in the Village shall, in the absence of provision in a franchise agreement
concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles free from and away from any trees in such
places so far as may be possible and shall keep all such trees properly trimmed and subject
to the supervision of the Village Director of Public Works so that no injury shall be done to
the poles or wires and trees by contact.
Sec. 16-117. Protection of Public Trees.
(a) All trees on any street or other publicly owned property near any excavation or construction of
any building, structure, or street work shall be guarded with a good substantial fence, frame,
or box not less than four feet high and eight feet square, or at a distance in feet from the tree
equal to the caliper of the trunk in inches, whichever is greater, and all building material, dirt,
or other debris shall be kept outside the barrier.
(b) No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or lay any drive within a radius of
fifteen (15) feet from any public tree; nor shall any person trim, treat chemically or otherwise,
spray or otherwise affect any public tree without first obtaining a written permit.
(c) No person shall deposit, place, store, or maintain upon any public place of the municipality,
any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other material which may impede the free passage of
water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing therein, except by written permit.
Sec. 16-118. Right to Inspect.
The officers, agents, servants, and employees of the Village are hereby authorized and directed, for
cause, to enter on and upon private property whereon there is located any vegetation having the appearance of
or suspected of being diseased or infested with insects for the purpose of inspecting said suspected vegetation
and removing therefrom samples or portions thereof to be tested to establish whether said vegetation is in fact
diseased or infested.
Sec. 16-119. Diseased or Infested Vegetation Declared Nuisance.
In the event that it is determined that the trees and shrubs from which samples have been taken in fact
have a transmittable disease or are infested with insects, said trees and shrubs shall be and is hereby declared to
be a nuisance.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-42
Sec. 16-120. Duty of Owner, Occupant to Abate.
The owner, occupant, or agent of the parcel of land on which diseased or infested trees and shrubs
exist shall forthwith treat or remove and destroy said diseased or infested trees and shrubs or shall cause the
same to be removed and destroyed within ten days of notification to such owner, occupant, or agent that said
trees and shrubs are in fact diseased and infested.
Sec. 16-121. Abatement by Village.
In all cases where the owner, occupant, or agent of the parcel of land on which said diseased or
infested trees and shrubs are located cannot be found or if found and notified as aforesaid neglects or refuses to
abate said nuisance, it shall be lawful for the Village to abate the same by the removal and destruction of said
vegetation and in that event the said owner, occupant, and agent or any of them shall be charged with those
expenses which may be incurred by the Village in the removal or abatement of the trees and shrubs as aforesaid
which expense shall be collected by the Village by suit or otherwise in addition to the fine or penalty provided.
Sec. 16-122. Visual Obstruction of Intersection.
Every owner or person in control of any tree, shrub, or plant growing on private property shall trim the
same in order that they shall not obstruct the view of motorists, cyclists, and/or pedestrians at street
intersections. Specifically such trees, shrubs, or plants shall in every case conform to the following restrictions:
With a radius of twenty feet from the corner point of the lot nearest the street intersection, no planted
vegetation shall exceed the height of thirty-six inches above the top of the curb except for trees in which case
the lowest limb must be at least five feet above the top of the curb or three feet above the top of corner-planted
shrubs, whichever is higher. This section shall not apply to trees with a diameter at one foot above ground
level of three inches or less provided that not more than two such trees exist in the regulated corner area.
Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this section within ten days after written notice
from the Village Director of Public Works of the particular things to be done under this section shall be subject
to the penalties provided in this chapter.
Sec. 16-123. Enforcement.
The Village Director of Public Works or his representative is charged with the enforcement of this
chapter and to that end may enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting
trees, shrubs, and plants. He may remove such specimens as are required for purpose of analysis to determine
whether or not the same are infected.
No person shall hinder, prevent, or interfere with the agents, servants, or employees of the Village
while engaged in carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 16-124. Removal of Public Nuisance.
The Village Director of Public Works of his representative shall give to the owner of the premises
where a nuisance as described in this chapter is found a written notice of the existence of such nuisance which
may require the removal or treatment of such nuisance within ten days following the notice such removal to be
done under the direction of the Village Director of Public Works or his representative. The notice may further
state that unless the nuisance is removed in compliance with the terms thereof within said ten-day period, the
Village Director of Public Works may proceed to remove the same and assess the cost thereof against the
property owner. Service of the notice may be by personal service or by registered mail to the property address.
In the event the owner does not live on the premises, notice may be sent by ordinary mail to the last known
address of the owner.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 16 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
16-43
Sec. 16-125. Permit Required for Each Job/Yearly Activity.
It shall be unlawful for any person, even though he shall be licensed as other wise provided in this
chapter, to plant, remove, trim, spray, or otherwise treat any tree in any street, parkway, or other public place
within the Village unless such person shall first apply for and obtain from the Village Director of Public Works
a permit for each job or activity of planting, removing, trimming, spraying, or otherwise treating trees to be
undertaken by such person. Such permit shall contain a detailed statement of the nature of the work proposed
and permitted to be done upon such trees; and it shall be unlawful for such person acting under such permit to
violate any of the provisions of such permit. Such permit shall be issued only to a person duly licensed as
provided in this Chapter, and a copy of the approved permit and license shall be kept on the job site while any
and work is being performed. Failure to have the same will result in work being stopped, and other measures as
the Village may deem appropriate.
Sec. 16-126. Issuance or Denial of Permit.
Upon filing of an application for a permit to plant or remove trees, the Village Director of Public
Works shall investigate the location described in said application and all pertinent facts pertaining thereto. If in
the opinion of the Village Director of Public Works said trees should be planted, removed, or destroyed, he
shall issue said permit. However, if in the opinion of the Village Director of Public Works the application for a
permit should not be issued, the application shall be denied and the reasons for denial shall be given to the
applicant.
Sec. 16-127. Appeal.
Any person adversely affected by a decision in the enforcement or interpretation of any terms or
provisions of this article by the Village Director of Public Works may appeal such decision to the Village
Manager.
Sec. 16-128. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall be subject upon conviction in a court
of competent jurisdiction to a fine not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) per offense. In a prosecution under this article, each tree removed, damaged, or destroyed
will constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 16-129. Utility Companies.
All utility companies or their designated contractors shall give the Village Director of Public Works or
his representative seven (7) days notification before engaging in any line clearing, tree trimming, or tree
removal activity. The Village Director of Public Works or his representative will approve the time, place and
manner of performing any tree or shrub related work. All utility companies or their contractors will follow all
proper arbor cultural practices on all trees within the limits of the Village of Palatine.
(Ord.No.0-109-99, §7 & 8; 8/9/99)
















































PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-1
CHAPTER 19 UTILITY SERVICES*
----------
*Cross reference(s)--Director of public works to have charge of construction and care, §2-172;
building codes and building regulations, Ch. 6; public improvements as a condition to issuance of building
permit, §6-56; health and sanitation, Ch. 9; housing, Ch. 10; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 16; zoning, App. A;
subdivision regulations, App. B.
----------
Editor’s Note: A new Article V Stormwater Discharge was enacted by Ord. 0-41-04, passed on March 8,
2004.
-----------
Editor’s Note: A new Article VI Cross Connection Control was enacted by Ord. 0-94-11, passed on August 8,
2011, effective August 18, 2011
-----------
Editor’s Note: Chapter 19 was renamed from “Water and Sewer Services to “Utility Services and
A new Article VII Electricity Aggregation Program was enacted by Ord. #0-58-12, passed on April 16, 2012
-----------
Art. I. In General, §§19-1 - 19-15
Art. II. Water, §§19-16 - 19-80
Div. 1. Generally, §§19-16 - 19-35
Div. 2. Service Pipes, §§19-36 - 19-50
Div. 3. Meters, §§19-51 - 19-60
Div. 4. Rates and Charges, §§19-61 - 19-70
Div. 5. Sprinkling Regulations, §§19-71 - 19-80
Art. III. Sewers, §§19-81 - 19-100
Art. IV. Septic Tanks, §§19-101 - 19-108
Art. V. Stormwater Discharge §§19-110 - 19-131
Art. VI. Cross Connection Control §§19-132 – 19-157
Art. VIII. Electricity Aggregation Program §§19-200 – 19-204
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 19-1. Bills.
Bills for water and sewer service shall be dated and sent out at such times as may be directed by the
mayor and village council.
All water and sewer bills must be paid within twenty-three (23) days after the statements are presented
or put in the mail and an additional ten (10) per cent shall be paid on all bills paid later. (Code 1961, §21.306;
Ord.No.0-80-89, §1, 6-28-99; Ord. No. 0-286-03, §1, 12-8-03)
Sec. 19-2. Termination of service for nonpayment.
The water supply may be shut off from any premises for which any bill or bills for water or sewer service
remain unpaid forty-two (42) days after such bill or bills are rendered. Such bill or bills for water or sewer
service shall include any and all services rendered by the village in performance of necessary repairs and
maintenance of the service pipes, meters or other equipment related to the water supply or sewer servicing the
subject premises, together with all filing fees, court costs and other charges incurred by the village in the
collection of said bill or bills. After settlement of the amount due on such bill or bills on terms satisfactory to
the village, the supply shall be turned on only upon payment of the amount due, plus a fee as set out in the Fee
Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances.
(Code 1961, §21.307; Ord. No. O-102-76, §1, 11-22-76; Ord. No. 0-30-93, 4-12-93; Ord. No. 0-80-99, §2, 6-
28-99; Ord. No. 0-286-03, §2 12-8-03; Ord. No. 0-154-10, §1, 12-13-10, effective 1-1-11)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-2
Sec. 19-3. Notice of delinquency.
Whenever a bill for water or sewer service, which service shall include any and all services rendered
by the village in the performance of necessary repair and maintenance of the service pipes, meters or other
equipment related to the water supply or sewer servicing the subject premises, remains unpaid ninety (90) days
after it has been rendered, the village clerk shall file with the county recorder of deeds of Cook County a
statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the following:
(1) A legal description of the subject premises sufficient for identification thereof;
(2) The amount of money due for such services;
(3) The date when such amount became delinquent; and
(4) A notice that the village claims a lien for said amount.
If the consumer of water whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises, and the village clerk has
notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises, if his address be known to the clerk,
whenever such bill remains unpaid for a period of ninety (90) days after it has been rendered.
If a bill for water or sewer service to real estate is unpaid at the time the owner sells such real estate,
and no statement of lien claim has been filed by the village prior thereto, the village manager shall refer the
matter to a firm or agency specializing in collection work to pursue collection from the seller, and no efforts
shall be made to collect the amount due from the purchaser of said real estate. If the seller acquires other real
estate within the village, the amount of the unpaid bill shall be added to future billings for water and sewer
services to such other real estate. Nothing herein shall be deemed to relieve an owner who rents his premises to
others from liability for unpaid water bills for service to such premises. (Code 1961, §21.309; Ord. No. O-
102-76, §1, 11-22-76; Ord. No. O-17-84, §1, 3-26-84, Ord. No. 0-154-10, §2, 12-13-10, effective 1-1-11)
Sec. 19-4. Foreclosure of lien.
The village shall have the power to foreclose the lien for unpaid bill or bills for water or sewer charges,
including all filing fees, court costs and other charges incurred by the village in the collection of said bill or
bills, by suit in chancery in the circuit court of Cook County. Said lien shall be effective and may be foreclosed
against the subject premises whether or not the party or parties owning or occupying the premises are the same
as those who owned or occupied the premises at the time such service was rendered.
(Code 1961, §21.310; Ord. No. O-102-76, §1, 11-22-76)
Sec. 19-5. Payment of bills for water and sewer service.
Payment of bills for water and sewer service (and the collection of garbage) shall be made either
directly to the village or to those businesses or enterprises which have been appointed agents to receive such
payments on the village's behalf. (Ord. No. O-22-78, §2, 4-10-78)
Sec. 19-6. Applicability of this chapter to all users of the Palatine water and sewer system.
In the application and enforcement of any provision of this chapter applicable to water and sewer
services furnished by the village, unless specifically stated in section 19-42, the provisions of this chapter shall
be applicable to residents and nonresidents of the village. (Ord. No. O-27-81, §1, 3-23-81)
Sec. 19-7. Bad check processing fee.
See Chapter 1 General Provisions, Sec. 1-11. Reimbursement for Insufficient Fund Checks. (Ord.
No. O-54-82, §1, 6-14-82; Ord. No. 0-46-97, §1, 4-14-97)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-3
Sec. 19-8. Credits and Refunds.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Article, in order to permit sound fiscal planning and
budgeting by the Village, no user/consumer shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a fee imposed under
this Article unless the user/consumer files a claim for refund or credit within one year after the date on which
the fee was paid or remitted with the Director of Finance.
Credits and refunds will only be made to the end user/consumer of services and not third parties or
subsequent user/consumers.
(Ord. No. 0-154-10, §3, 12-13-10, effective 1-1-11)
Secs. 19-9--19-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. WATER
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 19-16. Use during construction.
Prior to the issuance of any building permit, and before any water meter is installed as herein provided,
the contractor so constructing such building may be permitted to use the village water supply by paying a per
unit construction water fee which shall be as set out in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the Code of
Ordinances. (Code 1961, §21.308; Ord. No. O-54-82, §2, 6-14-82; Ord. No. O-180-88, § 4, 12-27-88; Ord.
No. O-88-91, §2, 6-24-91 Ord.No. 0-49-94, §4-25-94)
Sec. 19-17. Turning on.
No water from the village water supply shall be turned on for service into any premises by any persons
but the director of public works or some other person authorized by him to perform this service. (Code 1961,
§21.101)
Sec. 19-18. Application; fee.
Application to have water turned on shall be made to the Director of Community Services and by
doing so, the applicant agrees to abide by and accept all of the provisions of this chapter as condition governing
the use of the village water supply by the applicant. (Ord. No. 0-142-15 §1, 12/7/15)
(Editor’s note: Sec. 19-19. Deposit was removed by Ord. No. 0-80-99, 6/28/99 and therefore, Sec. 19-19.1
Water system development surcharge 19-19.1 was renumbered as 19-19.
On 12/7/15, Ord. No. 0-142-15 deleted Sec. 19-19 Water System development surcharge, in its entirety,
therefore Sec. 19-20 was renumbered to 19-19. Also, Sec. 19-21 Mileage charge for connection was deleted in
its entirety and Sec. 19-22 - 19-27 was renumbered to Sec. 19-20 – 19-25.)
Sec. 19-19. Connection and meter fees.
All water taps shall be made by and at the expense of the owner, subject to village inspection and
approval. For each such inspection the owner shall pay the village an inspection fee as set out in the Fee
Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances. All materials for water taps shall be in accordance with
village specifications and supplied by the developer or owner. All water meters must be purchased and
installed by the village or village designee. Applications for water taps and water meters shall be made to the
Director of Community Services and the required fees paid at the time of such application. Fees for water
meters for new service, expansion of service, or replacement equipment shall be as set out in an amount not to
exceed the Fee Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances. (Code 1961, §21.105; Ord. No. 0-18-79, §4,
3/12/79; Ord. No. 0-54-82, §4, 6/14/82; Ord. No. 0-180-88, §8, 12/27-88; Ord. No. 0-88-91, §5, 6/24/91; Ord.
No. 0-49-94 §3, 4/25/94; Ord. No. 0-154-10, §4 12/13/10, effective 1/1/11; Ord. No. 0-142-15, §1, 12/7/15;
Ord. No. 0-5-17, 1/16/17)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-4
Sec. 19-20. Resale prohibited; emergencies excepted.
No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the village supply to any premises
other than that for which application has been made and the water installed, except in case of emergency.
(Code 1961, §21.107)
Sec. 19-21. Tampering prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, not authorized by the village, to tamper with, alter or injure any
part of the village water works or supply system, or any meter. (Code 1961, §21.108)
Sec. 19-22. Sewer flushing prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to use potable water for the flushing of sanitary sewers unless such flushing is
done with a high velocity type sewer jet. (Ord. No. O-131-77, §1, 12-12-77)
Sec. 19-23. Illegal connection.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to connect any unit of property or portion
thereof to the village water system without obtaining a permit and paying the applicable fees as required under
this Article II. (Ord. No. O-19-81, §1, 2-23-81)
Sec. 19-24. Unauthorized draw of water.
Contractors wanting to draw water from a Village hydrant shall apply to the Department of Public
Works for a permit authorizing the drawing of water from a Village hydrant. The department shall require the
contractor to use a hydrant meter, rented from Public Works, as a condition to permitting the contractor to us
an unmetered hydrant. Provided, however, if the contractor is filling a tanker truck at the public works facility
from an already metered hydrant, then no hydrant meter rental is necessary. Fees for the water shall be as set
out in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances. (Ord. No. O-19-81, §1, 2-23-81; Ord. No. 0-
49-94 §4, 4-25-94; Ord. No. 0-154-10, §6, 12-13-10, effective 1-1-11)
Sec. 19-25. Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation who connects a unit of property or portion thereof to the village water
system without having been issued a permit and paying all required fees, or who draws water from the village
water system without paying the required water rates, shall be fined an amount as set out in the Fee Schedule
Supplement to the Code of Ordinances and in addition shall pay to the village an amount equal to the
estimated cost of the water used as reasonably determined by the director of finance and operations. (Ord. No.
O-19-81, §1, 2-23-81; Ord. No. 0-5-98; §22, 1-26-98; Ord. No. 0-80-99, §4, 6-28-99; Ord. No. 0-154-10, §7,
12-13-10, effective 1-1-11)
Secs. 19-26 - 19-35. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-5
DIVISION 2. SERVICE PIPES
Sec. 19-36. Installation to be at cost of owner; director of public works to supervise.
All service pipes from the watermain to the premises to be served shall be installed by, and at the cost
of the owner of the property to be served or the applicant for the service. Such installations shall be under the
supervision of the director of public works. (Code 1961, §21.201; Ord. No. 0-142-15, §1, 12/7/15)
Sec. 19-37. Specifications.
All water service pipes from the main to the meter shall be not less than one inch in size. Only copper
pipes or tubing shall be used to connect the meter with the mains. All fittings and connections shall be uniform
and comply with specifications established by the Mayor and Village Council.
All service pipes shall be buried at least five (5) feet deep in the ground. (Code 1961, §21.102; Ord.
No. O-54-82, §5, 6-14-82)
Sec. 19-38. Maintenance and repairs.
The village shall maintain the water service pipes from the water main up to and including the
roundway and shutoff boxes. The owner shall be liable for all maintenance and repairs of the water service
pipes from the roundway to the water meter. The village shall be responsible for the maintenance and repairs of
water meters. The property owner shall be liable for any damage to the water meter by any person or workman
hired by the owner on his property. The property owner shall be responsible for keeping any debris from
entering and damaging the shutoff box. (Code 1961, §21.203; Ord. No. O-54-82, §6, 6-14-82; Ord. No. O-72-
83, §1, 10-24-83)
Sec. 19-39. Excavations.
Excavations for installing service pipes or repairing the same shall be made in compliance with the
ordinance provisions relating to excavations in streets. (Code 1961, §21.204)
Sec. 19-40. Shutoff boxes.
Shutoff or service boxes shall be placed on every service pipe, and shall be located between the curb
line and the sidewalk line where this is practicable. Such boxes shall be so located that they are easily
accessible, and shall be protected from frost. (Code 1961 §21.205)
Sec. 19-41 Abandonment
If an existing water service is no longer to be used for its intended purpose as in the case of the demolition
of a building, the water service pipe shall be disconnected at the corporation stop or at another location
approved by the Director of Public Works. The corporation stop can remain provided there is no leakage when
closed. The b-box is to be removed and the hole properly backfilled and restored. The owner of the property or
the applicant is responsible for all costs and restoration associated with the disconnection. This disconnection
must be inspected and approved by the Director of Public Works or his designee. Ord. No. 0-61-04, §1, 4-12-
04)
Secs. 19-42-19-50. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-6
DIVISION 3. METERS
Sec. 19-51. Required; charges pending installation.
All premises using water from the village water supply must be supplied with a Village supplied meter
paid for by the property owner when service is obtained or altered authorized by building permit. The charge
for such meters shall be as set out in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances.
All non-residential building units must convert to an Automated Meter Read (AMR) meter for
continued water service. Any residential premises not converting from a manually read meter to an Automated
Meter Read (AMR) meter after due notice of such conversion being tendered shall pay a non-conversion fee
for each billing cycle as set out in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances until such time that
the meter conversion occurs. Said fee may be prorated should the conversion occur within a billing cycle.
(Code 1961, §21.301; Ord. No. 0-154-10, §9, 12-13-10, effective 1-1-11; Ord. No. 0-89-15, §1, 08-03-15)
Sec. 19-52. Location.
Meters and remote meter reading devices shall be installed by the village in a location that will provide
operability and be easy to access. (Code 1961, §21.302; Ord. No. 0-286-03, §4 12-8-03; Ord. No. 0-89-15, §1,
08-03-15)
Sec. 19-53 Access to Meter and External Transponder
No person shall prevent or deny any access to any authorized village employee or any village
authorized designee attempting to read, inspect, repair, convert or replace any water meter or external
transponder. In the event access to the meter or transponder is denied, or the area around the water meter or
external transponder is altered to limit access to prevent the repair or maintenance of Village owned equipment,
the Director of Public Works shall notify the owner in writing of required access. If the condition is not
remedied within thirty (30) days after the date such notice is issued, the water supply may be shut off, and shall
remain so until the condition has been remedied. (Code 1961, §21.303; Ord. No. O-27-81, §2, 3-23-81; Ord.
No. O-54-82, §7, 6-14-82; Ord. No. 0-80-99, §5, 6-28-99; Ord. No. 0-154-10, §10, 12-13-10, effective 1-1-11;
Ord. No. 0-89-15, §1, 08-03-15)
Sec. 19-54 Water Meter Testing
Any customer who disputes the accuracy of the meter serving their property may request that such
meter be tested. Upon payment to the village of a testing fee, as set forth in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the
Code of Ordinances, the disputed meter will be removed and replaced with a like type meter by representatives
of the village, and in the company of the person so requesting the testing, the meter will be delivered to a
testing facility designated by the village. In the presence of the person so requesting the test, the meter will be
tested in accordance with the American Water Works Association Meter Testing Procedures. If, after such
testing, the meter proves to be within limits set forth by the American Water Works Association, the fee paid
shall be retained by the Village to cover the cost of removal, testing and reinstallation of the meter. If, after
such testing, the meter over records in aggregate amount exceeding limits defined by the American Water
Works Association Meter Testing Procedures, the meter shall be replaced at no cost to the customer, and the
testing fee shall be refunded in full.
Except as provided in this chapter, meters shall be tested and/or replaced at village expense, unless
said meter has sustained damages due to abuse, tampering or negligence.
Replaced meters are not eligible for customer requested testing for 180 calendar days after original
installation.
(Ord. No. 0-89-15, §1, 08-03-15)
Secs. 19-55-19-60. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-7
DIVISION 4. RATES AND CHARGES
[Editor’s Note: Sec. 19-62 through 19-65 were deleted in their entirety, and replaced with Sec. 19-62—
19-67, pursuant to Ordinance 0-247-05, passed on 12-19-05, effective 1-1-06]
Sec. 19-61. Payment prerequisite to service.
No premises shall be served with water from the municipal water supply, nor served by or connected
with the municipal sanitary sewer system unless the rates hereinafter designated shall be paid. The Village, at
its sole option, may bill a tenant or other occupant; however, it shall be the ultimate responsibility of the owner
of all premises so served to pay the charges herein prescribed. (Code 1961, §21.304; Ord. No. O-19-76, §1, 3-
8-76; Ord. No. 0-154-10, §11, 12-13-10, effective 1-1-11)
Sec. 19-62. Water Rates
There shall be water charges pursuant to the classifications in this section.
A “user/consumer” is defined as a residential dwelling unit, commercial unit, business unit, industrial
unit, educational unit, governmental unit, institutional unit, or any other occupiable unit or combination
thereof, having direct access and use of water and/or sewer services regardless of whether water is or is not
metered through a single master meter. A residential dwelling unit is defined as any building or portion thereof
that contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, and sanitation. Unit counts for
commercial, business, industrial or institutional uses shall be determined on an individual analysis of occupied
or common areas having direct access to water services. Water provided as a general service to common area
will be counted as one unit under this definition when determining the total direct access units regardless of the
number of direct distribution users. (Ord. No. 0-89-15, §1, 08-03-15)
(A) For all services to premises within the village, each user/consumer of water service shall be
charged a monthly Basic User Billing Charge as set out in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the Code of
Ordinances. (Ord. No. 0-169-08, §1, 12-1-08, effective 1-1-09; Ord. No. 0-138-09, §1, 12-14-09,
effective 1-1-10; Ord. No. 0-154-10, §12, 12-13-10, effective 1-1-11)
In addition to this Basic User Billing Charge, each user/consumer shall pay the following consumption
rates:
(1) For services to premises within the village that are not exempt from the payment of real estate
taxes each user/consumer of water service shall be charged a consumption charge as set out in the
Fee Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 0-169-08, §2, 12/1/08, effective 1-1-09; Ord. No. 0-138-09, §2, 12-14-09, effective 1-1-
10; Ord. No. 0-154-10, §13, 12-13-10, effective 1-1-11)
The minimum usage billing will be for the quantity of 5,000 gallons.
(Ord. 0-169-08, §3, 12-1-08, effective 1-1-09; 0-138-09, §3, 12-14-09, effective 1-1-10; Ord.
No. 0-154-10, §14, 12-13-10, effective 1-1-11)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-8
(2) For services to premises within the village that are exempt from the payment of real estate taxes each
user/consumer of water service shall be charged a consumption charge as set out in the Fee Schedule
Supplement to the Code of Ordinances. (Ord. 0-169-08, §4, 12-1-08, effective 1-1-09; 0-138-09, §4,
12-14-09, effective 1-1-10; Ord. No. 0-154-10, §13, 12-13-10, effective 1-1-11)
The minimum usage billing will be for the quantity of 5,000 gallons. (Ord. 0-169-08, §5, 12-1-
08, effective 1-1-09; 0-138-09, §14, 12-14-09, effective 1-1-10; Ord. No. 0-154-10, §14, 12-13-
10, effective 1-1-11)
(B) For all services to premises not within the village, each user/consumer of water service shall be charged
a monthly Basic User Billing Charge as set out in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the Code of
Ordinances. (Ord. 0-169-08, §6, 12-1-08, effective 1-1-09; 0-138-09, §6, 12-14-09, effective 1-1-10;
Ord. No. 0-154-10, §15, 12-13-10, effective 1-1-11)
In addition to this Basic User Billing Charge, each user/consumer shall pay the following
consumption rates:
(1) For services to premises outside of the village that are not in the Village of Deer Park each
user/consumer of water service shall be charged a consumption charge as set out in the Fee
Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances. (Ord. 0-169-08, §7, 12-1-08, effective 1-1-09;
0-138-09, §7, 12-14-09, effective 1-1-10; Ord. No. 0-154-10, §16, 12-13-10, effective 1-1-11)
The minimum usage billing will be for the quantity of 5,000 gallons. (Ord. 0-169-08, §8, 12-
1-08, effective 1-1-09; 0-138-09, §8, 12-14-09, effective 1-1-10; Ord. No. 0-154-10, §16, 12-
13-10, effective 1-1-11)
(2) For services to premises outside of the village that are in the Village of Deer Park each
user/consumer of water service shall be charged a consumption charge as set out in the Fee
Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances. (Ord. 0-203-06, §1, 12-4-06, effective 1-1-07;
Ord. 0-21-07, §1, 12-10-07, effective 1-1-08; Ord. No. 0-170-08, §1, 12-1-08, effective 1-1-09;
Ord. 0-169-08, §9, 12-1-08, effective 1-1-09; 0-138-09, §9, 12-14-09, effective 1-1-10; 0-139-09,
§1, 12-14-09, effective 1-1-10; Ord. No. 0-154-10, §17, 12-13-10, effective 1-1-11)
The minimum usage billing will be for the quantity of 5,000 gallons.
(C) In the event an area is annexed during the course of a year, the charges for water service for premises
outside village limits shall remain in effect until January one (1) of the following year. However, the
Mayor and Village Council of the Village of Palatine may waive this provision.
(D) Where a contractor purchases water from a metered hydrant, the contractor shall be charged a
consumption charge as set out in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 0-169-08, §10, 12-1-08, effective 1-1-09; 0-138-09, §10, 12-14-09, effective 1-1-10; Ord. No. 0-154-10,
§18, 12-13-10, effective 1-1-11)
Sec. 19-63. Sewer Service Rates
There shall be sewer charges pursuant to the classifications in this section based upon the consumption
of water where water is metered, consumption where a sewer meter is used, or a flat fee if neither water nor
sewer is metered.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-9
A “user/consumer” is defined as a residential dwelling unit, commercial unit, business unit, industrial
unit, educational unit, governmental unit, institutional unit, or any other occupiable unit or combination
thereof, having direct access and use of sewer services regardless of whether water consumption is or is not
metered through a single master meter. Unit counts for commercial, business, industrial or institutional uses
shall be determined on an individual analysis of occupied or common areas having direct access to sewer
services.
The volume of flow for computing the consumption charge shall be determined by one of the following
methods, at the discretion of the authorized village official:
1) Metered water consumption.
2) Metered volume of waste discharged. A device for measuring volume may be required by the
authorized village official if these volumes cannot be otherwise determined from the metered
water consumption records. Such device shall be installed, owned, and maintained by the person.
Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed, without consent of the
authorized village official.
3) Standardized billing rates as set out in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances.
Ord. No. 0-154-10, §19, 12-13-10, effective 1-1-11)
(A) For all services to premises within the village, each user/consumer of sewer service shall be
charged a monthly Basic User Billing Charge as set out in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the
Code of Ordinances; however, this shall not be in addition to the Basic User Billing Charge
charged under Section 8-1 or 19-62:
In addition to this Basic User Billing Charge, each user/consumer shall pay a consumption charge
as set out in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 0-169-08, §11, 12-1-08, effective 1-1-09; Ord. No. 0-154-10, §20, 12-13-10, effective 1-1-11;
Ord. O-137-18 effective 1-1-19)
The minimum usage billing will be for the quantity of 5,000 gallons.
(B) For all services to premises not within the village, each user/consumer of water service shall be
charged a monthly Basic User Billing Charge as set out in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the
Code of Ordinances; however, this shall not be in addition to the Basic User Billing Charge
charged under Section 19-62:
In addition to this Basic User Billing Charge, each user/consumer shall pay a consumption charge
as set out in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 0-169-08, §12, 12-1-08, effective 1-1-09; Ord. No. 0-154-10, §21 12-13-10, effective 1-1-
11)
The minimum usage billing will be for the quantity of 5,000 gallons.
Sec. 19-64. Local Capital Financing (Sewer Separation) Surcharge Rate
The local capital financing surcharge will be computed to allocate the annual financing costs of all
capital improvements to the sewer system over all those affected sewer system user/consumers of the village. It
shall be based upon their proportional benefits received as determined by the Village Council based upon the
number of sewer connections servicing the property.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-10
Each affected user/consumer shall be charged a flat monthly rate as set out in the Fee Schedule
Supplement to the Code of Ordinances. (Ord. 0-205-06, §1, 12/4/06, effective 1-1-07; Ord. 0-211-07, §1, 12-
10-07, effective 1-1-08; Ord. 0-171-08, §1, 12-1-08, effective 1-1-09; Ord. No. 0-154-10, §22, 12-13-10,
effective 1-1-11)
Sec. 19-65. Local Storm Water Drainage Facility Surcharge Rate
The local storm water drainage facility maintenance surcharge will be computed to allocate the annual
maintenance cost of storm water drainage facilities accepted for maintenance by the Village to those lots served
by such facilities. The charge per lot to be established by the Village Council at the time such facility is
accepted by the Village. The charge is subject to adjustment upon an annual review by the Department of
Finance and Operations.
Each affected user/consumer of the Fair Meadows Drainage Facility shall be charged a flat monthly rate
as set out in the Fee Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances. (Ord. No. 0-154-10, §23, 12-13-10,
effective 1-1-11)
Sec. 19-66 Flood Control Surcharge Rate
The flood control surcharge will be computed to allocate the annual financing costs of certain flood
control improvements designated by the Mayor and Village Council (as amended from time to time) and
generally consistent with resolution adopted by the Corporate Authorities (R-53-02) or any amendments
thereto. The surcharge shall consist of a monthly charge imposed upon each residential, commercial, industrial
and institutional unit located within the incorporated limits of the Village. For purposes of this surcharge, a
“unit” shall be defined as each utility customer within the incorporated limits of the Village.
The surcharge is subject to adjustment and/or abatement by the Village Council based upon an annual
review by the Department of Finance and Operations.
Each affected user/consumer shall be charged a flat monthly rate as set out in the Fee Schedule
Supplement to the Code of Ordinances. (Ord. #0-212-07, §1, 12-10-07, effective 11-08; Ord. No. 0-154-10,
§24, 12-13-10, effective 1-1-11)
Sec. 19-67. General provisions regarding rates and charges.
(1) Bills. Said rates or charges for service shall be payable in accordance with Chapter 19 of the Code of
Ordinances, Village of Palatine, Illinois.
(2) Revenues. All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the water and sewer system shall
be deposited in the appropriate accounts of the water fund and sewer fund. All such revenues and moneys shall
be held by the authorized village official and other duly authorized employees of the village separate and apart
from other funds of the village and deposited in the accounts of the funds designated as the "water fund” and
the “sewerage fund” of village.
(3) Accounts. The authorized village official shall establish a property system of accounts and shall keep
proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions
relative to the water and sewer system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of both the water and sewer
systems.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-11
(4) Notice of rates. A copy of this section properly certified by the authorized village official shall be
filed in the office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real
estate of the charges of the sewerage system of said village on their properties.
(5) Penalty. Shall be in accordance with Chapter 1 of the Code of Ordinances, Village of Palatine,
Illinois.
(6) Access to records. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or the United States Environmental
Protection Agency or their authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers, and
records of the village which are applicable to the village system of user charges for the purpose of making
audit, examination, excerpts, and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and
general conditions to any state or federal grant.
Secs. 19-68--19-70. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. SPRINKLING REGULATIONS*
----------
*Editor's note--Ordinance No. O-19-90, § 1, adopted Feb. 26, 1990, deleted §§19-71--19-73, which
were the substantive provisions of Art. II, Div. 5, which pertained to sprinkling regulations, and which derived
from Ord. No. O-77-86, §1, adopted July 28, 1986. Ord. No. O-19-90 also added new provisions, similar in
subject matter, set out as a new Div. 5 to Art. II.
----------
Sec. 19-71. Regulation of sprinkling.
(a) Sprinkling or watering lawns shall be prohibited from noon until 6:00 p.m. each day, from 12:01
a.m. on May 15 of each year until 11:59 p.m. on September 15 of each year and shall not occur on consecutive
days. For the purpose of this section, "lawn" shall be that portion of any land under cultivation with grass,
trees, shrubs, bushes or types of vegetation not occupied by the principal or accessory building. (Ord. No. 0-
103-15, §1, 9/8/15)
(b) The use of water from the village water system for purposes of sprinkling or watering lawns and for
certain other purposes, including, but not limited to, the filling of swimming pools and the noncommercial
washing of cars, is not essential to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Village of Palatine. The
village manager is empowered to determine if other uses not specified in this section are nonessential.
(c) The village manager is authorized and empowered to impose additional restrictions, including
imposition of an odd/even water use cycle based on address and calendar day, of the nonessential use of water
from the village water system for such period of time and in such manner as he may deem necessary in order to
conserve the supply of water in the Village of Palatine. The village manager shall announce the restrictions
and the restrictions are effective upon the announcement. Upon announcing the restrictions, the village
manager shall report the nature of those restrictions and the reasons for them to the village president and board
of trustees. (Ord. No. O-19-90, §1, 2-26-90)
(d) Temporary 14 day sprinkling permits may be issued by the Director of Public Works to individuals
who have special needs related to newly installed landscape materials. (Ord. No. 0-115-12, §1, 8/6/12)
Secs. 19-72--19-80. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-12
ARTICLE III. SEWERS*
----------
*Editor's note--Section 3 of Ord. No. O-102-84, adopted Nov. 26, 1984 deleted Art. III in its entirety
and enacted in lieu thereof a new Art. III as herein set forth. Former Art. III, consisting of §§19-81--19-87,
pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from the following: Code 1961, §§9.123, 20.401--20.405;
Ord. No. O-85-75, §1, adopted Nov. 24, 1975; Ord. No. O-27-81, § 4, adopted Mar. 23, 1981; and Ord. No.
O-54-82, §8, adopted June 14, 1982.
Cross reference(s)--Department of public works to have charge of construction and care, §2-173.
----------
Sec. 19-81. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as
follows:
(1) Federal government:
(a) Federal Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) as
amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (Public Law 92-
500) and (Public Law 93-243).
(b) Administrator means the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
(c) Federal grant shall mean the U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II, Grants for Construction of
Treatment Works, of the Act and implementing regulations.
(2) State government:
(a) State Act means the Code of Illinois Antipollution Bond Act of 1970.
(b) Director means the director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
(c) State grant shall mean the State of Illinois participation in the financing of the construction of
treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Antipollution Bond Act and for making such
grants as filed with the secretary of the State of Illinois.
(3) Local government:
(a) Ordinance means this article.
(b) Village means the Village of Palatine.
(c) Authorized village official shall mean the village manager or his designated representative.
(4) Person shall mean any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individual, firm,
company, municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency,
or other entity.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-13
(5) NPDES permit means any permit or equivalent document issued by the administrator, or, where
appropriate, by the director, after enactment of the Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972, to
regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal Act.
(6) Wastewater and its characteristics:
(a) Wastewater shall mean the spent water of a community, including but not limited to, a
combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and
stormwater that may be present.
(b) Sewage is used interchangeably with wastewater.
(c) Unpolluted water is water of quality equal to or better than the applicable effluent criteria.
(d) ppm shall mean parts per million by weight.
(e) Milligrams per liter shall mean a unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent.
It is 0.001 grams of the constituent in 1,000 milliliters of water.
(f) Suspended solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in
water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device.
Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures
set forth in Standards Methods.
(g) BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days
at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
(h) pH shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
expressed by one of the procedures outlined in Standard Methods.
(i) Standard Methods shall mean the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most
recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" published
jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association,
and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
(j) Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
(k) "Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried
freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater
than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension.
(l) Floatable oil is oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from
wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be
considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not
interfere with the collection system.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-14
(m) Population equivalent is a term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a
treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one hundred (100) gallons of sewage
per day, containing 0.17 pounds (200 mg/l) of BOD, and 0.20 pounds (240 mg/l) of
suspended solids.
(n) Slug shall mean any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of
any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than
fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration
or flows during normal operation.
(o) Industrial waste shall mean any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to
flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial, or business establishment
or process or from the development, recovery, or processing of any natural resource as distinct
from sanitary sewage.
(p) Major contributing industry shall mean an industrial user of the publicly-owned treatment
works that: (a) has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average work day; or
(b) has a flow greater than ten (10) per cent of the flow carried by the municipal system
receiving the waste; or (c) has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under Section 307(a) of the Federal Act.
(7) Sewer types and appurtenances:
(a) Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface, and ground water drainage.
(b) Public sewer shall mean a sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the village. It
shall also include sewers within or outside the village boundaries that serve one or more
persons and ultimately discharge into the village sanitary sewer system, even though those
sewers may not have been constructed with village funds.
(c) Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination
of both, and into which storm, surface, and ground waters or unpolluted industrial wastes are
not intentionally admitted.
(d) Storm sewer shall mean a sewer that carries storm, surface, and ground water drainage but
excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
(e) Combined sewer shall mean a sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater,
storm, surface, and ground water drainage.
(f) Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other
place of disposal.
(g) Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives
the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and
conveys it to the building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning five (5) feet
outside the inner face of the building wall.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-15
(h) Stormwater runoff shall mean that portion of the precipitation that is drained into the sewers.
(i) Sewerage shall mean the system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation, and pumping of sewage.
(j) Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
(8) Treatment:
(a) Pretreatment shall mean the treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into
the wastewater treatment works.
(b) Wastewater treatment works shall mean an arrangement of devices and structures for treating
wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste
treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution control plant."
(9) Wastewater facilities shall mean the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry
away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport effluent to a watercourse.
(10) Watercourse and connections:
(a) Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
(b) Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of
surface or ground water.
(11) User types:
(a) User class shall mean the type of user either residential or commercial (nonindustrial) or
industrial as defined herein.
(b) Residential or commercial or nonindustrial user shall mean any user of the treatment works
not classified as an industrial user or excluded as an industrial user as provided for in this
paragraph.
(c) Industrial user shall mean any nongovernmental user of publicly-owned treatment works
identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and
Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions:
(1) Division A--Agriculture, forestry, and fishing.
(2) Division B--Mining.
(3) Division D--Manufacturing.
(4) Division E--Communications, electric, gas, sanitary services and transportation.
(5) Division I--Services.
A user in the divisions listed above may be excluded if it is determined by the authorized
village official that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-16
(d) Inspection manhole shall mean a structure located on a site where required by the
Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago. The purpose of an inspection manhole is to
provide access for the Metropolitan Sanitary District to sample and/or measure discharges.
The manhole shall be designed in accordance with Metropolitan Sanitary District criteria.
(12) Types of charges:
(a) Wastewater service charge shall be the charge per quarter or month levied on all users of the
wastewater system. The service charge shall be computed as outlined in Chapter 19, section
19-62 of the Code of Ordinances, Village of Palatine, Illinois and shall consist of the total of
the basic user charge, and the local capital financing surcharge, if applicable, and the local
storm drainage facility surcharge, if applicable.(Ord.No.O-146-93,11-22-93)
(b) Basic user charge shall mean the basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer
system.
(c) Local capital financing surcharge shall mean the assessment in addition to the basic user
charge for the payment of sewer construction debt service charges of principal, interest, and
other loan related costs to be charged based upon water usage and proportional benefits
received as determined by the village board for each sewer service on each property.
(d) Replacement shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or
appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment works to maintain
the capacity and performance for which such were designed and constructed. The term
"operation and maintenance" includes replacement.
(e) Useful life shall mean the estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated.
(f) Water and sewer fund is the principal accounting designation for all revenues received in the
operation of the water and sewer system.
(g) Local storm water drainage facility surcharge shall mean an assessment in addition to the
basic user charge for the construction or maintenance of local storm water drainage or
management facilities, and for payment of debt service charges on principal, interest and other
loan debt related cost to be charged on a per lot basis. A map of any area subject to such
charge and a listing of the per property charge on lots benefited by the facilities shall be on
file with the Clerk, following adoption by ordinance. (Ord. No O-102-84, §3, 11-26-84; Ord.
No.O-146-93, §3, 11-22-93)
Sec. 19-82. Use of public sewers required.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to place deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary
manner on public or private property within the Village of Palatine or in any area under the jurisdiction of said
village, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
(2) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Village of Palatine, or in any area
under jurisdiction of said village, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-17
(3) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(4) The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation, or other purposes situated within the village and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in
which there is now located or may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the village, is hereby
required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within ninety (90) days after date of
official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within two hundred fifty (250) feet (76.2 meters) of
the property line.
(5) Where a public sanitary sewer is not available in accordance with paragraph (4) above, the building
sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system approved by the Village of Palatine Department
of Health. When a public sanitary sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to said sewer
within ninety (90) days. (Ord. No. O-102-84, §3, 11-26-84)
Sec. 19-83. Connection fees.
It shall be unlawful to connect any sewer line serving any premises to any sewer main of the village
without first securing a permit therefor and paying the fee herein provided. The fees for such connections shall
be as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
The applicant shall furnish all labor and materials required for installing sewer service from the main to the
premises to be served.
Applications for connection permits shall conform to the general ordinances relating to applications for
permits, and no such permit shall be issued until the permit fee is paid. (Ord. No. O-102-84, §3, 11-26-84;
Ord. No. O-180-88, §10, 12-27-88; Ord. No. O-88-91, §7, 6-24-91; Ord. No. O-41-96, §1, 3-25-96)
Sec. 19-84. Building sewers and connections.
(1) No person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any
public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the authorized village
official.
(2) All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those discharges in compliance
with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards.
(3) There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: (a) for residential and commercial service,
and (b) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall
make application on a special form furnished by the village. The permit application shall be supplemented by
any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the authorized village
official. A permit and inspection fee as established by the village for a residential or commercial building sewer
permit shall be paid to the village at the time the application is filed. The industrial user, as a condition of
permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type
of activity.
(4) A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can
be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage system, including sewers, pump stations, and wastewater
treatment system, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional
anticipated waste load.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-18
(5) All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be
borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the village from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(6) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that where
one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from
the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
(7) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination and test by the authorized village official, to meet all requirements of this article.
(8) The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the village. In the
absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriated
specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of
Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois shall apply. In
case of conflict, the provisions of the applicable village code shall take priority.
(9) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at or below the elevation of
the building service connection. In any buildings in which any floor elevation is lower than the finished street
grade, sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by a means which is approved in accordance
with this chapter and discharged to the building sewer.
(10) No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway
drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(11) The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code, or other applicable rules and regulations of the village, in the absence of
village rules or regulations, the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of
Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications
for Water and Sewer Construction in Illinois. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the authorized village official
before installation.
(12) The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the authorized village official when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under
the supervision of the authorized village official.
(13) All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and
lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed
in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village. (Ord. No. O-102-84, §3, 11-
26-84)
(14) The owner of the building or property served by sewer shall be responsible for the maintenance
and repair of the building sewer up to and including the connection to the main. (Ord. No. 0-61-04, §2, 4-12-
04)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-19
(15) If an existing building sewer is no longer to be used for its intended purpose as in case of the
demolition of a building or the installation of a replacement line, the building sewer shall be disconnected and
plugged at the connection point to the main or at another location approved by the Director of Public Works.
The plug shall be permanent and watertight. The owner of the property or the applicant is responsible for all
costs and restoration associated with the disconnection. The disconnection and plugging must be inspected and
approved by the Director of Public Works or his designee. (Ord. No. 0-61-04, §2, 4-12-04)
Sec. 19-85. Use of the public sewers.
(1) No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, ground water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer.
(2) Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the authorized village official. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, to a storm sewer, or natural outlet on approval of the
authorized village official and permitted by the individual NPDES stormwater discharge permit. (Ord. No. 0-
41-04, §1, 3-8-04)
(3) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or
wastes to any public sewers:
(a) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
(b) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance,
or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
(c) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage
works.
(d) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as,
but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails
and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(4) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials,
waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the authorized village official that such wastes can harm
either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or
can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the authorized village official will give consideration to such factors as the
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the
sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of
wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances
which may be prohibited are:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-20
(a) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees
Fahrenheit (65 degrees centigrade).
(b) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials, or oils, whether emulsified or
not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees
Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Centigrade).
(c) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any
garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or
greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the authorized village official.
(d) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating
solutions whether neutralized or not.
(e) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or similar objectionable or
toxic substance, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any
such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the
limits established by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago for such
materials.
(f) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances, in such
concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the Metropolitan Water
Reclamation District of Greater Chicago as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such
discharge to the receiving waters.
(g) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
(h) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
(i) Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg at any time except as
permitted by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago in compliance
with applicable state and federal regulations.
(j) Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/I at any time except as permitted by the Metropolitan
Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago in compliance with applicable state and
federal regulations.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-21
(k) Materials which exert or cause:
1. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers
earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited
to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
2. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions);
3. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities
as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works;
4. Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined
herein.
(l) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by
the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree
that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
(m) Any waters or wastes having: (1) a five-day BOD greater than three hundred (300) parts per
million by weight, or (2) containing more than three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by
weight of suspended solids, or (3) having an average daily flow greater than two (2) per cent
of the average sewage flow of the city, or (4) having wastewater concentrations greater than
normal as determined by sampling and testing of a user's wastewater discharge, shall be
subject to the review of the authorized village official. Where necessary in the opinion of the
authorized city representative, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary
treatment as may be necessary to: (1) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to three hundred
(300) parts per million by weight, or (2) reduce the suspended solids to three hundred fifty
(350) parts per million by weight, or (3) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such
waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment system shall be submitted for the approval of the authorized
village official and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals
are obtained in writing.
(5) If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which
waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in paragraph (4) of this section, or
which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in paragraph (4) of this section, and/or which
are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40 CFR 403, June 26, 1978, and any amendments
thereto, and which in the judgment of the authorized village official, may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the authorized village official may:
(a) Reject the wastes;
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(d) Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by
existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions of paragraph (2) of this section. If the
authorized village official permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design
and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
authorized village official and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances,
and laws.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-22
(6) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the authorized village
official, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or
any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required
for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
authorized village official, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
(7) Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
(8) Each industrial user, commercial building, and other establishments as regulated, shall be required
to install a inspection manhole and, when required by the authorized village official, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable inspection manhole together with
such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Metropolitan Sanitary District. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all
times.
(9) The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide
laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this article and
any special conditions for discharge established by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater
Chicago or other regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.
The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as
stipulated by the Metropolitan Sanitary District, but no less than once per year the industrial user must supply a
complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal,
state, and local standards are being met. The industrial user shall comply with all requirements of the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago with respect to such tests and shall bear the
expense of all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the Metropolitan Sanitary District.
(10) All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of water and wastes to which reference
is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be
determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the
event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall
be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and
to. determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.
(11) No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Metropolitan
Water Reclamation District for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in accordance with any resolution or
ordinance establishing rates and charges passed by the village board, by the industrial concern, provided such
payments are in accordance with federal and state guidelines for user charge system. (Ord. No. O-102-84, §3,
11-26-84)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-23
Sec. 19-86. Protection of sewer works from damage.
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision
shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord. No. O-102-84, §3, 11-26-84)
Sec. 19-87. Powers and authority of inspectors.
(1) The authorized village official and other duly authorized employees of the village, the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials
and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The authorized village
official or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical,
chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind
and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or system for waste treatment.
(2) While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in paragraph (1) above, the
authorized village official or duly authorized employees of the village, the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the owner and occupant and the owner and occupant shall be held harmless for injury or death
to the village employees and the village shall indemnify the owner or occupant against loss or damage to its
property by village employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the owner and occupant and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as
such may be caused by negligence, or failure of the owner and occupant to maintain safe conditions as required
in section 19-85(8).
(3) The authorized village official and other duly authorized employees of the village bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the village holds
an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair,
and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. No. O-102-84, §3, 11-26-84)
Sec. 19-88. Penalties.
(1) Any person found to be violating any provision of this article except section 19-86 shall be served
by the village with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations. The village may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any
violation of any provision of this article.
(2) Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in paragraph (1)
above, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined an amount as set out in the
Fee Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances for each violation. Each day in which any violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord.No. 0-5-98, §23, 1-26-98; Ord. No. 0-154-10, §25, 12-13-
10, effective 1-1-11)
(3) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the village by
reason of such violation. (Ord. No. O-102-84, §3, 11-26-84)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-24
Sec. 19-89. Traps required.
It shall be unlawful to permit the use of or use any connection with the sanitary sewer unless the flow
from such connections passes through a catch basin, grease trap, or other interceptor in the manner required by
the general ordinances of the village relating to plumbing and sewers. (Ord. No. O-102-84, §3, 11-26-84)
Sec. 19-90. Injury to system prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to flow into the sanitary sewer system any substance of any kind
which interferes with or prevents the functioning of the sewage disposal plant of the village. (Ord. No. O-102-
84, §3, 11-26-84)
Secs. 19-91--19-100. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. SEPTIC TANKS
Sec. 19-101. Plumbing requirements.
Each building or structure in the village used for residence, business, trade, industry or meeting
purposes shall be equipped with properly constructed and installed adequate sewage disposal facilities
connected with the village sanitary sewer system when such system can reasonably be extended to serve the
premises. Applications for septic tank permits must be made to the president and board. The plumbing in all
such places shall conform to the ordinances of the village and the laws of the state relative thereto. (Code
1961, §20.301)
Sec. 19-102. Tank required.
Any premises not connected with the sanitary sewer system shall be equipped with an adequate septic
tank having a capacity of not less than five hundred (500) gallons for each seven (7) or less persons living or
working in such place; and an additional seventy-five (75) gallons for each person in excess of seven (7);
provided that the tank in any premises used for meeting purposes shall have a capacity of not less than one
thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons. (Code 1961, §20.302).
Sec. 19-103. Specifications.
Each tank shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from any building and five (5) feet from a lot line,
and shall be constructed of twelve (12) gauge steel, monolithic concrete or brick or concrete blocks adequately
coated inside so as to be impervious to water. A baffle shall be located at the inlet end of the septic tank, six (6)
inches away from the inlet pipe, and shall extend from a point eight (8) inches above the liquid level to a point
nine (9) inches below the liquid level. At the outlet end a baffle shall be constructed five (5) inches from the
outlet and shall extend from a point six (6) inches above the liquid level to a point twelve (12) inches below the
liquid level.
These baffles shall be made of two (2) inch planks. Each tank must be equipped with a manhole or
similar cover opening to permit inspection and cleaning.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-25
The tank shall be similar and equal to the design of septic tanks to serve single family dwellings
prepared by the Division of Sanitary Engineering, Cook County Public Health, copies of which are on file with
the clerk. (Code 1961, §20.303)
Sec. 19-104. Disposal field.
Each tank shall discharge the liquid through a vitrified bell and spigot tile with cement joints laid with
a grade of one (1) foot per one hundred (100) feet. This tile shall discharge into a concrete distribution box of
sufficient size to accommodate the necessary number of lateral lines of tile. The minimum size of this box shall
be eighteen (18) inches by eighteen (18) inches inside.
The disposal field tile shall be located at least seventy-five (75) feet distant from any well, ten (10) feet
from the tank, thirty (30) feet from any building used for human habitation, and shall not be closer than five (5)
feet from any lot line. Each lateral of the disposal field tile shall be connected separately to the distribution box,
and shall not be subdivided.
There shall be at least fifty (50) feet of disposal field tile for each person living or working in the
building, but in no case shall the total length of disposal field tile be less than two hundred (200) lineal feet.
The disposal field tile shall be four (4) inch drain tile laid with open joints at a maximum slope not to
exceed six (6) inches per one hundred (100) feet. The top half of the joint shall be covered with pieces of
asphalt treated paper to prevent absorption material from entering the tile. (Code 1961, §20.304)
Sec. 19-105. Trench.
The disposal field tile shall be laid in a trench of a minimum width of twenty-four (24) inches and a
maximum width of thirty-six (36) inches depending upon the depth of the tile below the ground line. The
maximum depth shall not be greater than thirty-six (36) inches.
The tile shall be laid on a minimum of six (6) inches of coarse gravel which shall extend for the entire
width of the trench and shall be covered with coarse gravel to a depth of at least two (2) inches above the top of
the tile. The balance of the trench shall be earthbackfill, well tamped. (Code 1961, §20.305)
Sec. 19-106. Inspection.
No septic tank or any pipes leading to or from the same shall be covered unless and until such tank and
pipes have been inspected and found to be in compliance with the ordinances of the village and with the state
laws pertaining thereto. (Code 1961, §20.306)
Sec. 19-107. Facilities required.
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy any premises as habitations, or for business, trade, industry or
meeting purposes in the village unless such premises are equipped with sewage disposal facilities consisting of
either a connection with a sanitary sewer system or a proper septic tank, as provided by ordinance. (Code
1961, §20.307)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-26
Sec. 19-108. Seepage tests.
Before any septic tanks and drain tile fields are constructed in any area within the village limits, a
seepage test shall be run in accordance with the requirements of the State Plumbing Code of 1959 promulgated
by the State Department of Health. The seepage trench shall be constructed to function in the type of soil
present, as prescribed in such specifications. (Code 1961, §20.308)
-----------
Editor’s Note: A new Article V Stormwater Discharge was enacted by Ord. 0-41-04, passed on March 8,
2004.
------------
ARTICLE V STORMWATER DISCHARGE
Sec. 19-110. Purpose/Intent.
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of
the Village of Palatine through the regulation of non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system to the
maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This ordinance establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to
comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process.
The objectives of this ordinance are:
(1) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
by stormwater discharges by any user
(2) To prohibit Illicit Connections and Discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system
(3) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures
necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance
Sec. 19-111. Definitions.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following shall mean:
Authorized Enforcement Agency: employees or designees of the director of the municipal agency
designated to enforce this ordinance.
Best Management Practices (BMPs): schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good
house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater,
receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from
raw materials storage.
Clean Water Act
subsequent amendments thereto.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-27
Construction Activity. Activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits. Currently these include
construction projects resulting in land disturbance of 1 acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited
to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
Hazardous Materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which
because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or
significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
Illegal Discharge. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the storm drainage system,
except as exempted in Section X of this ordinance.
Illicit Connections. An illicit connection is defined as either of the following:
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to
enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm
water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system
and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said
drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency or,
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system
which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.
Industrial Activity. Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 4 0 CFR, Section
122.26 (b)(14).
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit. means a
permit issued by EPA (or by a State under authority delegated pursuan 1342(b)) that authorizes
the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual,
group, or general area-wide basis.
Non-Storm Water Discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of
storm water.
Person. means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity
recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent.
Pollutant. Anything, which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not
limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances,
and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate
metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or
offensive matter of any kind.
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved
including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-28
Storm Drainage System. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed,
including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage
channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
Storm Water. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. A document which describes the Best Management Practices
and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a
site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to Stormwater, Stormwater Conveyance
Systems, and/or Receiving Waters to the Maximum Extent Practicable.
Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharged from
a facility.
Sec. 19-112. Applicability.
This ordinance shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and
undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
Sec. 19-113. Responsibility for administration.
The Director of Public Works shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
ordinance. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated
in writing by the Director of Public Works to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the
employ of the agency.
Sec. 19-114. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence,
or paragraph of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall
be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this Ordinance.
Sec. 19-115. Ultimate responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance are minimum standards;
therefore this ordinance does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be
no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
Sec. 19-116. Discharge prohibitions.
(a) Prohibition of Illegal Discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the village’s storm drain system or
watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that
cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-29
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is
prohibited except as described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this
ordinance: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn
watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active
groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs,
non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows, swimming
pools (if de-chlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities, and
any other water source not containing Pollutants.
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to
protect public health and safety.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized
enforcement agency prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under an NPDES
permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the
authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in
full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws
and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the
storm drain system.
(b) Prohibition of Illicit Connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm
drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if the person connects a line
conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
Sec. 19-117. Suspension of MS4 access.
(a) Suspension due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations
The Director of Public Works may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person
when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which presents or may present
imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or
Waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the
authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the
MS4 or Waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-30
(b) Suspension due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge
Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this ordinance may have their MS4 access
terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency
will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized
enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing.
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to
this Section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
Sec. 19-118. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall
comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Director of Public Works prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
Sec. 19-119. Monitoring of discharges.
(1) Applicability.
This section applies to all facilities that have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity,
including construction activity.
(2) Access to Facilities.
(a) The Director of Public Works shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to
regulation under this ordinance as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance. If a
discharger has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into
its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the
authorized enforcement agency.
(b) Facility operators shall allow the Director of Public Works ready access to all parts of the premises
for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the
conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as
defined by state and federal law.
(c) The Director of Public Works shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as
are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of
the facility's storm water discharge.
(d) The Director of Public Works has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a
safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-31
(e) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the Director of
Public Works and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
(f) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director of Public Works access to a permitted facility is a
violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this ordinance. A person who is the operator of a facility
with a NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the
person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of
conducting any activity authorized or required by this ordinance.
(g) If the Director of Public Works has been refused access to any part of the premises from which
stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and
sampling program designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any order issued hereunder, or to
protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency
may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 19-120. Requirement to prevent, control and reduce storm water pollutants by the use of Best
Management Practices.
The Director of Public Works will adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices for any
activity, operation, or facility, which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the
storm drain system, or waters of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or
other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural
BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of
an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural
BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water
associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of
this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for
compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
Sec. 19-121. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep
and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and
other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or
adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
Sec. 19-122. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or
operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging
into storm water, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S. said person shall take all necessary steps to
ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous
materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency
dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-32
enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in
person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the Director of Public Works
within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a
commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site
written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained
for at least three years.
Sec. 19-123. Enforcement.
Notice of Violation.
Whenever the Director of Public Works finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a
requirement of this Ordinance, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(a) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(b) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(c) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
(d) The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of
any affected property; and
(e) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
(f) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a
deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that,
should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
Sec. 19-124. Appeal of Notice of Violation.
Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination of the authorized
enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received within 7 days from the date of the Notice of
Violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 15
days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee
shall be final.
Sec. 19-125. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation,
or, in the event of an appeal, within 7 days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of
the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon
the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation
and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any
premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the
purposes set forth above.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-33
Sec. 19-126. Cost of abatement of the violation.
Within 14 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost
of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the
amount of the assessment within 7 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by
the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges
shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the
amount of the assessment.
Sec. 19-126. Cost of abatement of the violation.
Within 14 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost
of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the
amount of the assessment within 7 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by
the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges
shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the
amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the village by reason of
such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of prime plus
2 percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the 1st day following discovery of the
violation.
Sec. 19-127. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this Ordinance. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this
ordinance, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a temporary restraining order, temporary or
permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling
the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
Sec. 19-128. Compensatory action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this Ordinance, the
authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm
drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
Sec. 19-129. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to
exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and
is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a
civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-34
Sec. 19-130. Criminal prosecution.
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this ordinance shall be liable to criminal
prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty as set out in the Fee
Schedule Supplement to the Code of Ordinances for each violation, and a separate violation shall be deemed
committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. No. 0-154-10 §26, 12-13-10,
effective 1-1-11)
The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney fees, court costs and other expenses associated
with enforcement of this ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
Sec. 19-131. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any
applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to
seek cumulative remedies.
ARTICLE VI. CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
[Editor’s Note: A new Article VI Cross Connection Control was enacted by Ord. 0-94-11, passed on August 8,
2011, effective August 18, 2011]
Sec. 19-132. Purpose
The Purpose of this Article is as follows:
A. To protect the public water supply system from contamination or pollution by isolating within the
customer’s water system contaminants or pollutants which would backflow through the service
connection into the public water supply systems.
B. To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the
public or consumer’s potable water system and non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and
sources or systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety;
C. To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will
prevent the contamination or pollution of the public and consumer’s potable water systems.
Sec. 19-133. Application
This Article shall apply to all premises served by the public potable water supply system of the Village
of Palatine.
Sec. 19-134. Policy
The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for protection of the public water supply system
from contamination due to backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants through the customer’s water service
connection. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall be responsible for causing surveys and
investigations to be made of all accounts served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or
potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-35
of public record and shall be repeated at least every two years, or as often as the Director of Public Works shall
deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least
five years. The installation of an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public
water supply system. The Director of Public Works shall give notice to the consumer to install such approved
backflow prevention device at each service connection immediately beyond the water meter. The consumer
shall immediately install such approved device or devices at the consumer’s own expense. Failure, refusal or
inability on the part of the consumer to install such devices or devices shall constitute grounds for
discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices have been installed. The consumer
shall retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and repair as required in Sec. 19-140 for a period of at
least five (5) years.
Sec. 19-135. Definitions
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of this Article:
1. “A.S.S.E.” means American Society of Sanitary Engineering.
2. “Agency” means Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
3. “Air Gap” means the air gap in a water-supply system is the unobstructed vertical distance
through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying
water to a tank or plumbing fixture and the flood-level rim of the receptacle.
4. “Approved” means accepted or acceptable under an applicable specification stated or cited in
this Part or accepted as suitable for the proposed use.
5. “Auxiliary water system” means any water source or system on or available to the premises
other than the public water supply system. These auxiliary waters may include water from
another purveyor’s public water supply system; fire sprinkler connections or water from a
source such as wells, lakes, ponds, or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters
may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over
which the water purveyor does not have control.
6. “Backflow” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the
distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the intended source of
the potable water supply.
7. “Backflow prevention device” means any device, method, or type of construction intended to
prevent backflow or back siphonage into a potable water system. All devices used for
backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois Plumbing Code and the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
8. “C C D I” means Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector.
9. “Booster Pump” means a mechanical device used to increase domestic water pressure.
10. “Community Water System” (“CWS”) means a public water supply which is owned or
operated by the village of Palatine.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-36
11. “Consumer” or “customer” means the owner, official custodian or person in control of any
premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
12. “Consumer’s water system” means the service connection and any water system located on
the customer’s premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a customer’s water
system with the exception of the water meter and its connections.
13. “Contamination” means an impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
14. “Cross-connection” means any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise
separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other a substance of
unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there may be a flow from one system into
the other.
a. “Direct cross-connection” means a cross-connection formed when a water system is
physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
b. “Indirect cross-connection” means a cross-connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by a vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.
15. “Double Check Valve Assembly” means an assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves under A.S.S.E. standard 1015. A double check valve assembly must
include tight shut off valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for
testing the water tightness of each check valve.
16. “Drainage” shall mean the routing of discharged used water from a Reduced Pressure
Principle Backflow Preventer, due to the proper operation of the device, pressure fluxuation,
or malfunction of the device. Drainage shall be directed to a gravity flow sanitary drain, or an
ejection system which is rated to be capable of meeting a full flow discharge from the device,
or combination of devices which may be present. This shall apply to all domestic, irrigation,
and fire prevention applications.
17. “Dual check valve” means an assembly composed of single, independently acting check
valves under ASSE Standard 1024 for containment.
18. “Health hazard” means any condition, device or practice in a water system or its operation
resulting in a real or potential danger to the health and well-being of consumers. The word
“severe” as used to qualify “health hazard” means a hazard to the health of the user that could
be expected to result in death or significant reduction in the quality of life.
19. “Inspection” means a physical inspection to examine carefully and critically all materials,
fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of a plumbing system for
compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.
20. “Non-community water system” (“non-CWS”) means a public water supply which is not a
non-community water supply.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-37
21. “Non-potable water” means water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604.
22. “Plumbing” means the actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension of a
plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and
appliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including without limitation lawn sprinkler
systems, from the source of a private water supply on the premises or from the main in the
street, alley or at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or
persons live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and
appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any
building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of
connection of such building drain to the buildings sanitary sewer or private sewage disposal
system for a distance of ten feet beyond the foundation walls.
23. “Pollution” means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological, or
biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the
usefulness of the water.
24. “Potable water” means water which meets the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604 for
drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.
25. “Potential cross-connection” means a fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose connection,
tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension of the water supply line
beyond its designed termination point.
26. “Process fluid(s)” means any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or
otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a
health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced into the public or a customer’s potable
water system. This includes, but is not limited to:
a. Polluted or contaminated waters;
b. Process waters;
c. Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may have
deteriorated in sanitary quality;
d. Cooling waters;
e. Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams, or
irrigation systems;
f. Chemicals in solution or suspension;
g. Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or
other processes, or for fire fighting purposes.
27. “Public water supply” (PWS) means all mains, pipes, water meters, and structures through
which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks, water meters
and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended for use for the purpose
of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic use and which serve at least fifteen
service connections or which regularly serve at least twenty-five persons at least sixty days per
year. A public water supply is either a “community water supply” or a “non-community water
supply.”
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-38
28. “Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device” means a device containing a
minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically operated
pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves and approved under
ASSE Standard 1013.
29. “Service connection” means the opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at the water
main through which water is supplied to the user.
30. “Survey” means the collection of information pertaining to a customer’s piping systems
regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system and must include
the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of all cross-connection control
devices and methods located within that customer’s piping system. The survey must be in
written form, and shall not be an actual plumbing inspection.
31. “System hazard” means a condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading
material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply system or a consumer’s
potable water system.
32. “Thermal Expansion” means a condition which occurs in a domestic water system, where a
backflow preventer has been installed, creating a closed water system. Thermal expansion
occurs, when the cold water supplied to the hot water tank is heated. The expansion of the
water caused by heat, creates a need for the displacement of the expanded properties of the
water. This is accomplished by installing a diaphragmed thermal expansion tank device,
which displaces the expanded volume of water, keeping the internal piping system safe from
extreme internal pressures.
33. “Used water” means any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer’s
water system after it has been passed through the service connection and is no longer under
the control of the water supply official custodian.
34. “Village” means Village of Palatine.
35. “Water purveyor” means the owner or official custodian of a public water system.
Sec. 19-136. Water System
A. The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the public water supply system
and the consumer’s water system.
B. The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution
system, and shall include all those facilities of the potable water system under the control of
the Director of Public Works up to the point where the consumer’s water system begins.
C. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment,
storage, and delivery of water to the public water supply distribution system.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-39
D. The public water supply distribution system shall include the network of conduits used to
deliver water from the source to the consumer’s water system.
E. The consumer’s water system shall include all parts of the facilities including the service
connection used to convey water from the public water supply distribution system to points of
use.
Sec. 19-137. Illinois Plumbing Code.
Subpart I of Feb. 2004, Illinois Plumbing Code is hereby adopted hereto and by this reference
incorporated herein and made a part of.
Sec. 19-138. Cross-connection prohibited.
A. Connections between the Village water system and other systems or equipment containing
water or other substances of unknown or questionable quality are prohibited except when and
where approved cross-connections control devices or methods are installed, tested, and
maintained to insure proper operation on a continuing basis.
B. No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion of a supply not of
equal or better bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis
by the Agency.
Control of all cross-connections to a supply is the responsibility of the owner or official
custodian of the supply. If a privately owned water supply source meets the applicable
criteria, it may be connected to a water supply upon approval by the owner or official
custodian and by the Agency. Where such connections are permitted, it is the responsibility
of the public water supply officials to assure submission from such privately owned water
supply source or sources samples and operating reports as required by 35 Ill. Adm. Code 605
and 606 as applicable to the cross-connected source.
C. No person, firm, or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or
permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water
supply, other than the regular public water supply of the Village, may enter the supply or
distribution system of said municipality unless such private auxiliary or emergency water
supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the
Director of Public Works and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
Sec. 19-139. Survey and Inspections.
A. SURVEY
On request by the Director of Public Works or designee, the consumer shall furnish written
survey documentation regarding the piping system or systems or water use within the
customer’s premises. The refusal to provide requested information shall, within the discretion
of the Director of Public Works, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections
as provided in this Article.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-40
B. INSPECTION
It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer upon the request from the Director of
Public Works or his designee, to arrange for a physical inspection at their cost of water use
practices on the consumer’s premises to determine whether there are actual or potential crossconnections
to the water system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow
into the consumer’s or the public potable water system. The physical inspection shall confirm
that all installations of the backflow devices are installed per manufacturer specifications and
as provided in this Article. All maintenance, repair, and testing records must be available and
current during inspection. All cross-connection control or other plumbing inspections must
be conducted by licensed plumbers as provided in 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes, 320/3(1).
C. ACCESS AND VERIFICATION
The consumer’s premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the approved crossconnections
control device inspector, the Director of Public Works, or his designee for
verification of the written survey and of physical inspection information, in regards to the
presence or absence of cross-connections within the consumer’s premises, and testing, repair
and maintenance of cross-connection control devices within the consumer’s premises.
D. PREVENTION
It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow into the public water system
by ensuring that:
1. All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross-connection control devices are
installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage.
2. Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions.
3. Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of installation and at
least annually by a person approved by the Agency as a cross-connection control
device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical devices shall include
physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
4. In new constructions a properly sized floor drain shall be required for the discharge
from the reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
5. Thermal expansion is required on all domestic water services protected by crossconnection
control devices. Protection from thermal expansion shall incorporate
properly sized thermal expansion tanks, properly placed within the system, at the hot
water tank.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-41
Sec. 19-140. Certification and maintenance.
A. It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow prevention devices are
required by this Article to insure that the backflow protection devices are installed and have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repairs made in accordance with the following schedule or
more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in manufacturer’s instructions.
1. Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document that a proper vertical
distance is maintained between the discharge point of the service line and the flood
level rim of the receptacle at the time of installation and at least annually thereafter.
2. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be tested at the time of
installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the
manufacturer, and required service performed prior to certification expiration.
B. Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the Agency as competent
to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in writing.
C. Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent test or visual inspection,
name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
D. The owner of the premises shall maintain a maintenance log which shall include:
1. Testing and Records
a. Each cross-connection control device shall be tested at the time of installation and at least
annually or more frequently, if recommended by the manufacturer.
b. Maintenance records shall be available for inspection by the Agency of the Director of
Public Works or his designee at any time.
c. Each cross-connection control device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test, testing company, name of CCCDI, approval number and type and date of
repair.
d. A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
i. Date of each test or visual inspection;
ii. Company name, approval number, and name of person performing the test;
iii. Test results;
iv. Repairs or servicing required;
v. Repairs and date completed;
vi. Servicing performed and date completed.
E. Whenever backflow prevention devices required by this Article are found to be defective, they
shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the consumer within ten (10) days of
notification or sooner, if required by the Director of Public Works or his designee. The
Director of Public Works or his designee may immediately disconnect water service if deemed
that a public health hazard exists because of a cross-connection.
F. Backflow prevention devices shall not be by passed, made inoperative, removed, or otherwise
made ineffective without specific written authorization by the Director of Public Works.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-42
Sec. 19-141. Where protection is required.
A. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on all connections to the public
water system as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Agency’s
regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 680. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall
be installed on each service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises, where in the
judgment of the Director of Public Works, actual or potential hazards to the public water
supply system exists.
B. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a
consumer’s water system serving premises where the following conditions exist:
1. Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary supply is accepted as an
additional source by the Director of Public Works and the source is approved by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
2. Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an actual or potential
hazard to the public water supply system. This shall include premises having sources or
systems containing process fluids or waters originating from the public water supply
system which are no longer under the sanitary control of the Director of Public Works.
3. Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of the Director of Public
Works and the cross-connection control device inspector, are not correctable or contain
intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or not
cross-connections exist.
4. Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it
is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross-connection survey.
5. Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished.
C. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on all connections to the public
water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Agency’s
regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall
be installed on each service line to a consumer’s water system serving, but not necessarily
limited to, the following types of facilities unless the Director of Public Works determines that
no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exist:
1. Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;
2. Laboratories;
3. Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;
4. Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, or storm water pumping stations;
5. Food or beverage processing plants;
6. Chemical plants;
7. Metal plating industries;
8. Petroleum processing or storage plants;
9. Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
10. Car washes;
11. Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks;
12. Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks;
13. Pools;
14. Schools;
15. Irrigation Systems.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-43
Sec. 19-142. Type of protection required.
A. The type of protection required shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
1. An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where the public water
supply system may be contaminated with substance that could cause a severe health
hazard.
2. An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public water supply
system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause a system or health
hazard.
3. An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public water supply
system may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not
dangerous to health.
B. The type of protection required shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. No double checks are
permitted.
C. Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a fire protection system,
reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be installed on the fire safety system
connected to the public water supply when:
1. The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant, or other chemicals;
2. Water is pumped into the system from another source;
3. Water flows by gravity from a non-potable source; or water can be pumped into fire
safety system from any other source; or
4. There is a connection whereby another source can be connected to the fire sprinkler
system.
Sec. 19-143. Backflow prevention devices.
A. All backflow prevention devices or methods required by this Article shall be approved by
American Society of Sanitary Engineering, and may carry the following additional
endorsements the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of
South California, American Water Works Association, or American National Standards
Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in compliance with
applicable industry specification.
B. Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653.802,
and only as specified by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the
University of Southern California or applicable industry specifications. Maintenance as
recommended by the manufacturer of the device shall be performed. Manufacturer’s
maintenance manual shall be available on-site.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-44
Sec. 19-144. Booster pumps.
A. Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within any premises, such
pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff device designed to shut off the booster
pump when the pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty
psi or less.
B. It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure cutoff device in proper
working order and to certify to the Director of Public Works, at least once each year, that the
device is operable.
Sec. 19-145. Violations – Enforcement
A. The Director of Public Works shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to the
occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any backflow prevention device
required by this Article is not installed, tested, maintained, repaired and inspected in a manner
acceptable to the Director of Public Works, or if it is found that the backflow prevention
device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exist on the
premises, or if a low pressure cut-off device required by this Article is not installed and
maintained in working order. Immediate disconnection upon oral or written notice can be
effected when the Director of Public Works is assured that imminent danger of contamination
of the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification
of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be
effected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply,
provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the Director of Public Works, or the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, such action is required to prevent actual or potential
contamination or pollution of the public water supply. Neither the Village or the Director of
Public Works or their agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages
or lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer’s water supply in
accordance with the terms of this Article, whether or not said termination was with or without
notice.
B. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer has corrected or
eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with these regulations and to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, and the required re-connection fee of one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) is paid to the Village.
Sec. 19-146. Liability for Cleanup.
The consumer responsible for back-siphoned material or contamination through backflow, should
contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or by an
improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, and must bear the
cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system.
Sec. 19-147. Violations – Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be subject to penalties as provided in Sec. 1 – 5
of this Code.
Secs. 19-148 – 19-157. Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-45
[Editor’s Note: A new Article VII Electricity Aggregation Program was enacted by Ord. #0-58-12, passed on
April 16, 2012]
ARTICLE VII.
ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM
Sec. 19-200. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article VII, the following terms shall have the following definitions:
“Act” shall mean the Illinois Power Agency Act, 20 ILCS 3855/1-92, as may be amended
from time to time.
“Customer” shall mean recipients of residential and small commercial retail electric loads as
provided in the Act.
“Electricity Aggregation Program” shall mean a program pursuant to the Act for the
aggregation of residential and small commercial retail electric loads located within the corporate limits
of the Village that provides customers with the opportunity to opt out of participating in that program
as provided in the Act.
Sec. 19-201..Aggregation of Electrical Load
A. The Corporate Authorities of the Village are authorized to operate an Electricity
Aggregation Program pursuant to the Act and for that purpose may solicit bids and enter into service
agreements to facilitate the sale and purchase of electricity and related services and equipment for
those loads aggregated pursuant to the Electricity Aggregation Program as provided in the Act.
B. The Corporate Authorities of the Village may exercise the authority to operate the
Electricity Aggregation Program jointly with any other municipality or county and, in combination
with two or more municipalities or counties, may initiate a process to jointly authorize the Electricity
Aggregation Program by a majority vote of each particular municipality or county as required by the
Act.
Sec. 19-202..Opt-Out Program
A. The Electricity Aggregation Program shall operate as an opt-out program whereby
Customers who do not wish to participate in the Electricity Aggregation Program may opt out pursuant
to the Act.
B. The Village Manager or designee, on behalf of the Village, shall fully inform customers in
advance, as provided in the Act, that Customers have the right to opt-out of the Electricity
Aggregation Program. The disclosure provided to the Customers shall comply with the requirements
of the Act and shall prominently state all charges to be made and shall include full disclosure of the
cost to obtain service pursuant to Section 16-603 of the Act, how to access service, and the fact that
service under Section 16-603 of the Act is available to Customers without penalty if they are currently
receiving service under Section 16-603 of the Act.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – CHAPTER 19 – UTILITY SERVICES
19-46
C. Upon notification from any Customer that the Customer wishes to opt out of the
Electricity Aggregation Program, that Customer shall be excluded from the Electricity Aggregation
Program.
D. Except for those Customers who opt out of the Electricity Aggregation Program pursuant
to this Section 19-202 and the Act, the Electricity Aggregation Program shall automatically apply for
each person owning, occupying, controlling, or using an electrical load center proposed to be
aggregated in the corporate limits of the Village.
Sec. 19-203..Adoption of Plan of Operation and Governance for the Electricity Aggregation
Program
A. The Corporate Authorities of the Village, with the assistance from the Illinois Power
Agency as required pursuant to the Act, shall develop and approve a Plan of Operation and
Governance for the Electricity Aggregation Program.
B. Before adopting the plan of operation required under Section 19-203 (A) and the Act, the
corporate authorities shall hold at least two public hearings on the proposed plan. Before the first
public hearing, the corporate authorities shall publish notice of the hearings once a week for two
consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village. The notice shall summarize
the plan of operation and state the date, time, and location of each hearing.
C. The plan of operation and governance for the Electricity Aggregation Program shall:
1. Provide for universal access to all applicable residential Customers and equitable
treatment of applicable residential Customers,
2. Describe demand management and energy efficiency services to be provided to each class
of Customers, and
3. Meet any requirements established by law concerning aggregated service offered pursuant
to the Act.”
Sec. 19-204..Solicitation of Bids
The process for soliciting bids for electricity and other related services and awarding proposed
agreements for the purchase of electricity and other related services for the Electricity Aggregation
Program shall be conducted pursuant to the Act.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-1
Chapter 20 TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Art. I. Telecommunication. §§ 20-1 – 20-16
Art. II. Reserved. §§ 20-17– 20-50
Art. III. Cable and Video Customer Protection Law §§ 20-51 – 20-70
Art. IV. Cable/Video Service Provider Fee and Peg Access Support Fee §§ 20-71 – 20-90
Art V. Small Wireless Facilities Deployment 20-91 – 20-113
----------
*Editor's note--Ord. No. O-137-92, §1, adopted Sept. 9, 1991, deleted Ch. 20, Eminent Domain,
in its entirety. Former Ch. 20 was derived from Ord. No. O-7-82, § 1, adopted Jan. 25, 1982; and Ord. No.
O-15-82, §1, adopted Feb. 8, 1982.
Editor’s Note – Ord. No. 0-249-05, §1, adopted December 19, 2005, deleted Article II. Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee (Secs. 20-17 through 20-26) in its entirety. Now reference Chapter 17, Section 17-78
Imposition of Tax
--------------------
Editor’s Note – Ord. #0-208-07, adopted on December 10, 2007, added a new Article III Cable
and Video Customer Protection Law.
-----------------
Editor’s Note – Ord. #0-209-07, adopted on December 10, 2007, added a new Article IV
Cable/Video Service Provider Fee and Peg Access Support Fee.
-----------------
Editor’s Note – Ord. #0-121-15, adopted October 19, 2015 replaced Chapter 20 in its entirety.
-----------------
Editor’s Note – Ord. #O-31-19, adopted April 1, 2019 replaced Article V Personal Wireless
Telecommunication Services and Facilities in its entirety with Article V Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment
ARTICLE 1:GENERAL
Sec. 20-1. Purpose. The purpose and intent of this Chapter Title is to:
20-1.1 establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and services;
20-1.2 establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of local authority
with respect to the regulation of telecommunications providers and services;
20-1.3 promote competition in telecommunications;
20-1.4 minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers and services;
20-1.5 encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications services on the
widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and residents of the Village;
20-1.6 permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the Village for
telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis;
20-1.7 conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in public trust by the Village;
20-1.8 assure that the Village's current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to
and use of the public ways are fully paid by the persons seeking such access and causing such
costs;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-2
20-1.9 secure fair and reasonable compensation to the Village and the residents of the Village for
permitting private use of the public ways;
20-1.10 assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or services within the Village
comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the Village;
20-1.11 assure that the Village can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety
and welfare;
20-1.12 enable the Village to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving federal and
state regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development.
Sec. 20-2 Definitions
For the purpose of this Chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof, the following words
and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used shall
indicate otherwise:
"Affiliate" means a person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or
is under common ownership or control with another person.
"Annual gross revenue" ... reserved.
"Cable Act" shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. 532, et seq., as
now and hereafter amended.
"Cable operator" means a telecommunications carrier providing or offering to provide "cable service"
within the Village as that term is defined in the Cable Act.
"Cable service" for the purpose of this Title shall have the same meaning provided by the Cable Act.
"Corporate Authorities" means the Mayor and Village Council.
“Easement Any land, public or private, upon which any utility has any right(s) granted for access,
usage, placement, construction, or maintenance of or relative to the operation of its utility system(s).(Ord.No.0-
109-99, § 2,3,4,56;8-9-99)
"Excess capacity" means the volume or capacity in any existing or future duct, conduit, manhole,
handhole or other utility facility within the public way that is or will be available for use for additional
telecommunications facilities.
"FCC" or "Federal Communications Commission" means the Federal administrative agency, or
lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a
national level.
"Facility" All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber
optic cable, communications and video cables and wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and
appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within public ways, except those
owned by the Village.(Ord.No.0-109-99, §2,3,4,56;8-9-99)
“Franchisee Any person as holder of a Telecommunication Franchise as set forth in Section 20.5 of
this document.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-3
"ICC" or "Illinois Commerce Commission" means the State administrative agency, or lawful
successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers in the State
of Illinois.
Licensee Any person as holder of a Telecommunication License as set forth in Section 20.4 of this
document.
"Other ways" means the highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other rights-of-way within the
Village, but under the jurisdiction and control of a governmental entity other than the Village.
"Overhead facilities" means utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities located
above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.
"Person" means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or
associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees
and receivers.
"Public street" means any highway, street, alley or other public right of way for motor vehicle travel
under the jurisdiction and control of the Village which has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to
highway purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
"Public way" means and includes all public streets and utility easements, as those terms are defined
herein, now or hereafter owned by the Village, but only to the extent of the Village's right, title, interest or
authority to grant a license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for telecommunications
facilities.
"State" means the State of Illinois.
"Surplus space" means that portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the necessary
clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders and regulations of the Illinois Commerce
Commission, to allow its use by a telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
"Telecommunications carrier" means and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns,
controls, operates or manages plant, equipment or property within the Village, used or to be used for the
purpose of offering telecommunications service.
"Telecommunications facilities" means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited
to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennae, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to
transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.
“Telecommunications Franchisee See Franchisee
“Telecommunications Licensee See Licensee
"Telecommunications provider" means and includes every person who provides telecommunications
service over telecommunications facilities without any ownership or management control of the facilities.
"Telecommunications service" means the providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange
for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with
or without benefit of any closed transmission medium.
"Telecommunications system" See "Telecommunications facilities".
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-4
"Underground facilities" means utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of
the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for Overhead Facilities.
"Usable space" means the total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible
attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical clearance as specified in the orders and
regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission.
"Utility" The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as defined in this Chapter.
(Ord.No.0-109-99, 2,3,4,56;8-9-99)
"Utility easement" means any easement owned by the Village and acquired, established, dedicated or
devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
"Utility facilities" means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to the poles,
pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the
ground within the public ways of the Village and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility or
telecommunications services.
"Village" means the Village of Palatine.
"Village property" means and includes all real property owned by the Village, other than public
streets and utility easements as those terms are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by
the Village, which are not subject to right-of-way licensing and franchising as provided in this Title.
Sec. 20-3. Registration: Any entity or utility having or installing facilities of any kind in the
easements, public or private, or the public ways within the Village shall register with the Village in accordance
with Chapter 16 of the Village Code of Ordinances.(Ord.No.0-109-99, §§2,3,4,56;8-9-99)
Secs. 20-4 - 20-16 Reserved.
ARTICLE II. RESERVED
Secs. 20-17 – 20-50 Reserved.
ARTICLE III. CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
[Editor’s Note – Ord. #0-208-07, adopted on December 10, 2007, added a new Article III Cable and Video
Customer Protection Law.]
Sec. 20-51 Customer Service and Privacy Protection Law.
(a) Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made
applicable to the cable or video providers offering services within the Village of Palatine’s
boundaries.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-5
(b) Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law that
becomes effective after the effective date of this Article shall be incorporated into this Article
by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the
municipality’s boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for
adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this Article by reference without
formal action by the corporate authorities of the Village of Palatine.
Sec. 20-52. Enforcement.
The Village of Palatine does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer
service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video Protection Law with respect to complaints
received from residents within the Village of Palatine.
Sec. 20-53. Penalties.
The Village of Palatine, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of
penalties for any material breach of the Cable and Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in
addition to the penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral
basis and shall not exceed $750.00 for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed $25,000.00 for
each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
(a) Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service
quality and other standards specified in any provision of the law.
(b) The Village of Palatine shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged
material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30 days from the receipt of the notice
to remedy the specified material breach.
(c) A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day
that a material breach has not been remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice
in (b).
Sec. 20-54. Customer Credits.
The Village of Palatine hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those credits shall
be as provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the
customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The
cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to
request the credit.
Sec. 20-55. Severability.
If any provision of this Article, or the application of any provision of this Article, is held unconstitutional
or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not affect other provisions of this Article, or their application, that
can be given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its application. Each unconstitutional
or invalid provision, or application of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this Article.
Sec. 20-56–20-70 Reserved.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-6
ARTICLE IV. CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE
AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
[Editor’s Note – Ord. #0-209-07, adopted on December 10, 2007, added a new Article IV Cable/Video
Service Provider Fee and Peg Access Support Fee.]
Sec. 20-71. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
(a) “Cable service” means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
(b) “Commission” means the Illinois Commerce Commission.
(c) “Gross revenues” means all consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation,
cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video
system to provide cable service or video service within the holder’s cable service or video service area within
the Village of Palatine.
(1) Gross revenues shall include the following:
(i) Recurring charges for cable or video service.
(ii) Event-based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited
to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges.
(iii) Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
(iv) Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service,
including but not limited to activation, installation, and repair charges.
(v) Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service,
including but not limited to service order and service termination charges.
(vi) Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other
charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
(vii) A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to
compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any
products or services derived from the operation of the holder’s network to
provide cable service or video service within the Village of Palatine. The
allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the Village of Palatine
divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or
national compensation arrangement.
(viii) Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the
holder’s network to provide cable service or video service with respect to
commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or
exhibition of any products or services on the holder’s network, such as a “home
shopping” or similar channel, subject to subsection (ix).
(ix) In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated
functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion of the
holder’s revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications
shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify
the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept
in the regular course of business.
(x) The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b).
(2) Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-7
(i) Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220
ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
(ii) Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross
revenues received by the holder of the State-issued authorization to the extent the
refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service.
(iii) Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally
integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received from
services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without
limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services, information
services, or the provision of directory or Internet advertising, including yellow
pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other
revenues attributed by the holder to non-cable service or non-video service in
accordance with the holder’s books and records and records kept in the regular
course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or
orders.
(iv) The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is
required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser’s subscribers to
the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within
the Village of Palatine and pay the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) with
respect to the service.
(v) Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the
transaction by a city, State, federal, or any other governmental entity and
collected by the holder of the State-issued authorization and required to be
remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
(vi) Security deposits collected from subscribers.
(vii) Amounts paid by subscribers to “home shopping” or similar vendors for
merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
(3) Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the
extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the
effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
(d) “Holder” means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or
video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
(e) “PEG” means public, education and governmental.
(f) “PEG access support fee” means the amount paid under this Article and 220 ILCS 5/21-801(d) by
the holder to the Village of Palatine for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
(g) “Service” means the provision of “cable service” or “video service” to subscribers and the
interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or
video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-8
(h) “Service provider fee” means the amount paid under this Article and 220 ILCS 5/21-801 by the
holder to a Village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
(i) “Video service” means video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for
the selection or use of such video programming services, and which is provided through wireline facilities
located at least in part in the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet
protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial
mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of,
and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over
the public Internet.
Sec. 20-72. Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed.
(a) Fee Imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in
the Village of Palatine.
(b) Amount of Fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent (5%) of the holder’s
gross revenues.
(c) Notice to the Village of Palatine. The holder shall notify the Village of Palatine at least ten (10)
days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the Village of
Palatine.
(d) Holder’s Liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the Village of
Palatine. The holder’s liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following
thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this Article by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
Article shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder’s application notice sent
pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the Village of Palatine.
(e) Payment Date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, fortyfive
(45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is
postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
(f) Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service
providers that have an existing franchise agreement with the Village of Palatine in which a fee is paid.
(g) Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing
agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under Section 20-72(b).
Sec. 20-73. PEG Access Support Fee Imposed.
(a) PEG Fee Imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the Village of Palatine in addition to the fee imposed pursuant to Sec. 20-72.
(b) Amount of Fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent
(1%) of the holder’s gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable
operators pay to the Village of Palatine or its designee for PEG access support in the Village of Palatine.
(c) Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the Village of Palatine or to the
entity designated by the Village of Palatine to manage PEG access. The holder’s liability for the PEG access
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-9
support fee shall commence on the date set forth in Section 20-72(d).
(d) Payment Due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, fortyfive
(45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is
postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
(e) Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing
agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary
payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been
terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the
previous sentence may be credited against the fees that that operator owes under Section 20-73(b).
Sec. 20-74. Applicable Principles.
All determinations and calculations under this Article shall be made pursuant to generally accepted
accounting principles.
Sec. 20-75. No Impact on Other Taxes Due from Holder.
Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later
be imposed by the Village of Palatine, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or
through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A State-issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the Village of Palatine’s simplified municipal
telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A Stateissued
authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of
government’s 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
Sec. 20-76. Audits of Cable/Video Service Provider.
(a) Audit Requirement. The Village of Palatine will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes
on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder
shall comply with the same requirements the Village of Palatine imposes on other cable service or video
service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and records and to re-compute any amounts
determined to be payable under the requirements of the Village of Palatine. If all local franchises between the
Village of Palatine and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the Village
of Palatine pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. No
acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
(b) Additional Payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30)
days after the Village of Palatine’s submission of an invoice for the sum.
Sec. 20-77. Late Fees / Payments.
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by the Village of
Palatine pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-10
Sec. 20-78. Severability.
If any provision of this Article, or the application of any provision of this Article, is held unconstitutional
or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not affect other provisions of this Article, or their application, that
can be given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its application. Each unconstitutional
or invalid provision, or application of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this Article.
Sec. 20-79 – 20-90. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES DEPLOYMENT
Sec. 20-91. Purpose, Scope and Conflicts.
a) Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish regulations, standards, and procedures for the
siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on rights-of-way within the Village’s jurisdiction, or
outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for business, office research or
manufacturing use, in a manner that is consistent the SWFDA.
b) Conflicts with Other Ordinances. This Ordinance supersedes all Ordinances or parts of Ordinances
adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
c) Conflicts with State and Federal Laws. In the event that applicable federal or State laws or regulations
conflict with the requirements of this Ordinance, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements
of this Ordinance to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or State laws or regulations.
Sec. 20-92. Definitions.
All terms defined in this section have the meaning provided in Section 10 of SWFDA.
Antenna. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals
used in the provision of wireless services.
Applicable. Codes uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a
recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes, including the National Electric
Safety Code.
Applicant. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
Application. A request submitted by an applicant to an authority for a permit to collocate small wireless
facilities, and a request that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
Authority. A unit of local government that has jurisdiction and control for use of public rights-of-way as
provided by the Illinois Highway Code for placements within public rights-of-way or has zoning or land use
control for placements not within public rights-of-way.
Authority utility pole. A utility pole owned or operated by an authority in public rights-of-way.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-11
Collocate or collocation. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or
adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole.
Communications service. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as amended; information service,
as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as
amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other than mobile
service.
Communications service provider. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a
provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
Fee. A one-time charge.
Historic district or historic landmark. A building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or
sites that are either (i) listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the authority by the
federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with
Section VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR
Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an
ordinance adopted by the authority pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the
Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such
certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
Law. A federal or State statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution.
Micro wireless facility. A small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length,
15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
Permit. A written authorization required by an authority to perform an action or initiate, continue, or
complete a project.
Person. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other
entity or organization, including an authority.
Public safety agency. The functional division of the federal government, the State, a unit of local
government, or a special purpose district located in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has
authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to respond to and
manage emergency incidents.
Rate. A recurring charge.
Right-of-way. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or
utility easement dedicated for compatible use. Right-of-way does not include authority-owned aerial lines.
Small wireless facility. A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i) each antenna
is located inside an enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no
more than 6 cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with
the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-12
equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch,
cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
Utility pole. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service
provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.
Wireless facility. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user
equipment and a communications network, including: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications;
and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and
comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless
facilities. Wireless facility does not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline back haul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless
support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to
or directly associated with an antenna.
Wireless infrastructure provider. Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the
State that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless
support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is acting as an agent or a
contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the authority.
Wireless provider. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
Wireless services. Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers,
and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed
location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
Wireless services provider. A person who provides wireless services.
Wireless support structure. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or selfsupporting;
billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting
wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole.
Sec. 20.93. Small Wireless Facilities – Permitted Use Subject to the Provisions of this Article V
1. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses, and are subject to the provisions of this
Chapter.
2. Small Wireless Facilities shall not be subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated (i) in
rights-of-way in any zone, or (ii) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for business, officeresearch
and manufacturing uses.
Sec. 20-94. Permit Requirements and Review Procedure.
An applicant is required to obtain one or more permits to collocate small wireless facilities. A permit
application is received and processed, and permits are issued subject to the following requirements.
1. Application Requirements.
A. Specific Documentation. A wireless provider shall be required to provide the following
information when seeking a permit to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or
wireless support structure:
i. Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989, for
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-13
each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is
proposed to be installed;
ii. Site specific structural integrity analysis and, for an authority utility pole,
make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined
in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
iii. The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole
would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed
small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or
structures would be installed;
iv. The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
v. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small
wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
vi. Certification that the collocation complies with paragraph (5), Requirements,
to the best of the applicant’s knowledge.
vii. For Village utility poles that support aerial facilities used to provide
communications services or electric service, wireless providers shall comply
with the process for make-ready work under 47 U.S.C. 224 and its
implementing regulations.
viii. Applications for Multiple Small Wireless Facilities.
i. An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the
jurisdiction of a single authority shall be allowed, at the applicant's
discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single
permit for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the
collocations each involve substantially the same type of small
wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
ii. If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the
Village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the
application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations
for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not
qualify for consolidated treatment or that are denied. The Village
may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a
consolidated application.
ix. Alternate Placements in Lieu of New Utility Pole.
i. With respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless
facility associated with a new utility pole, the Village may propose
that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility
pole or existing wireless support structure within 100 feet of the
proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the
right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-14
conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose
technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the
applicant.
ii. The applicant shall provide a written certification describing the
property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate
location does not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
2. Permit Review Procedure.
A. Method of Submitting All Permit Documentation. All permit applications, supporting
information, and notices shall be submitted by personal delivery at the Village Hall, by
regular mail postmarked on the date due, or by any other commonly used means, except that
electronic mail may be used only if specifically permitted by the Village for said permit.
B. Village Review Period of Review to Determine Completeness of Application. Within 30 days
after receiving an application, the Village must determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must specifically identify
the missing information. An application shall be deemed complete if the Village fails to
provide notification to the applicant within 30 days after when all documents, information,
and fees specifically enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted by the
applicant to the Village.
C. Village Review Period for Permit Application. The Village shall process applications as
follows:
i. Collocation on Existing Structure.
1. An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis.
2. An application shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to
approve or deny the application within 90 days but only if notice
pursuant to Section 20-94 D-i-3 is timely provided to the Village.
3. If an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant must notify the Village in
writing (“Deemed Approved Notice”) of its intention to invoke the
deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75 days after the
submission of a completed application.
4. If the Deemed Approved Notice was timely given, then the permit
shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the
receipt of the Deemed Approved Notice by the Village.
5. The receipt of the Deemed Approved Notice shall not preclude the
Village's denial of the permit request within the time limits as
provided under this Ordinance.
ii. Collocation on New Structure.
1. An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-15
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis.
2. An application shall be deemed approved if the Village
fails to approve or deny the application within 120 days,
but only if notice pursuant to Section D-ii-3 is timely
provided to the Village.
3. If an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant must
notify the Village in writing (“Deemed Approved Notice”)
of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than 105 days after the submission of a completed
application.
4. If the Deemed Approved Notice was timely given, then the
permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th
day after submission of the complete application or the
10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by
the Village.
5. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not
preclude the Village's denial of the permit request within
the time limits as provided under this Ordinance.
D. Village Review Period for Permit Correction Resubmittals.
i. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and
resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice of denial is
sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee.
ii. The Village shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days
after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved.
iii. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant must notify the Village in writing
(“Deemed Approved Notice”) of its intention to invoke the deemed
approved remedy simultaneously with the Applicant’s resubmittal.
iv. If the Deemed Approved Notice is timely given, then the application shall be
deemed approved on the 31st day after resubmission.
v. Any subsequent Village reviews shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in
the denial.
vi. However the revised application deemed approved cure does not apply if the
cure requires the review of a new location, a new or different structure to be
collocated upon, new antennas, or other new wireless equipment associated
with the small wireless facility.
vii. The receipt of the Deemed Approved Notice shall not preclude the Village's
denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-16
Ordinance.
E. Tolling of Review Time Period.
i. All processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice
of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
ii. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
1. The express agreement in writing by both the applicant and the
Village; or
2. A local, State or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency
that causes the delay.
F. Document Basis for Denial.
The Village must document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or
application conditions on which the denial was based, and send the documentation to the
applicant on or before the day the Village denies an application.
3. Application Fees. Application fees are subject to the following requirements:
A. The Village shall charge an application fee of $650 for an application to collocate a single
small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure and $350 for
each small wireless facility addressed in an application to collocate more than one small
wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
B. The Village shall charge an application fee of $1,000 for each small wireless facility
addressed in an application that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such
collocation.
C. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance, applications filed
pursuant to this Chapter must be accompanied by the required application fee.
D. The Village shall not require an application, approval, or permit, or require any fees or other
charges, from a communications service provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
i. routine maintenance;
ii. the replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are
substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider
notifies the Village at least 10 days prior to the planned replacement and
includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment
consistent with the requirements of 20-94 (1) (A) (iv); or
iii. the installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro
wireless facilities that are suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
iv. However, the Village may require a permit to work within rights-of-way for
activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-17
4. Collocation Limitations.
A. The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that
are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the communication worker
safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
B. However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in
the communications space on the Village utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not
otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work
involving the top of the pole.
i. For purposes of this Section, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as
published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
C. The Village may reserve space on authority utility poles for future public safety uses or for the
Village’s electric utility uses, but a reservation of space may not preclude the collocation of a
small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably determines that the authority utility pole
cannot accommodate both uses.
Sec. 20-95. Height, Spacing, Design and Historic Preservation Regulations.
1. Height Limitations. The Village may limit the maximum height of a small wireless facility antenna to 10 feet
above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
A. The height of new or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small
wireless facilities are collocated to the higher of:
i. 10 feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole
supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date the application is
submitted to the Village, that is located within 300 feet of the new or replacement
utility pole or wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within
the jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate which
intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless
support structures shall control the height limitation for such facility; or
ii. 45 feet above ground level.
2. Spacing. The wireless provider shall comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and
ordinances concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
3. Design Standards. The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that are generally
applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment, and aesthetic requirements that are
identified by the Village in an ordinance, written policy adopted by the governing board of the authority, a
comprehensive plan, or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including
on a historic landmark or in a historic district
4. Underground Installations. The wireless provider shall comply with Section 16-20 of the Code of
Ordinances concerning undergrounding requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification
of existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-18
5. Historic Preservation.
A. Subject to Section 20-103 entitled Regulation of Small Wireless Facilities, and except for
facilities excluded from evaluation for effects on historic properties under 47 CFR
1.1307(a)(4), the Village requires reasonable, technically feasible and non-discriminatory
design or concealment measures in a historic district or historic landmark.
B. Any such design or concealment measures, including restrictions on a specific category of
poles, may not have the effect of prohibiting any provider's technology. Such design and
concealment measures shall not be considered a part of the small wireless facility for purposes
of the size restrictions of a small wireless facility.
C. This Section 20-118 may not be construed to limit an authority's enforcement of historic
preservation in conformance with the requirements adopted pursuant to the Illinois State
Agency Historic Resources Preservation Act or the National Historic Preservation Act of
1966, 54 U.S.C. Section 300101 et seq., and the regulations adopted to implement those laws.
Sec. 20-96. Waivers.
Waivers from the height, setback and underground requirements of this Chapter shall be pursued according to
the procedure set forth in Section 20.23 (or Section 20.93-k) of the Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 20-97. Interference.
1. The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used
by a public safety agency for public safety communications.
2. A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause
unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications equipment.
3. Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and
the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
4. If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice
of the interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall take all
reasonable steps necessary to correct and eliminate the interference, including, but not limited to, powering
down the small wireless facility and later powering up the small wireless facility for intermittent testing, if
necessary.
5. The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless
provider is not making a good faith effort to remedy the problem in a manner consistent with the abatement
and resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47
CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675.
Sec. 20-98. Construction Requirements.
1. The wireless provider shall comply with the applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that
concern public safety.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-19
2. The wireless provider shall comply with generally applicable standards that are consistent with the SWFDA
and adopted by an authority for construction and public safety in the rights-of-way, including, but not
limited to, reasonable and nondiscriminatory wiring and cabling requirements, grounding requirements,
utility pole extension requirements, and signage limitations; and shall comply with reasonable and
nondiscriminatory requirements that are consistent with the SWFDA and adopted by an authority regulating
the location, size, surface area and height of small wireless facilities, or the abandonment and removal of
small wireless facilities.
Sec. 20-99. Replacement of Wireless Support Structure.
1. If the Village determines that applicable codes, local code provisions or regulations that concern public
safety, or the requirements of this Chapter require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be
replaced before the requested collocation, approval may be conditioned on the replacement of the utility
pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider.
a. The Village must document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or application
conditions on which the denial was based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before
the day the Village denies an application.
b. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and resubmit the revised application
once within 30 days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional
application fee. The Village shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after the
applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved but only if notice pursuant to Section 20-
99-1-d is timely provided to the Village.
c. If an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the
applicant must notify the Village in writing (“Deemed Approved Notice”) of its intentions to invoke
the deemed approved remedy at the same time the applicant resubmits the application.
d. If the Deemed Approved Notice was timely given, then the permit shall be deemed approved on the
31st day after the applicant resubmits the application and the Village receives the Deemed Approved
Notice.
e. The receipt of the Deemed Approved Notice shall not preclude the Village’s denial of the permit
request within the time limits as provided in this Section.
f. Any subsequent review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial.
g. However, this revised application cure does not apply if the cure requires the review of a new
location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
Sec. 20-100. Collocation Construction Completion Deadline.
Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit,
unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by make-ready
work for an authority utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the permit for
commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation does not exceed 360
days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the Village grants an extension in
writing to the applicant.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-20
Sec. 20-101. Duration of Permits.
The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than ten (10) years, and the permit shall be renewed
for equivalent durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or
modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable Village codes and this Chapter.
Sec. 20-102. Repeal of Small Wireless Facility Deployment Act.
If SWFDA is repealed as provided in
Section 90 of the SWFDA, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable authority code provisions or
regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
Section 20-103. Exceptions to Applicability.
Nothing in this Ordinance authorizes a person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
1. property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the Village or another
unit of local government that is not located within rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility
pole or wireless support structure without the consent of the property owner;
2. property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or
conservation district for public park, recreation, or conservation purposes without the consent
of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an
affected district that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
3. property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as
defined in Section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier,
public commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this Ordinance do not apply
to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being
used, developed, and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of Section
16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to that term in Section 3-105 of the
Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement
(a) to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video service or (b) to obtain
any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small
wireless facilities subject to this Ordinance.
Sec. 20-104. Existing Contracts.
The wireless provider shall comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles and groundmounted
equipment located in the right-of-way.
Sec. 20-105. Existing Agreements Grandfathered for Existing Locations.
Agreements between the Village and wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on authority utility poles, that are in
effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village’s utility poles
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-21
pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination
provisions.
Sec. 20-106. Annual Recurring Rental Rate.
The Village shall charge an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village utility pole
located in a right-of-way that equals (i) $200 per year or (ii) the actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to
the wireless provider’s use of space on the Village utility pole.
Rates for collocation on Village utility poles located outside of a right-of-way are not subject to these
limitations.
Sec. 20-107. Burden of Proof Regarding Claim of Excessive Rental Rates.
In any controversy concerning the appropriateness of a cost-based rate for a Village utility pole located within a
right-of-way, the Village shall have the burden of proving that the rate does not exceed the actual, direct, and
reasonable costs for the applicant’s proposed use of the authority utility pole.
Sec. 20-108. Abandonment.
1. A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be
considered abandoned and the owner of the facility must remove the small wireless facility
within 90 days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the owner of the
abandonment.
2. The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the Village
to the owner at the last known address of the owner. If the small wireless facility is not
removed within 90 days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for authority utility poles or
through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal
and cost recovery.
Sec. 20-109. Notice of Transfer of Ownership of Small Wireless Facilities.
The Village shall require a wireless provider to provide written notice to the Village if a wireless provider sells
or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdictional boundary of the Village. Such notice shall include
the name and contact information of the new wireless provider.
Sec. 20-110. Dispute Resolution.
A circuit court has jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on authority
utility poles within the right-of-way, the authority shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at
annual rates of no more than $200 per year per authority utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final
resolution of the dispute.
Sec. 20-111. Indemnification.
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any and all liability or loss from
personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of
the authority improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless provider or its
employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this Ordinance and the
SWFDA. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - CHAPTER 20 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
20-22
as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider
shall further waive any claims that they may have against the Village with respect to consequential, incidental,
or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability.
Sec. 20-112. Insurance.
1. The Village shall require the wireless provider to carry, at the wireless provider's own cost
and expense, the following insurance: (i) property insurance for its property's replacement cost
against all risks; (ii) workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or (iii) commercial
general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the authority improvements or
rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits consistent with its requirements of other
users of authority improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and
property damage.
2. The Village shall require a wireless provider to include the Village as an additional insured on
the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation of
inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy as reasonably required by the
Village.
Sec. 20-113. Severability.
If any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to any person or circumstances is ruled
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this
Ordinance that can be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid provision or
invalid application of this Ordinance is severable.
(Ord. O-31-19, 04/01/19)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-1
Appendix A ZONING ORDINANCE*
*Editor's note--Ord. No. O-31-88, §1, adopted March 14, 1988, repealed App. A, pertaining to
zoning and enacted new provisions pertaining to zoning as a new Appendix A to read as herein set out.
Absence of a history note following a particular section indicates that such section derived unchanged from
Ord. No. O-31-88; conversely, a history note enclosed in parentheses following a section indicates amendment
by the ordinance or ordinances shown in such history note. Former Appendix A derived from the following
legislation:
ORD. NO. DATE ORD. NO. DATE
0-46-57 12-23-57
0-41-58 9-22-58
0-55-58 12-22-58
0-22-60 7-11-60
0-8-61 2-27-61
0-21-62 3-26-62
0-23-62 3-26-62
0-33-62 6-11-62
0-42-62 10-29-62
0-25-63 6-12-63
0-26-63 6-12-63
0-20-64 7-13-64
0-16-65 3-22-65
0-3-66 2-7-66
0-12-66 2-28-66
0-33-66 7-11-66
0-37-66 7-25-66
0-47-66 10-24-66
0-51-66 11-29-66
0-3-67 1-9-67
0-6-67 3-13-67
0-11-67 3-27-67
0-35-67 7-24-67
0-4-68 1-8-68
0-7-68 1-22-68
0-46-68 7-8-68
0-51-68 8-12-68
0-33-69 7-14-69
0-34-69 7-14-69
0-65-69 12-22-69
0-67-69 12-22-69
0-16-70 3-23-70
0-27-70 5-11-70
0-1-71 1-1-71
0-3-71 1-11-71
0-4-71 1-11-71
0-11-71 1-25-71
0-27-71 3-8-71
0-45-72 7-17-72
0-88-74 10-28-74
0-90-74 11-12-74
0-16-75 2-10-75
0-57-75 7-28-75
0-67-75 9-8-75
0-72-75 10-13-75
0-25-76 3-8-76
0-26-76 3-8-76
0-33-76 3-22-76
0-85-76 9-27-76
0-96-76 10-25-76
0-9-77 2-28-77
0-12-77 3-14-77
0-45-77 6-13-77
0-46-77 6-13-77
0-52-77 6-13-77
0-54-77 6-13-77
0-82-77 8-8-77
0-118-77 11-14-77
0-130-77 12-12-77
0-2-78 1-9-78
0-6-78 2-13-78
0-20-78 3-27-78
0-58-78 7-24-78
0-64-78 8-14-78
0-80-78 9-25-78
0-101-78 11-13-78
0-105-78 11-27-78
0-112-78 12-11-78
0-116-78 12-26-78
0-12-79 3-12-79
0-39-79 5-14-79
0-68-79 6-25-79
0-70-79 6-25-79
0-80-79 7-9-79
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-2
ORD NO. DATE
0-4-80 1-14-80
0-20-80 2-25-80
0-28-80 3-24-80
0-41-80 5-12-80
0-45-80 5-27-80
0-49-80 6-9-80
0-57-80 6-23-80
0-64-80 8-25-80
0-65-80 8-25-80
0-80-80 10-27-80
0-50-81 5-26-81
0-6-82 1-25-82
0-27-82 4-12-82
0-35-82 4-12-82
ORD NO. DATE
0-62-82 7-12-82
0-73-82 8-23-82
0-87-82 9-13-82
0-95-82 9-27-82
0-71-83 10-24-83
0-26-84 5-14-84
0-27-84 5-14-84
0-34-84 6-11-84
0-51-84 7-9-84
0-53-84 7-9-84
0-99-85 10-14-85
0-55-86 6-9-86
0-162-87 11-9-87
0-187-87 12-28-87
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-3
Cross reference(s)--Department of public works, ? 2-171 et seq.; department of community
development, ? 2-191 et seq.; electrical commission, ? 2-291 et seq.; Palatine Environmental Coordinating
Council, ? 2-306 et seq.; director of environmental health, ? 2-326 et seq.; board of health, ? 2-341 et seq.; plan
commission, ? 2-421 et seq.; board of zoning appeals, ? 2-431 et seq.; authorization of live entertainment in
places selling liquor to be in accordance with special use provisions, ? 3-35; fire protection and prevention, Ch.
7; garbage and refuse, Ch. 8; health and sanitation, Ch. 9; existing structures' maintenance and occupancy, Ch.
10; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 16; water and sewer services, Ch. 19; subdivision regulations, App. B.
State law reference(s)--For provisions relating to the zoning power of municipalities see 65ILCS5/11-13-1.
----------
[Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-127-06, passed on July 17, 2006 replaced Article VIII in its entirety]
Art. I. Existing Rights, §§ 1.01--1.03
Art. II. Purpose and Intent, §§ 2.01
Art. III. Rules and Definitions, §§ 3.01, 3.02
Art. IV. General Provisions, §§ 4.01--4.15
Art. V. Use Districts, §§ 5.01--5.03
Art. VI. Accessory Structures and Uses, §§ 6.01--6.05
Art. VII. Off-street Parking and Loading Regulations, §§ 7.01--7.05
Art. VIII. Signage, §§ 8.01--8.09
Art. IX. Nonconforming Uses, Buildings or Structures, §§ 9.01--9.05
Art. X. Residential Districts, §§ 10.01--10.08
Art. XI. Business Districts, §§ 11.01--11.06
Art. XII. Manufacturing Districts, §§ 12.01, 12.02
Art. XIII. P - Planned Development Districts, §§ 13.01--13.09
Art. XIV. Administration, §§ 14.01--14.10
ARTICLE I. EXISTING RIGHTS
1.01. Title.
This ordinance shall be known as and may be referred to as "The Zoning Ordinance of the Village of
Palatine."
1.02. Compliance.
(a) It shall be unlawful to occupy or use any premises, building or structure in the village excepting in
full compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, or for any purpose other than those purposes or uses
described in this ordinance as permitted uses in the district within which such buildings, premises or structures
may be located.
(b) It shall be unlawful to occupy or use any premises, building or structure in the village without
compliance with all provisions of this ordinance relative to setbacks, parking lots, or any other restrictions or
requirements applicable to the district in which such building or premises or structures are located.
1.03. Pending actions.
(a) The enactment of this ordinance shall not in any way affect the liability of any person for a
violation of the zoning ordinance enforced in the village prior to the enactment of this ordinance, and no use
shall be considered as a lawful nonconforming use under the provisions of this ordinance unless such use was a
lawful use at the time it was commenced under the provisions of whatever zoning ordinance may have been in
force at such time.
(b) The adoption of this ordinance shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under or
by virtue of the prior zoning ordinance of the village, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any
penalty accrued or to accrue, or any liability, for a violation of such prior zoning ordinance.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-4
ARTICLE II. PURPOSE AND INTENT
2.01. Purpose and intent.
(a) Purpose. This ordinance is adopted for the purposes of promoting the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of Palatine, future citizens and the general public. Protecting and promoting the health,
safety and welfare is accomplished by zoning all properties into uniform districts which reflect their best use,
conserve and enhance their value and conserve adequate air, light and space for a habitable environment.
(b) Intent. This ordinance will meet the desired end state of the village through the reinforcement of
the following objectives:
(1) To enhance the desirability of living in the village for all residents regardless of race, religion
or background;
(2) To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of residential,
business or manufacturing districts;
(3) To establish standards to which buildings or structures shall conform;
(4) To regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas, to prevent the overcrowding of land
through regulating, limiting and determining the height, bulk and area of open space within
and surrounding such buildings;
(5) To promote the redevelopment of uses and structures deemed to be incompatible and
undesirous in the public interest;
(6) To protect the residential development of the village through:
a. Continuation of single-family detached housing as the primary housing source;
b. Provision of adequate amounts and location of non-single-family housing types;
c. Separation of residential areas from business or manufacturing activities;
d. Mixing of compatible housing types;
(7) To provide for diversity of business areas within the Village and encourage their viability;
(8) To encourage adequate off-street parking in business and industrial areas;
(9) To control the use of land annexed to the village to insure orderly and desirous expansion;
(10) To protect the interests of other governmental agencies with jurisdictions within the village
which also exist for the health, safety and welfare of the public;
(11) To control development within the floodplain to protect persons and property; and
(12) To define and limit the powers and duties of the bodies and administrative officers that will
enforce this ordinance.
(c) Support and implementation of comprehensive plan. This ordinance shall be supported by and
considered an implementation device of the Village of Palatine Comprehensive Plan, where possible, as
amended, or revised from time to time.
(d) Village Council Authority. The Village Council may propose zoning amendments, special uses,
and variations for property located within the Village of Palatine, pursuant to the procedures set forth in the
Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 0-138-07, §1, 8/13/07)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-5
ARTICLE III. RULES AND DEFINITIONS
3.01. General rules.
(a) Rules of construction. The language set forth in the text of this ordinance shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
(1) The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
(2) The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future the present.
(3) The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive.
(b) Anything not expressly permitted within the conditions of this ordinance shall be prohibited.
(c) Meaning of terms. Whenever a term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this ordinance, its
meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition thereof.
(d) Measured minimum setback distances.
(1) Unimproved lots. All measured setback distances shall be to the nearest integral foot. If the
fraction is three-fourths (3/4) foot or greater the integral foot next above shall be taken. If the
fraction of the foot is less than three-fourths (3/4) foot, the integral foot next below shall be
taken.
(2) Improved lots.
i. Lots improved prior to the effective date of this ordinance. All measured setback
distances shall be to the nearest integral foot. If a fraction is one-half (1/2) foot or
less, the integral foot next below shall be taken. If a fraction is greater than one-half
(1/2) foot, the integral foot next above shall be taken.
ii. Lots developed on or after the effective date of this ordinance. All measured setback
distances shall be to the exact, specified integral foot.
3.02. Specific definitions.
Above ground public utility appurtenances. Any structure, brace, guy, anchor valve or other equipment
owned by a public utility which lies above the existing grade, except fire hydrants.
Accessory structure. A subordinate structure which is located on the same zoning lot as the
principal building, the use of which is incidental and customary to that of the principal building
including above ground public utility appurtenances and recreational equipment. Where an accessory
structure is attached to and made part of the principal building, such accessory structure shall comply
in all respects with the requirements of this ordinance applicable to the principal building.
Accessory unique use. A subordinate use which is clearly and customarily incidental to the principal
use of a building or premises and which is located on the same lot as the principal building or use which is not
otherwise listed as a permitted use or a special use within any zoning district, except for such accessory parking
facilities as are specifically authorized to locate elsewhere. (Ord. No. 0-115-12, §1, 8/6/12)
Accessory use. A subordinate use which is clearly and customarily incidental to the principal use of a
building or premises and which is located on the same lot as the principal building or use except for such
accessory parking facilities as are specifically authorized to locate elsewhere.
Acre. Forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet.
Administrative Special Use. A category of Residential Special Use which may be approved
administratively by the Village of Palatine, in conjunction with a submitted application, site plan, and all of the
necessary requirements, as proscribed by the Zoning Ordinance and with required consent or determination of
no objection from adjacent property owners. (Ord. O-36-17, 4/3/17)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-6
Administrative Variation. A category of Residential Variation which may be approved administratively
by the Village of Palatine, in conjunction with a submitted application, site plan, and all of the necessary
requirements, as proscribed by the Zoning Ordinance and with required consent or determination of no
objection from adjacent property owners. (Ord. O-36-17, 4/3/17)
Administrator. Means the director of community development of the village or a person designated by
the village manager.
Alley. A public right-of-way which affords secondary access to abutting property.
Alternative tower structure. Shall mean existing light poles, water towers and similar mounting
structures that can be used to support antennas. (Ord.No.0-72A-98, ?1, 5-26-98)
Antenna. Shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television
communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. Dish type devices for said
purposes are included in this definition. (Ord.No.0-72A-98, ?2, 5-26-98)
Antenna support structure. Any mast, pole, tripod, tower or similar structure used to support an
antenna.
Antenna system. The combination of an antenna and antenna support structure.
Antenna system height. The overall vertical length of the antenna system above grade. If such system is
located on a building, the overall antenna system height shall include the height of the building.
Approved combustible materials. Means any material more than five hundredths (0.05) inch in
thickness, which burns at a rate of not more than two and one half (2 1/2) inches per minute when subject to
the A.S.T.M. (American Society for Testing Materials) standard test for flammability in sheets of sixhundredths
(0.06) inch thickness.
Automobile mart. Any building or premises used for dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail any
fossil fuels or other forms of energy that assists automobile movement, having pumps and storage tanks but no
repair services; also offering for retail sale convenience items without on-site consumption of food.
Automobile service and repair shops. Any building or premises where automobiles are painted,
repaired, rebuilt, reconstructed or stored for compensation.
Automobile service station. Any building or premises used for dispensing, sale or offering for sale at
retail any automotive fuel or oils fossil fuels or other forms of energy that assists automobile movement, having
pumps and storage tanks; also where battery, tire and automotive repair and other similar services are rendered
when located wholly within lot lines. Where such dispensing, sale or offering for sale of any fuels or oils is
incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be classified as a public garage. Does not
include automobile or trailer sales lots (new or used) on which such vehicles are parked for purposes of
inspection and sale.
Awnings. Any structure made of non-rigid materials attached to a building so as to permit the structure
to be raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in use.
Basement. A story with one half or less of its floor to ceiling height below the finished grade. (Ord. 0-
54-07, §1, 4/16/07)
Bedroom. A room or enclosed space in basement, first or upper story arranged and intended for
sleeping purposes. In dwelling units of more than two (2) rooms in multi-family buildings each room in excess
of two, other than bath, toilet rooms, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating corridors shall constitute a
bedroom whether or not arranged or intended for sleeping.
Boarding houses (rooming houses). A building containing a single dwelling unit and not more than
five (5) guest rooms, where lodging is provided with or without meals for compensation.
Boat or raft. Any unit that is to be used for water travel or pleasure.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-7
Building. Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or
movable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land.
Building coverage. The Percentage of a lot which, when viewed directly from above, would be
covered by a building(s), or any part thereof, excluding projecting roof areas. The total square footage of
building coverage on a given lot is a component of the lot coverage percentage. Building coverage shall not
include Village-operated facilities, when deemed necessary in the public interest. (Ord. 0-54-07, §2, 4/6/07;
Ord. #0-29-15, §1, 4/13/15)
Building, out. A business or commercial use not attached to the main unified center which may or may
not be on a separate subdivided lot.
Building, principal. A non-accessory building in which a principal use of the lot, on which it is
located, is conducted.
Building code. Shall be defined as Appendix C of the Code of Ordinances, Village of Palatine, Illinois.
[Published in a separate volume.]
Building line, front. A line parallel to the front lot line at a distance equal to the nearest point of the
building, not including any permitted obstructions. (Ord. 0-72-07, §1, 5/14/07)
Bulk. A composite characteristic of a given building as located upon a given lot--not definable as a
single quantity, but involving all of these characteristics:
(1) Size and height of building;
(2) Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets, or to other buildings;
(3) Gross floor area of the building in relation to lot area (floor area ratio);
(4) All open spaces allocated to the building; and
(5) Amount of lot areas provided per dwelling unit.
Business. Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or
which occupies time, attention, labor and materials, or where services are offered for compensation.
Canopy. A roof-like structure, other than an awning, made of some durable material with frames
attached to a building and further supported by a frame by the ground or sidewalk.
Catering Establishments. A facility whose primary purpose is to provide food, generally in large
quantities, for banquets or special events which are held off the premises not including carry-out or sit down
restaurants. (Ord. 0-18-07, §1, 3/5/07)
Circuit. The complete assembly of generators, conductors, switches, and lines by which an electric
current is transmitted. (Ord.No.0-18-95, ?1, 2-27-95)
Co-locator shall mean a public or private entity which constructs a communication antenna or
antennas on an existing tower or alternative tower structure occupied by an antenna or antennas operated by
another public or private entity. (Ord.No.0-72-98, ?3, 5-26-98)
Commercial vehicle. Any motor vehicle used by or for a business or service which may or may not
bear any sort of advertising for that business or service.
Communication device. Any apparatus such as antenna systems or satellite dish stations of which the
principal function is to send or receive television, radio, or data microwave signals.
Compatible retail or service use. A business establishment which is compatible with existing
conforming uses of the Village of Palatine. A particular business establishment is compatible with existing
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-8
conforming uses if:
(1) Locating the particular business establishment in the business area will tend to increase
interchange of customers with other business establishments in the business area; and
(2) Locating the particular business in the shopping area will not create:
(a) Dead spots where a shopper may tend to lose interest in going further; or
(b) Driveways or other physical breaks in the sidewalk which are larger than
required to provide necessary off-street parking and loading; or
(c) Traffic hazard, noise, odor, unsightliness or other pedestrian inhabiting
qualities; or
(d) Heavily increases non-shopper traffic.
The presence or absence of competition between the particular business establishment, and surrounding
establishments shall not be considered a factor in determining compatibility.
Conflict point. Includes a street intersection, an intersection between a street and a private drive or any
other point of potential conflict or impact between two (2) or more vehicles (including bicycles) or between
vehicles and pedestrians operating or proceeding on street drives, sidewalks, or other avenues or ways for
normal vehicular or pedestrian travel.
Covenants, restrictive. Any contract restricting the manner in which land may be used.
Day care facility. Any facility designed for the care of pre-school or school age children which meets
the requirements and criteria for licensing set forth in the various standards for such facilities issued by the
Illinois Department of Children and Family Services.
Day care home. Any residential dwelling operated as a facility for the care of children exclusively by a
resident or member of the resident's family, and which holds a valid license issued by the Illinois Department
of Children and Family Services, when such state license is required.
Density, gross. In determining units per acre in planned developments, the total square footage of the
property shall include the building site, plus surrounding streets and other immediately adjacent and necessary
surrounding land.
Density, net. In determining units per acre in planned developments, the total square footage of the
property shall be limited to the building site area only.
Department store. A retail store with a floor area of more than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet
offering for sale at retail some or all of the goods permitted in the B-1 and B-2 districts.
Development. Finalization of a Plat of Subdivision or man-made change to real estate including
construction, repair or placement of a building or addition, installation of utilities, mining, drilling,
construction of roads, levees, dams, culverts, walls, fences, and bridges, demolition of a structure, filling,
dredging, grading, excavating, paving, clearing or other non-agricultural alterations of the ground surface, and
any other activity that might change the height, direction, or velocity of flood or surface water. Development
does not include maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as re-roofing or resurfacing of pavement
when there is no increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, or construction of levees. (Ord.No. 0-83-96, ?1. 5/29/96)
Disability. A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one (1) or more of a person's
major life activities or impairs the person's ability to live independently; such term includes a record of having
such an impairment, but such term does not include current use of, nor addiction to, a controlled substance.
District. A section or sections of the village in which the regulations governing the use of buildings
and premises, the height of buildings, the use of yards, and the intensity of use is uniform.
Dog enclosure or run. A fenced in area within a required yard which is intended to restrain dogs.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-9
Drive in or drive-through eatery. Any food service establishment, restaurant, or similar place, with or
without interior facilities for eating which permits the reception and consumption of food in automobiles or
other designated areas on the premises outside the establishment.
Donation/collection box. A receptacle designed with a door, slot, or other opening that is intended to
accept donated goods or items. The bulk standards and regulations for locating a donation box are found in
Section 4.16. (Ord. 0-63-12, §1, 5/7/12)
Drive-through, Drive thru. A product or service offered by means of a window or automated service
point (e.g ATM), that is designed or intended to allow customers to remain in their motor vehicles while
obtaining the product or service. (Ord. 0-52-08, §2, 4/21/08)
Dumpster enclosure. Any type of approved screening which encompasses trash receptacles.
Dwelling. A building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy,
including one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings; but not including hotels,
motels, boarding or rooming houses, tourist homes, and trailers.
Dwelling unit. Residential accommodation--including complete kitchen facilities, permanently
installed, which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use exclusively as living quarters for one family
and not more than an aggregate of two (2) roomers or boarders. Where a private garage is structurally attached,
it shall be considered as part of the building in which the dwelling unit is located.
Dwelling, attached. A dwelling which is joined to other dwellings at both sides by common walls, as
one of a series of not more than eight (8) dwellings arranged in a row including the semidetached dwellings at
the ends.
Dwelling, detached. A residential building which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.
Dwelling, multiple-family. A residential building containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
Dwelling, semi-detached. A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one side only by a
common wall.
Dwelling, single-family. A residential building containing one dwelling unit, including detached, semidetached
and attached dwellings.
Dwelling, two-family (duplex). A residential building containing two (2) dwelling units, including
detached units.
Easement. A right given by the owner of land to another party for a specific, limited use of that land.
Electronic Cigarette Store – A retail store that is primarily devoted to the sale of electronic cigarettes,
including the sale of liquids, vape materials, vapor, or other similar products to be used in conjunction with
electronic cigarettes or other similar devices. (Ord. No. 0-123-15, 10/19/15)
Engineer.A registered engineer of the State of Illinois under the Illinois Professional Engineering Act
(225 ILCS 325/1, et seq.) (Ord.No. 0-83-96, ?1. 5/29/96)
Escape Lane. A designated lane adjacent to a drive through lane which will allow vehicles to
sufficiently exit or bypass the drive through lane. The escape lane must be at least 12 feet wide and be no
less than the length of the adjacent drive though lane. Subject to the ordinance requirements, an adjacent
drive aisle may be used to satisfy the escape lane requirements. (Ord. #0-52-08, §3, 4/21/08)
Face of sign. The surface area of the sign upon which the sign may be displayed or illustrated.
Family.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-10
(a) One person, his or her spouse, their offspring, legally adopted children or foster children,
together with not more than three (3) other persons who are related to said person by blood,
marriage or legal adoption including but not limited to mother, father, sister, brother, motherin-
law, or father-in-law; or
(b) A group of persons none of whom are related to each other by blood, marriage or adoption,
provided, however, that said dwelling unit shall contain not less than three hundred (300)
square feet of floor area for each such occupant, and the total number of occupants in such
group shall not exceed three (3).
(c) A family as defined in paragraph (a) above may include not more than two (2) domestic
servants and not more than one gratuitous guest or boarder residing with said family, in
addition to the number of persons set forth in said paragraph (a). A family as defined in
paragraph (b) above may include not more than two (2) domestic servants and not more than
one gratuitous guest or boarder, provided that such servants, guest or boarder shall be
included in computing the number of unrelated persons permitted under said paragraph (b). A
family as defined in (a) and (b) above shall be limited to groups of persons maintaining a
common household in a dwelling unit.
(d) Group homes, as defined in this article, shall be exempt from the preceding paragraphs (a),
(b) and (c). Group homes shall be permitted uses or special uses, as delineated in article X of
this ordinance.
Fence. An enclosure or barrier constructed of wood and/or human-made material(s) used to delineate
boundary or as a means of confinement or for confinement.
Fence, decorative. All fencing which is ornamental or embellished and shall include but is not limited
to the following types of fencing: post and rail, split rail, oak horse and picket, but excluding chain link.
Fence, open. A fence having a regular pattern with more than fifty (50) percent open throughout the
length of the fence when viewed from the perpendicular.
Fence, semi-open. A fence having a regular pattern of between ten (10) and fifty (50) percent open
throughout the length of the fence when viewed from the perpendicular.
Fence, solid. A fence having a regular pattern with less than ten (10) percent open throughout the
length of the fence when viewed from the perpendicular.
Flashing signs. Means any illuminated sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source, and
is not constant in intensity and color when in use.
Flood Insurance Rate Maps. A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that
depicts the special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and
floodplains and may or may not depict floodways. (Ord.No. 0-83-96, ?1. 5/29/96)
Floodplain. Any area equal to or lower than the base flood elevation which is susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source including, drainageways with a tributary area in excess of 640 acres,
isolated depressional areas with a surface area greater than 0.25 acres at the time of inundation, and any area
indicated as a SFHA on a FIRM map, the limits of which are defined by superimposing the base flood
elevation on the best available topographic information for the area. (Ord.No. 0-83-96, ?1. 5/29/96)
Floor area, gross. For the purpose of determining floor area ratio, the gross floor area of a building or
buildings shall be the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of such building or
buildings--measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center line of party walls separating
two buildings. In particular, "gross floor area" shall include:
(a) Basement space, if at least one-half (1/2) of the basement story height is above the average
grade of the adjoining ground, or used for purposes other than storage.
(b) Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-11
(c) Floor space used for mechanical equipment where the structural headroom exceeds seven and
one-half (7 1/2) feet, except equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof, i.e.: Bulkheads,
water tanks and cooling towers.
(d) Attic floor space where the structural headroom exceeds seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet.
(e) Interior balconies and mezzanines.
(f) Enclosed porches, but not terraces and breezeways.
(g) Accessory uses and structures.
Floor area ratio. The numerical value obtained through dividing the gross floor area of a building or
buildings by the total area of the lot or parcel of land on which such building or buildings are located.
Funeral home or undertaking establishment. Shall mean a facility where ceremonies are held in
connection with the embalming and burial of deceased persons and shall not include as a service provided, the
cremation of corpses.
Garage, private. An accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal building intended for
and used to restore the private passenger vehicles of the families resident upon the premises, and in which no
business, service or industry connected directly or indirectly with automotive vehicles is carried on, and
provided that not more than one-half (1/2) of the space may be rendered for the private vehicles of persons not
resident on the premises, except that all of the space in a garage of one-or two-car capacity may be so rented.
Such garage shall not be used for more than one commercial vehicle per family resident upon the premises, but
no such commercial vehicle shall exceed six thousand (6,000) pounds gross vehicle weight.
Garage, public. Any building where motor vehicles are painted, repaired, rebuilt, reconstructed or
stored for compensation.
Garage, storage. A building used solely for the storage of passenger vehicles, but not for the service or
repair thereof nor the sale of fuel, accessories or supplies.
Group home. A single dwelling unit occupied on a relatively permanent basis in a family-like
environment by unrelated persons with disabilities, as identified and regulated within the Federal Fair Housing
Act. Paid professional support staff, provided by a sponsoring agency, either living with the residents on a 24-
hour basis, or present whenever residents are present at the dwelling, shall be required unless a Special Use
approval is obtained to eliminate the requirement of supervision. A "Group Home" shall comply with the
zoning regulations for the district in which the site is located and shall provide the necessary staff and resident
parking on site, as more fully described within Article 10. For purposes of this definition, disability shall mean,
with respect to a person: (1) a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such
person's major life activities; (2) a record of having such an impairment; or (3) being regarded as having such
an impairment. However, “persons with disability” shall not include any person involved in the current, illegal
use of or addiction to a controlled substance (as defined in section 802 of the Controlled Substance Act (21
U.S.C. Sec. 802), nor does it include any person whose residency would constitute a direct threat to the health
or safety of other individuals or whose residency would result in substantial physical damage to the property of
others. (0-92-93 8/9/93; Ord. #0-32-12, §1, 3/12/12)
Half story. A half story is that portion of a building under a gable, hip or mansard roof, the wall plates
of which, on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than four and one-half feet above the finished
floor of said story. A basement shall be considered as a half story where the finished surface of the floor above
the basement is greater than twelve (12) inches, but less than fifty-four (54) inches above the finished grade.
(Ord. 0-54-07, §3, 4/16/07)
[Editor’s Note: “Halfway House” definition was removed by Ord. #0-85-12]
Health Club. Facility where members use equipment or space for the purpose of physical exercise.
(Ord. 0-199-07, §10, 12/3/07)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-12
Height of roof measurement. The vertical length from ground level to the mean height between the
eaves and ridges of a roof or the coping of a flat roof.
Height of single-family residential structure. The vertical length from the ground level to the mean
height between the eaves and ridges of a roof or the coping of a flat roof as determined by the mean height of
the two corners of the residence closest to the front lot line. (Ord. 0-54-07, §4, 4/16/07)
Height of structure, measurement. The vertical length from ground level to the mean height between
the eaves and ridges of a roof or the coping of a flat roof.
Height of Tower shall mean the distance from grade to the top of the tower or the top of an antenna located on
the tower, whichever is taller. If a tower is located on the roof of a building, the height of a tower shall mean
the distance measured from the grade of the building to the top of the tower or the top of the antenna located on
the tower, whichever is taller. (Ord.No.0-72A-98, ?5, 5-26-98)
Home occupation. Any occupation or profession conducted in a dwelling unit by an occupant of the
dwelling unit which is incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit.
Homeless Day Facility. A publicly or privately operated facility designed for the provision of services
to homeless persons including but not limited to: a central location to obtain transportation, make telephone
calls, send and receive mail, wash laundry, improve hygiene and personal care; and/or receive basic case
management, mental health therapy, job counseling, educational services and assistance with meeting the needs
of homeless families with children. A Homeless Day Facility shall comply with the zoning district regulations
for the district in which the site is located. (Ord. 0-115-00 ?1 9/25/00)
Homeless Person. An individual who lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate residence. (Ord. 0-115-00
?1 9/25/00)
Hospice. A temporary residential living arrangement for persons with a disease that requires full-time
support, therapy and/or treatment.
Hotel. A building which provides a common entrance, lobby, halls, and stairways and in which
lodging is offered with or without meals to ten (10) or more transient guests.
Hotel apartment. A hotel which contains dwelling units, or dwelling units and loading rooms and in
which at least fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area devoted to residential use shall be allocated to such
dwelling units.
Illuminated sign. Means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or an outline
illuminated by electric lights, luminous tubes or other means; or a sign illuminated by a source of light which is
cast upon or falls upon the surface or face of the sign to illuminate by reflection only.
Illuminated traffic signal. Means any traffic control device or sign duly authorized by law which is
illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes.
Impervious Surface. Any hard-surfaced, man-made area that does not readily absorb or retain water,
including but not limited to buildings, patios, paved parking and driveway areas, walkways, sidewalks and
paved recreation areas (e.g. basketball court, tennis court, swimming pools). This would exclude public
sidewalks on private property. The total square footage of impervious surface on a given lot is a component of
the lot coverage percentage. (Ord. 0-54-07, §5, 4/16/07)
Isolated depressional areas. Any area inundated by the base flood that is not a regulatory
floodplain or a channel or drainage way. (Ord.No. 0-83-96, ?1. 5/29/96)
Junk yard. An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are brought, sold, exchanged,
stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper,
rags, rubber tires, and bottles.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-13
Laboratory. A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and analyzing. Manufacturing,
assembly, or packaging of products is not included in this definition.
Land surveyor. A registered surveyor of the State of Illinois, under the Illinois Land Surveyors Act
(225 ILCS 330/1, et seq.) (Ord.No. 0-83-96, ?1. 5/29/96)
Liquified petroleum gas. Any material which is composed predominantly of any of the following
hydrocarbons or mixtures of them: Propane, propylene, butane (normal butane or isobutane) and butylene.
Live entertainment – Shall consist of live music, dancing and/or singing performances, floor shows,
D.J. shows and other entertainment performances, whether or not an admission fee is charged. Live
entertainment shall not include ambient or incidental music provided for guests or patrons by musicians, such
as a piano player, harpist, strolling violinist, traditional juke box, karaoke, or guitarist. However, if there is an
admission charge requirement to observe or attend such ambient or incidental music or entertainment, it shall
be considered live entertainment. (Ord. 0-3-10, §1, 1/11/10
Loading or unloading berth. An open, hard surfaced area of land other than a street or public way, the
principal use of which is for the standing, loading and unloading of motor trucks, tractors, or trailers, to avoid
undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys.
Lodging room. A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without cooking facilities and with
or without an individual bathroom. In a suite or rooms without cooking facilities, each room which provides
sleeping accommodations shall be counted as one "lodging room".
Lot. A parcel of land designated as a lot on a recorded plat of subdivision, located within a single
block, and having its principal frontage upon a street.
Lot, corner. A lot at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets, or at the point
of deflection in alignment of a single street, the interior angle of which does not exceed one hundred thirty-five
(135) degrees.
Lot coverage. The percentage of a residential zoning lot covered by all buildings and any other
impervious surface therein. The lot coverage percentage takes the total square feet of building coverage and
other impervious surfaces divided by the total square feet of the lot to determine the lot coverage. Lot coverage
shall not include Village-operated facilities, when deemed necessary in the public interest. (Ord. 0-115-00
?2, 9-25-00; Ord. 0-54-07, §6, 4/16/07; Ord. #0-29-15, §2, 4/13/15)
Lot, improved. A lot containing a principal structure.
Lot interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot through. A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) more or less parallel public streets,
and which is not a corner lot.
Lot, unimproved. A lot without a principal structure.
Lot, zoning. A single subdivided tract of land or a group of subdivided tracts of land which, at the time
of applying for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or
built upon as a unit.
Lot area. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines, measured within
the lot boundaries.
Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot
measured within the lot boundaries.
Lot line. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership, except that, where
any portion of the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or
alley line.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-14
Lot line, front. That boundary of a lot which lies along an existing or dedicated street. In the case of a
corner lot, the front lot line shall be the shortest lot line that abuts a street. In the event that the lot lines
abutting streets are of equal distance, the front lot line shall be the lot line located along the street for which the
building’s street address is designated. (Ord. 0-72-07, §2, 5/14/07)
Lot line, rear. That boundary of a lot which is most distant from and is or is approximately parallel to
the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten (10) feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the
rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum
distance from the front lot line.
Lot line, side. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front or rear lot line.
Lot width. A mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured within the lot
boundaries.
Marquee. Means a permanent structure projecting from part or all of the building face but not
supported by the ground or sidewalk.
Message board. An advertising structure on which copy or characters are changed manually in the
field.
Mini-warehouse. A building or group of buildings in a controlled access compound that contains
varying sizes of individual compartmentalized and controlled access stalls or lockers of no more than five
hundred (500) square feet of floor area for the dead storage of customer's goods or wares in enclosed buildings
or in the open for a distance not to exceed thirty (30) feet from the outer walls of said building or buildings;
provided, however, that no such storage shall be permitted outside of a mini-warehouse on any side which
faces any zoning district other than an "M" Manufacturing District. No volatile materials are allowed.
Model home. A building or structure which is used as an example of the type of dwelling unit/s which
may be purchased in a new construction project located in the Village of Palatine. (Ord. 0-115-00, ?3, 9-25-00)
Motel (tourist court). A building or group of detached, semidetached or attached buildings on a lot
containing guest rooms or dwellings each of which has a separate outside entrance leading directly from the
outside of the building, with garage or parking space conveniently located to each unit, and which is designed,
used or intended to be used primarily for the accommodation of automobile transients. Motels do not include
hotels, boarding houses or trailer camps.
Motor freight terminal (truck terminal). A building in which freight brought by motor truck is
assembled and sorted for routing in intrastate and interstate shipment.
Motorized home. A portable dwelling designed and constructed as a self-propelled vehicle.
Moved. The act of permanently establishing a structure upon a portion of land after removing same
from another part of the same or a different lot, tract or parcel of land.
Moving sign. Means any sign that has an external or visible part, or parts, that move, rotate, or spin.
Copy changes which indicate time, temperature or date shall not, for that reason alone, be considered moving
signs.
Municipal code. Shall be defined as the Code of Ordinances, Village of Palatine, Illinois.
Nameplate. A sign identifying only the name, occupation or profession and address of the business or
occupant of the lot where the sign is placed; or a directory listing the names, addresses and businesses of the
occupants.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-15
Noncombustible material. Means a material which, in the form in which it is used, falls in one of the
following groups (a) through (c). It does not apply to surface finish materials nor to the determination of
whether a material is noncombustible from the standpoint of clearances to heating appliances, flues or other
sources of high temperature. No materials shall be classed as noncombustible which are subject to increase in
combustibility or flame spread rating beyond the limits herein established, through the effects of age, moisture
or other atmospheric condition. Flame spread rating as used herein refers to ratings obtained according to the
Standard Test method for Fire Hazard Classification of Building Materials of Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.,
U.L. 723, NFPA 255, ASTM E84.
(a) Materials no part of which will ignite when subjected to fire. Any material which liberates
flammable gas when heated to any temperature up to one-thousand, three-hundred, eighty
degrees (1,380) Fahrenheit for five (5) minutes shall not be considered noncombustible within
the meaning of this paragraph.
(b) Materials having a structural base of noncombustible material, as defined in (a) with a surface
not over one-eight (1/8) inch thick which has a flame spread rating not higher than fifty (50).
(c) Materials in the form and thickness used, other than as described in (a) and (b) having a flame
spread not higher than twenty-five (25) without evidence of continued progressive
combustion and of such composition that surfaces that would be exposed by cutting through
the material in any way would not have a flame spread rating higher than twenty-five (25)
without evidence of continued progressive combustion.
Nonconforming building. Any building which does not comply with all of the regulations of this
ordinance governing bulk for the district in which such building is located, or is designed or intended for a
nonconforming area.
Oriel window. A bay window built out from a wall and resting on a bracket or similar support.
Overhead utility lines. Wires or cables used for distribution and/or transmission of public services (i.e.
electricity, cable television, telephone) that are located above the ground. (Ord.No.0-18-95 ?1 2-27-95)
Parking space, automobile. A suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area on privately owned
property, either within or outside of a building, of sufficient size to store one standard automobile, but in no
event less than two hundred (200) square feet, exclusive of passage-ways, driveways, or other means of
circulation or access.
Person. Every natural individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization of any
kind.
Pickup coach. A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis and with
sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation
uses.
Piercing studio and stores– A business establishment or use occupying a building or structure, which
performs piercing activities and is not exempted under the Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishment
Registration Act, (410 ILCS 54/) as administered by the Illinois Department of Public Health. This shall not
include practices that are considered medical procedures or the puncturing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the
ear using the pre-sterilized, single-use stud and clasp piercing system. (Ord. No. 0-144-11, §1, 11/21/11)
Planned development. Shall mean a land development project, comprehensively planned as an entity
via a unitary site plan which permits flexibility in building, mixture of housing types and land uses, usable
open spaces, and the preservation of significant natural features.
Porch. A roofed over structure, projecting out from the wall or walls of the principal structure which is
commonly open to the weather in part.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-16
Public Service or Utility Facility. Any substation or transfer point used by the public service or utility
company that is entitled to use public rights-of-way and/or utility easements in the Village of Palatine. (Ord.
No. 0-37-94 4/11/94)
Recreational vehicle. Shall mean a vehicular portable structure, mounted on a vehicle chassis,
primarily designed for recreation purposes.
Replacement. The act of repairing, taking, or filling the place of a majority of a circuit that is to be
discarded or worn out. (Ord.No.0-18-95 ?1 2-27-95)
Rest home (nursing home). A private home for the care of children or the aged or infirm, or a place of
rest for those suffering bodily disorders. Such home does not contain equipment for surgical care or for the
treatment of disease or injury, nor does it include maternity care or mental illnesses or infirmities.
Restaurant. Any food service establishment in which food or drink is prepared for sale or for service
on the premises or elsewhere (including but not limited to restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, short order cafe,
luncheonette, grill, tea room, sandwich shop, soda fountain, roadside stand, drive-in, or similar place).
Ringlemann Chart. The "Ringlemann Chart" is one which is described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines
Information Circular 6888, and on which are illustrated graduated shades of grey for use in estimating the
light-obscuring capacity of smoke and smoke density.
Roof sign. means any sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or over the roof or parapet
wall of any building.
Satellite dish station. Also referred to as "earth stations" or "ground stations" shall mean any antenna
with an essentially solid surface, whether flat, concave or parabolic which is designed for receiving
communication signals from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit on the planet itself.
Screening. Any solid fencing, walls, or landscaping used to conceal a use, structure, or the like from an
outside observation.
Setback, front. The minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a building, not
including any permitted obstructions. (Ord. 0-72-07, §3, 5/14/07)
Setback, rear. The minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a building, not
including any permitted obstructions. (Ord. 0-72-07, §3, 5/14/07)
Setback, side. The minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line and a building, not including
any permitted obstructions. (Ord. 0-72-07, §3, 5/14/07)
Sign. Means every sign, device, copy change, flashing sign, streamer, window promotional sign,
billboard, freestanding sign, attached sign, roof sign, illuminated sign, temporary sign, marquee, awning,
canopy, and any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display illustration or insignia containing words,
printing, pictures, designs, or combinations hereof used to identify or inform or advertise or promote the
interests of any person, business, profession, product or service when the same is placed in view of the general
public.
Sign, attached. A sign attached to or held in place by supports attached to a principal structure.
Sign, Community. A sign identifying the Village of Palatine and other village related information.
(Ord. 0-127-06, §2, 7/17/06)
Sign, development. A temporary on-premises sign for the purpose of advertising a new construction
project or development during the period in which it is being constructed as well as the initial renting/selling
period.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-17
Sign, Electronic Message Board (formerly Copy Change Sign). A sign with a fixed or changing
display/message composed of a series of lights that may changed through electronic means. Electronic
signs depicting solely time and temperature or gasoline prices shall not be considered an electronic
message board. (Ord. #0-52-08, §4, 4/21/08)
Sign, Event. A temporary sign advertising the name, duration and location of a specific event
occurring within the Village of Palatine. (Ord. 0-127-06, §3, 7/17/06)
Sign, freestanding. A sign supported by pedestal(s), pier(s), column(s) or other similar support(s)
either in or upon the ground, and which is not attached to any building.
Sign, Institutional. A sign identifying a public, government, civic or religious institution or
organization located on the same zoning lot. (Ord. 0-127-06, §4, 7/17/06)
Sign, noncommercial. A sign, providing no commercial advertising of any kind, used to identify noncommercial
activities. (Ord. 0-127-06, §5, 7/17/06)
Sign, nonconforming. A sign existing at the effective date of this ordinance which could not be
constructed under the terms of this ordinance.
Sign, temporary. A non-permanent sign erected, affixed or maintained for a short, usually fixed, period
of time.
Sign, Temporary Directional. A temporary sign designed to provide directional traffic information
for a specific event occurring within the Village of Palatine. (Ord. 0-127-06, §6, 7/17/06)
Sign, window promotional. A sign made of non-combustible material such as paper or cardboard
which promotes a price or service offered by the business or commercial use and is located in the window of
said establishment.
Special use. A "special use" is permission granted by the village board, pursuant to the terms of this
appendix, for use of property in a way not ordinarily permitted in a given zoning district classification.
Stable, private. A stable is any building, located on a lot on which a residence is located, designed,
arranged, used or intended to be used for not more than four (4) horses for the private use of the residence, but
shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet in area.
Stable, public. A stable where horses are kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
Stacking space. A component of a drive through lane measuring a minimum of 12 feet by 22 feet
with direct forward access to a service window or drive through facility. Stacking spaces for drive through
or drive-in uses may not be counted as required parking spaces. (Ord. #0-52-08, §5, 4/21/08)
Stand, roadside. A structure for the display and sale of products with no space for customers within the
structure itself.
Stoop. An unenclosed platform at the entrance to a building. (Ord. No. 0-60-06, §1, 4/3/06)
Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next
floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
Any portion of a story exceeding fourteen (14) feet in height shall be considered as an additional story for each
fourteen (14) feet or fraction thereof, excepting the following:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-18
1. A basement shall not be considered as a story where the finished surface of the floor above
the basement is twelve (12) inches or less above the finished grade.
2. A basement shall be considered a story where the finished surface of the floor above the
basement is fifty-four (54) inches or greater above the finished grade.
(Ord. 0-54-07, §7, 4/16/07)
Street. A public or private right-of-way which affords the primary means of access to abutting
property.
Street line. The dividing line between the lot and the street.
Structural alterations. Any change, other than incidental repairs, in the supporting members of a
building or structure, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders or any substantial change
in the roof or exterior walls.
Structural trim. Means the molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing and platforms which are
attached to the sign structure.
Structure. Anything erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground,
or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. A sign, billboard, or other advertising
medium detached freestanding or attached projecting and having a gross area of sixty (60) square feet or more
shall be construed to be a structure.
Structure, principal. A structure in which a principal use is conducted. (Ord. 0-115-00, ?4, 9-25-00)
Structure, temporary. A structure not designed or intended for permanent human occupancy nor for
the permanent protection of animals, chattels, or property of any kind. (Ord. 0-115-00, ?4, 9-25-00)
Subdivision regulations. Shall be defined as Appendix B of the Code of Ordinances, Village of
Palatine, Illinois.
Tavern or bar. A place of business that serves alcoholic beverages with a legally approved village
liquor license with limited food service.
Tourist home. A building containing a single dwelling unit and in which meals or lodging or both are
provided or offered to transient guests for compensation.
Tower. Shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of
supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers.
The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular
phone towers, alternative tower structures and the like. (Ord.No.0-72A-98, ?4, 5-26-98)
Trailer. Any vehicle not independently maneuverable, designed for carrying persons or property and
for being drawn by a motor vehicle, whether attached or detached from a motor vehicle. (Ord. #0-29-15, §3,
4/13/15)
Unified center. A building or buildings located on a single lot which has at least two (2) separate
business or commercial uses.
Unique Uses. A use not otherwise listed as a Permitted Use or Special Use within any zoning district.
(Ord. 0-72-07, §3, 5/14/07; Ord. 0-85-12, §2, 6/18/12)
Unit of Government shall mean any Federal or State office, agency or a unit of local government
recognized as such in the Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord.No.0-72A-98, ?6, 5-26-98)
Use. The purpose or activity for which the land, or building thereon is designed, arranged or intended,
or for which it is occupied or maintained.
Use, principal. The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-19
Use, temporary. A use of a building, structure or parcel of land which is not permanent and in
existence for a limited amount of time. (Ord. 0-115-00, ?5 9-25-00)
Use, nonconforming. Any lawfully established use of a building or premises which on the effective
date of this ordinance does not comply with all of the applicable use regulations of the zoning district in which
such building or premises shall be located. For the purpose of this ordinance, any use lawfully established on
the effective date of this ordinance which is nonconforming solely by virtue of lacking off-street parking or
loading facilities as required hereinafter for new uses shall not be deemed a nonconforming use.
Used car lot. Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying and selling second-hand passenger
cars and/or trucks and the storing of same prior to sale.
Variation. A "variation" is a grant of relief by the village board, pursuant to the terms of this appendix,
from specific limitations of the zoning ordinance with reference to a structure to be constructed or modified on
a given zoning lot or parcel of land.
Vehicle, motor. Any automobile, pickup, mini-van, van, semi, motorcycle or other vehicle propelled or
drawn by mechanical power.
Vehicle, private passenger. Any automobile, pickup three-quarter (3/4) ton or less, mini-van, van or
motorcycle owned and used by the occupant for private, every day transportation use.
Village. Shall mean the Village of Palatine, Illinois.
Village manager. Shall mean the appointed official of the village or one of his/her designated
representatives.
Village operated facilities. Shall include but not be limited to fire and police stations, public works
garages/storage facilities, municipal office buildings, sanitary sewer and potable water systems, storm water
management facilities, and telecommunication devices. (Ord. #0-57-09, §1, 5/11/09)
Vision clearance. An open, unoccupied triangular space at the street corner or a corner lot, the space
being defined as a setback line extending across the corner between points established on the street lines by
measurement from the corner.
Yard. An open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky,
except as hereinafter permitted. A "yard" extends along a lot line and at right angles to such lot line to a depth
or width specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
Yard, front. A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between the side lot lines. In
the case of a corner lot, the front yard shall be adjacent to the shortest lot line that abuts a street. In the event
that the lot lines abutting streets are of equal distance, the front yard shall be the yard that is adjacent to the
street for which the building’s street address is designated. (Ord. 0-72-07, §5, 5/14/07)
Yard, rear. A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side lot lines,
provided, that in those locations where an alley is platted in the rear of the lot, one-half (1/2) of the width of the
platted alley may be included in the rear yard requirement.
Yard, side. A yard extending along a side lot line between the front and rear yards.
Yard, required front. That yard established by the front setback requirement of this ordinance and the
established front lot line.
Yard, required rear. That yard established by the rear setback requirement of this ordinance and the
established rear lot line.
Yard, required side. That yard established by the side setback requirement of this ordinance and the
established side lot line.(Ord. No. O-147-90, ? 1, 11-26-90)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-20
ARTICLE IV. GENERAL PROVISIONS
4.01. Interpretation.
(a) The provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
the public health, safety, morals, and welfare.
(b) Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this ordinance upon the use of land or
buildings or upon the bulk of buildings, are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by any other provision of this ordinance, or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards of
requirements shall govern.
(c) This ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or other private agreement;
provided that where the regulations of this ordinance are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements of this ordinance
shall govern.
4.02. Separability.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the village president and board of trustees of the Village of
Palatine that all provisions of this ordinance are separable.
4.03. Number of buildings per lot.
(a) Each zoning lot in the village may be improved but shall not exceed one principal building, except
for lots zoned P, Planned Development.
(b) No accessory structures are allowed without a principal structure.
4.04. Allowable use of land or buildings.
The following uses of land or buildings are permitted in the districts indicated hereinafter in Articles
X, XI, XII and XIII and under the conditions specified in this ordinance:
(1) Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this ordinance;
(2) Permitted uses as designated in Articles X, XI, and XII;
(3) Special uses;
(4) Accessory uses.
4.05. Prohibited use of land or buildings.
(a) No building or tract of land shall be devoted to any use other than one which is specified as a
permitted or special use in Articles X, XI and XII in the zoning district in which such building or land is
located.
(b) In the event a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in accordance with law
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and provided that construction is begun within one year of such
effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, said building or structures may be completed in
accordance with approved plans; subject to the provisions of Article IX of this ordinance.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-21
4.06. Control over use.
No building or premises shall be used or occupied and no building or part thereof or structure shall be
erected, raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or altered, except in conformity with the regulations
herein specified for the district in which it is located.
4.07. Control over bulk.
(a) All new buildings shall conform to the bulk requirements established herein for the districts in
which each building shall be located.
(b) No existing building shall be enlarged, reconstructed, structurally altered, converted or relocated in
such a manner as to further conflict with the bulk regulations of this ordinance for the district in which such
building shall be located.
4.08. Height restrictions.
(a) Spires, cupolas, chimneys, penthouses, water tanks, flagpoles, monuments, scenery lofts, fire
towers, air conditioning equipment, elevator equipment and similar structures and the necessary appurtenances
shall not cover more than ten (10) percent of the roof area.
(b) Said structures shall not exceed a height of one hundred (100) feet or more than twenty-five (25)
feet above the height limit prescribed by the regulations of the district in which the site is located, whichever is
less.
4.09. Permitted obstructions; yards.
For purposes of this ordinance permitted obstructions shall be as stated in the zoning regulations of
each district.
4.10. Zoning of annexed land.
All land hereafter annexed to the Village of Palatine shall be classified as R-1, Single-Family District,
unless provision for other classifications is made by ordinance after a public hearing as required by law.
4.11. Reserved.
(Sec. 4.11 Flood Plain Regulations was deleted in its entirety by Ord. #0-104-08, passed on 8/4/08)
4.12. Erosion and sedimentation control ordinance.
All excavation, movement of earth, site development and execution of an erosion and sedimentation
control plan shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the "Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance"
found in the village subdivision regulations.
4.13. Expansion, additions to, or replacement of overhead utility lines in excess of 2,600 lineal feet shall be
required to be buried unless the Village Board authorizes their expansion, alterations of construction above
ground. The replacement of a majority of the lines in a circuit shall be deemed a replacement under this
section. All such construction of utility lines in excess of 2,600 lineal feet, whether buried or overhead, shall
be subject to review and approval by the Village Board of a specific implementation plan to ensure minimal
impact on trees and private and public property. (Ord. No.0-18-95 ?2 2-27-95)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-22
-----------------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-22-02 passed on February 25, 2002 added a new Sec. 4.14
----------------
4.14. Site Plan Review
(a) Approval required. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or land development permit for new
construction or additions, except for indoor alteration of a building, additions, signage and accessory buildings
and structures on fee simple townhouse property or single-family detached dwellings, a site plan shall be
approved by ordinance, possibly with conditions, by the Village Council.
(b) Authority. Site plans shall be authorized or denied by the Village Council in accordance with the
procedural provisions of this section and the regulations and conditions set forth herein for site plan approval.
No application for site plan approval for which a variance to this chapter is necessary shall be acted upon by
the Village Council until after a public hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals or Plan Commission, and
the findings and recommendations of the Zoning Board of Appeals or Plan Commission holding such public
hearing have been reported to the Village Council.
(c) Initiation. An application for site plan approval may be made by any person, firm or corporation, or
by an office, department, board, bureau or commission requesting or intending to request a land development
permit or building permit.
(d) Processing. An application for site plan approval shall be filed with the Director of Planning &
Economic Development or his/her authorized designee on forms provided by the village and accompanied by
such information as shall be established from time to time by the village and kept on file in the Community
Development Department.
(e) Recommendation. The Director of Planning & Economic Development or his/her authorized
designee shall forward all recommendations containing those stipulations and conditions to be made a part of
the authorization ordinance to the Village Council within a reasonable time.
(f) The site plan shall be drawn to insure that all the following have been addressed:
(1) General welfare. The proposed development should not under the circumstances of the
particular case be detrimental to health, safety, morals or general welfare and should be
designed to avoid or mitigate possible adverse impacts.
(2) Compatibility. That the proposed arrangement of buildings, off-street parking and loading
facilities, access, lighting, landscaping, and drainage is compatible with adjacent land uses.
(3) Conformance. That the site plan shall conform to all applicable village policies and
ordinances.
(g) Determination. The Village Council, upon receipt of the site plan and authorization ordinance with
applicable conditions, and without public hearing, may grant or deny any proposed plan, in accordance with
applicable statutes of the State of Illinois and subsections (F) (1) (2) and (3) of this section, or may refer it to
the Zoning Board of Appeals, Plan Commission and/or a standing committee, for further consideration. (Ord.
0-22-02 §1, 2/25/02)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-23
Sec. 4.15. Temporary Outdoor Christmas Tree Sales:
The temporary outdoor sales of Christmas trees and related items shall be permitted, except on properties
that contain a residential use, subject to obtaining a Village business license and the following conditions:
(a) The temporary outdoor sales of Christmas trees and related items may only occur between
November 15 and December 31.
(b) When merchandise is stored or displayed on pedestrian walkways, a minimum width of five
(5) feet must be maintained free and clear of any storage, display or sales area.
(c) No outdoor sales or storage shall occur within public rights-of-way.
(d) All merchandise and equipment shall be kept in a neat, safe, sanitary and orderly fashion, free
from garbage, rubbish and other debris.
(e) A maximum of one (1) sign per street frontage shall be permitted. No individual sign shall
exceed forty (40) square feet.
(f) All applicable Village codes shall be followed and all applicable taxes shall be paid.”
(Ord. 0-84-05, §1, 4/18/05)
[Editor’s Note: Ord. #0-63-12 created a new Sec. 4.16 Donation/collection box)
Sec. 4.16 Donation/collection box
a. Only donation boxes directly associated with the principal use of the subject property shall be
permitted.
b. Only two (2) donation boxes shall be permitted per zoning lot.
c. Administrative Site Plan Review and Registration are required.
d. As part of the application to locate a donation box, written authorization from the property owner must
be obtained and provided to the Village of Palatine.
e. The donation/collection box must be placed on a solid and dust-free surface.
f. Donation boxes shall not exceed six (6) six (6) inches in height, five (5) feet wide and four (4) feet
deep and if located in the parking lot shall not obstruct more than one surplus parking space.
g. Donation boxes shall only be located upon properties used for educational, institutional, religious, or
not for profit uses.
h. Donation boxes shall not be located in the required front or corner side yard and must be located to
minimize the visual impact, when viewed from public or private streets.
i. Donation boxes shall include an informational posting, as to whether their organization accepting the
donations is a for-profit or not-for-profit.
j. Donation boxes shall also include a local contact person and the operator of the donation box, with the
appropriate contact telephone number to address any maintenance or damage concerns with the box.
k. The donation box shall not be placed in a location to interfere with or cause a visual obstruction to
vehicle or pedestrian traffic.
l. Donated materials or items shall not be stored or left outside the donation box.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-24
ARTICLE V. USE DISTRICTS
5.01. District classifications.
R-1 Single-Family District.
R-1A Single-Family District.
R-1B Single-Family District.
R-1C Single-Family District.
R-2 Single-Family District.
R-3 High Density Multifamily District.
R-3A Low Density Multifamily District.
B-1 Shopping Center District.
B-2 General Business District.
B-3 Central Business District.
B-4 Office-Research District.
B-5 Highway Business District.
M Light Manufacturing District.;
P Planned Development District.
5.02. Zoning map.
(a) Official zoning map.
(1) The location and boundaries of the districts established by this ordinance are hereby set forth
on the zoning map entitled "Official Zoning Map". All amendments, notations, references and
other matters shown thereon, shall be part of this ordinance.
(2) The official zoning map shall be kept on file in the office of the village clerk and shall be
open to public inspection at all times during which the clerk's office is customarily open. Any
person desiring a copy shall pay a fee as provided in the fee supplement to the municipal
code.
(3) To reflect changes and adaptations, the official zoning map shall be annually updated and
revised.
(b) Boundaries. In the event that uncertainties exist with respect to the intended boundaries of the
various districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
(1) The district boundaries are the center lines of the streets or alleys, unless otherwise indicated.
Where designation of a boundary line on the official zoning map coincides with the location
of a street or alley, the centerline of such street or alley shall be construed as the boundary of
such district.
(2) Where the district boundaries do not coincide with the location of streets or alleys, but do
coincide with lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of such district.
(3) When a lot held in one ownership on the effective date of this amendatory ordinance
(effective date April 1, 1988) is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be
construed to be within the more restrictive district.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-25
5.03. Zoning of streets, alleys, public and railroad right-of-ways.
(a) All streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated,
shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting upon such streets, alleys, public
ways and railroad rights-of-way.
(b) Where the center line of the street, alley, public way or railroad right-of-way serves as a district
boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as
that of the abutting property up to such centerline.
ARTICLE VI. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
6.01. Accessory structures and pools, hot tubs, and spas. (Ord. #0-115-10, §1, 9/20/10)
(a) Regulations. The following regulations shall apply to all accessory structures, except for Villageoperated
facilities and above ground public utility appurtenances as noted in Section 6.01(b). If an accessory
structure is attached to a principal structure, it shall follow all applicable standards of that zoning district for
the principal structure. (Ord. #0-52-08, §6, 4/21/08; Ord. #0-29-15, §4, 4/13/15)
(1) Maximum height: One (1) story, not to exceed Fifteen (15) feet, except as a special use. The
highest point of an accessory structure shall not exceed the highest point of the principal
structure. (Ord. 0-31-00, ? 1, 4-24-00)
(2) Minimum distance requirements:
a. From principal building: Ten (10) feet.
b. From side lot line: Five (5) feet.
c. From rear lot line: Five (5) feet.
(3) Location. All accessory structures shall be located in rear yards or side yards, subject to the
minimum distance requirements in Section 6.01(a)(2). For the purposes of Section 6.01(a),
rear yard shall be defined as the area between the rear of the principal structure and the rear
lot line, extending between the side lot lines, and side yard shall mean the area between the
side of the principal structure and the side lot line, extending between the front and rear
building lines.
a. Where the side lot line of a rear yard abuts the side lot line of a front yard of an adjacent
lot, all accessory structures, except fences, shall be set back from the rear lot line a
distance equal to the required front yard setback of said adjacent lot.
b. Corner Lots. Accessory structures shall not encroach upon a side yard abutting a street.
For the purposes of Section 6.01(a), a side yard abutting a street shall be defined as the
area between side of the principal structure and the side lot line abutting the street,
extending between the front lot line and the rear lot line. (Ord. 0-60-06, §2, 4/3/06)
c. No portion of any accessory structure shall overhang or be located in any easement.
(Ord. #0-52-08, §7, 4/21/08)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-26
(4) Ground floor area.
a. Rear yards. The ground floor area of all accessory structures located in a rear yard
shall not exceed the lesser of:
i. Twenty (20) percent of the area of such rear yard or;
ii. Seven hundred (700) square feet.
iii. Fifty percent (50%) of the floor area of the principal structure. (Ord. 0-31-
00, ? 1, 4-24-00)
b. Side yards. The ground floor area of all accessory structures located in a side yard
shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in size.
(5) Swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas:
a. Swimming pools, hot tubs and spas shall be located in rear yards or side yards,
b. The placement of a swimming pool, hot tub or spa shall comply with the applicable
building codes and the National Electrical Code.
c. All swimming pools and hot tubs shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from the
side lot line and five feet from the rear lot line.
d. All swimming pools must be set back a minimum of four (4) feet from the principal
structure. Hot tubs and spas shall meet the building codes requirements and National
Electrical Code, but there is no other setback requirement for the placement of a hot tub
or spa. (Ord. 0-115-10, §2, 9/20/10)
(b) Above ground public utility appurtenances in Residential Districts.
(1) Location. Above ground public utility appurtenances located on private property shall be
permitted in public utility easements in a rear or interior side yard.
(2) A maximum of two (2) above ground utility appurtenances shall be permitted per residential
lot.
(3) Above ground public utility appurtenances shall not be calculated into lot coverage.
(Ord. #0-52-08, §8, 4/21/08)
(c) Special uses. The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the village
board, subject to the standards set forth in section 14.05 of this appendix.
(1) Accessory structures; on lots zoned for residential uses which exceed fifteen (15) feet in
height.(Ord.No. 0-4-97, ?3, 1/13/97)
(d) Portable Storage Units. Portable storage units, which shall be limited to fully enclosed temporary
storage structures, shall be permitted on residential properties, subject to the following conditions.
Roll off dumpsters, or other similar containers shall not be considered as portable storage units. (Ord.
0-91-05, §1, 5/2/05)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-27
(1) Maximum Number Permitted: two (2) per zoning lot.
(2) Maximum Size: No individual portable storage unit shall exceed 1,100 cubic feet.
(3) Maximum Duration: The use of portable storage units on a property shall be limited to
three (3) separate instances per calendar year, not to exceed ten (10) consecutive days per
instance, unless otherwise approved by the Village of Palatine, in conjunction with a
building permit.
(4) Portable storage units shall be kept on a solid dust free surface.
(5) Portable storage units shall not encroach into any easement.
(Ord. 0-84-05, §2, 4/18/05; Ord. O-135-17, 12/11/17)
6.02 Towers and Antennas
(a) General Requirements
(1) A building permit shall be required for the construction or installation of any tower or
antenna. Building permit fees shall be waived for the towers and antennas when
required by state law.
(2) All antennas and towers shall be installed, maintained, and grounded according to the
standards as stated in the building code.
(3) Advertising, logos, or symbols shall not be permitted on any tower or antenna, nor
shall any tower or antenna be illuminated by direct or indirect lighting.
(b) Towers in the B and M Districts and residentially zoned properties owned and used by a unit of
government.
(1) Location and Setbacks
a. Towers shall be located in the rear or interior side yards or on the roof of
buildings.
b. Towers shall be set back from residentially zoned property a minimum
distance equal to the height of the tower.
c. Towers shall be set back from the lot lines a minimum distance equal to the
height of the tower.
(2) Number. No more than one tower shall be located on each zoning lot.
(3) Height
a. The height of a single user tower shall not exceed 80 feet, measured from
grade to the top of the tower or to the top of an antenna, whichever is taller,
except as provided below.
b. The height of a tower designed to accommodate co-location for at least three
additional antennas shall not exceed 140 feet, measured from grade to the
top of the tower or to the top of the highest antenna, whichever is taller,
subject to the requirements contained in Subparagraph G. Said towers shall
be subject to the regulations governing setbacks.
(c) Towers in Residential Districts, excluding properties owned and used by a unit of government.
(1) Location and Setbacks
a. Towers shall be located in the rear or interior side yards or on the roof of
buildings.
b. Towers shall be set back from the lot lines a minimum distance equal to the
height of the tower.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-28
(2) Number. No more than one tower shall be located on each zoning lot.
(3) Height. The height of a tower shall not exceed 50 feet, measured from grade to the
top of the tower or the top of the highest antenna, whichever is taller.
(4) Limited Use. Towers in residential districts shall be used solely for communications
directly related to on-site residential permitted uses.
(d) Antennas in the B and M Districts and residentially zoned properties owned and used by a unit of
government.
(1) Location and Setbacks.
a. Antennas shall be permitted on tower or alternative tower structures, in the
rear and interior side yards and on roofs of buildings.
b. Antennas shall be set back from the lot lines a minimum distance equal to
the height of the antenna.
(2) Number and screening.
a. No more than one ground mounted antenna shall be located on each zoning
lot.
b. Any number of antennas shall be permitted on towers and alternative tower
structures, provided that the antennas are painted the same color as the tower
or alternative tower structure, to minimize the visual impact of the structure.
c. Any number of antennas shall be permitted to be located on the roof,
provided that the antennas are completely screened from view by a solid
screen wall equal to or greater in height than the tallest antenna on the roof.
Antennas may be placed directly on the front of screen wall provided that the
antennas are painted the same color as the screen wall and do not extend
above the top of the screen wall.
(3) Size
a. Antennas shall not exceed 15 feet measured in any direction.
b. Exemption: Antennas less than 1 meter (39 inches) in size are exempt from
the regulations.
(e) Antennas in residential districts, excluding properties owned and used by a unit of government.
(1) Location and setbacks
a. Antennas shall be permitted in the rear and interior side yards and on roofs
of buildings and are subject to the minimum distance requirements for
Accessory Structures as stated in Section 6.01 (a)(2).
b. Ground mounted antennas shall be setback from the rear and interior side lot
lines a minimum distance equal to the height of the antenna or the minimum
as stated in Section 6.01 (a) (2), whichever is greater.
(2) Number. No more than one antenna per zoning lot shall be permitted.
(3) Size
a. Antennas shall not exceed 10 feet measured in any direction.
b. Exemption: Antennas less than 1 meter (39 inches) in size and non-dish
type, roof-mounted antennas used solely for television reception less than 15
feet measured in any direction are exempt from the regulations.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-29
(4) Limited Use. Antennas in residential districts shall be used solely for communications
directly related to on-site residential permitted uses.
(f) Removal of Abandoned Towers and Antennas
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be
considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within one hundred
twenty (120) days of receipt of notice from any governing authority or the Village of Palatine notifying
the owner of such abandonment. The telecommunication service provider shall provide the Village
with a copy of the FCC notice at the same time said notice is sent to the FCC when an antenna site is
taken out of service. Failure to provide such copy of the FCC notice, or failure to remove the tower
within 120 days of the date such FCC notice is given to the FCC shall result in a penalty of
$10,000.00. Further, the Village retains the right to remove said tower after said 120 day period and
charge all costs and expenses of removal and restoration to the owner. If there are two or more uses of
a single tower or antenna, then this provision shall apply only to the antenna that is taken out of
service.
(g) Co-location on Towers
It is the purpose and intent of this ordinance to encourage and assist in co-location of antennas and
towers wherever possible for the purpose of reducing visual blight and improving public safety from
an overabundance of tower structures. To further that purpose and intent, the following regulations
shall apply:
In the event that the Village Council agrees, pursuant to a Co-location Agreement, then the height
restrictions in this ordinance applicable to towers may be extended to allow, as a matter of right, an
additional twenty (20) feet of overall height for every additional co-location site provided on the
proposed tower up to a maximum of sixty (60) additional feet in overall height. In order to qualify for
the additional height, the owner must agree to execute a Co-location Agreement, in the form
prescribed by the Village, which shall include at a minimum the following rights and responsibilities:
1) The owner of the land and the owner of the tower shall execute a Co-location
Agreement with the Village permitting co-locator(s) (other telecommunication
providers) to locate antennas on the tower.
2) The agreement shall provide that in consideration for the use of the tower, the owner
of the tower shall be reimbursed for certain costs as identified below.
3) The tower owner shall receive, on a monthly basis, fifty (50%) percent of the
remaining monthly payments on the land lease, if any, for the tower structure. (The
co-locator shall negotiate with the land owner for his own land lease for the colocator
?s equipment cabinet or equipment building.) Said lease payments to begin on
the first day of the month that the co-locator gains access to the tower structure. The
owner of the tower shall provide the Village (at the time of building permit issuance
for construction of the tower) with a copy of the land lease evidencing the monthly
lease payment (separating out the rent reasonably attributable to the ground space
leased for the equipment cabinet or equipment building, if the lease does not do so)
of the leased premises and certify that it is a true and accurate copy of said lease.
4) The tower owner shall receive from the first co-locator fifty (50%) percent of the
costs of construction of the tower, (excluding costs attributable to the tower owner?s
equipment cabinet or equipment building and installation costs exclusively
attributable to the tower owner?s equipment), in a lump sum, subject to the tower
owner certifying said amount to the Village and the Village confirming the costs of
construction.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-30
5) In the event of a second and/or third co-locator on the same tower, the tower owner
and any existing co-locator(s) shall receive from the second and/or third co-locator
their proportionate share; i.e., the second co-locator will be responsible for one-third
of the remaining monthly tower land lease payments and one-third of the tower
construction costs; the third co-locator will be responsible for twenty-five (25%)
percent of the remaining monthly tower land lease payments and twenty-five (25%)
percent of the tower construction costs. Said lease payments and construction costs
shall be distributed on a pro-rata basis so that the tower owner and each co-locator
pays an equal proportionate share of tower land lease and tower construction costs.
Total payments of all tower users shall at no time exceed one hundred (100%)
percent of tower lease or tower construction costs. Subsequent co-locators shall
make the pro-rata payments on the same basis as set forth above.
6) The owner of the land agrees to make available to co-locators, a comparably sized
space at a comparable rental for the purposes of accommodating a co-locator and
subsequent co-locators? electrical equipment.
7) Each party to the Co-location Agreement, its successor and assigns, shall maintain its
equipment in good condition and repair, and shall remain responsible for all costs,
expenses and liabilities of every kind whatsoever relating to the maintenance, repairs
and replacements of its equipment on the real estate and on the tower.
8) The tower owner, in connection with its building permit, shall submit an engineering
report from a licensed structural engineer certifying that the tower has been designed
and shall be constructed to structurally and physically accommodate the maximum
additional telecommunication equipment it is designed to handle. The tower owner
shall not deny a co-locator access to its tower on the grounds that the co-locator?s
antenna and equipment imposes greater structural and wind loading impacts on the
tower unless it presents a certified written report to the Village from a licensed
structural engineer certifying that the co-locator?s antenna and equipment cannot be
supported by the tower.
9) The tower owner shall grant to co-locators access to the tower and to their respective
antennas at all reasonable times to install said equipment and to maintain same.
10) In the event of a dispute between the land owner, tower owner and/or the co-locator,
the losing party shall reimburse the Village its costs, expenses and attorneys fees in
enforcing the terms of this Ordinance or the Co-location Agreement.
(h) Relief Alternatively Available Through Special Use
In the event the Village, the land owner and the tower owner do not agree to execute a Co-location
agreement, then said owner(s) may proceed with a Special Use application to seek the additional
height. (Ord.No.0-72A-98, ?7,5/26/98)
6.03. Fences.
(a) General requirements.
(1) Permits. It shall be unlawful to construct, erect or replace on private property or upon any
parkway in the village any fence, as defined in this ordinance without first obtaining a
building permit from the administrator and making payment of required fees.
(2) Restrictions. All fencing shall be subject to the following restrictions:
a. All fence types, except barbed wire, electrically charged or other types designed to
cause injury, shall be permitted unless otherwise specified.
b. All fencing shall be constructed so that the rough, unfinished side faces the owner's
property.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-31
(3) Required fences.
a. Swimming pools. Fences shall be required around swimming pools as provided in the
building code.
b. Mini-warehouses. All mini-warehouses in the village shall be required to have an
eight-foot high chain link fence around the perimeter of any required yard.
(4) Dumpster enclosures. All fencing around dumpsters shall be subject to approval by the
administrator to insure promotion of the health, safety and welfare of the Village.
(5) Method for Determining Fence Height. The fence height limitations contained within this Code shall
apply to the fence and any other appurtenances attached to it. Fence height shall be measured
vertically from grade to the top of the fence. Fence height shall be determined on the property in
which the fence is installed. Posts used specifically for supporting a fence may exceed the applicable
height limit by a maximum of eight (8) inches, thus allowing for ornamental treatment. To
accommodate potential drainage conflicts and fluctuations in grade, the Director of Community
Services may allow portions of a fence to exceed the applicable height limit by a maximum of 6
inches.
(6) Replacement of existing fence. Any existing fence, as of the effective date of this ordinance, may be
replaced in its current location without having to comply with any applicable setback requirements.
Prior to obtaining a building permit the property owner shall provide proof that the fence existed in its
current location prior to the adoption of these regulations. This proof shall be submitted in a manner
acceptable to the Director of Planning and Zoning.
(Ord. 0-84-05, §3, 4/18/05)
(b) Residential districts. All fencing in residential districts shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Height. All fencing shall not exceed six (6) feet in height unless otherwise specified.
(2) Front yards. In front yards, only decorative fencing shall be permitted, and shall conform to
the following standards:
a. The total amount of all decorative fencing in any front yard shall not exceed twenty
(20) linear feet in length.
b. Decorative fencing shall not exceed three (3) feet in height.
(3) Pet enclosures. A pet enclosure or run shall be permitted only within rear yards and when
located on lots abutting a street, said enclosure shall not be located in the half of the rear yard
which abuts the street. All pet enclosures or runs must conform to the following standards:
a. Said enclosure shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
b. Said enclosure shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
(4) Lots platted after January 1, 1930.
a. Front yard: all fencing, except decorative fencing shall follow the required
setback of that zoning district.
b. Side yard: No setback requirement.
c. Rear yard: No setback requirement.
d. Side yard abutting a street: Decorative fences 48 inches or less in height shall be
setback a minimum of three (3) feet from the lot line.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-32
i. Landscaping shall not be required for decorative fences 48 inches or less in
height.
(Ord. 0-41-03, §1, 2-3-03; Ord. 0-84-05, §4, 4/18/05, Ord. 0-37-19 4/8/19)
e. Side yard abutting a street: All other fences shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet
from the lot line with landscaping.
i. Landscape material shall be installed within the area between a fence and
any lot line abutting a public street. The landscape material shall include a
combination of shrubs, deciduous plant materials, or other appropriate
plantings, approved and reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Department,
with a minimum installed height of 36 inches. The property owner must
provide written verification including, but not limited to, a landscaping or
planting plan, confirming the types and size of plant materials to be installed
as part of this project. No landscaping shall be required when the proposed
fence meets the corner side yard setback requirement of the zoning district
the proposed fence is located in.
ii. Use of existing landscaping: Landscape material located within and adjacent
to the area in which the proposed fence would be located in, may fulfill the
landscaping requirements set forth within this Section. The landscape
material must meet the minimum size installation requirements for that
portion of the fence which is subject to the request. The use of this existing
plant materials is subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning
Department.
f. Rear yard abutting a street: Fences located in a rear yard abutting a public street shall be
setback a minimum of 5 feet from the lot line.
i. Landscape material shall be installed within the area between a fence and any lot
line abutting a public street. The landscape material shall include a combination
of trees and shrubs with a minimum installed height of 36 inches.
ii. Fences located in the rear yard abutting a public street shall include a gate to
allow access to the rear street frontage. (Ord. O-37-19, 04/08/19)
(5) Lots platted on or before January 1, 1930.
a. Front yard: All fencing, except decorative fencing, may follow the established, front
building line excluding any stairs, porches and the like, otherwise the required
setback of that zoning district shall be followed.
b. Side yard: No setback requirement.
c. Rear yard: No setback requirement.
d. Side yard abutting a street: Decorative fences 48 inches or less in height shall be a
Setback minimum of three (3) feet from the lot line.
i. Landscaping shall not be required for decorative fences 48 inches or less in
height.
e. Side yard abutting a street: All other fences shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet
from the lot line with landscaping.
i. Landscape material shall be installed within the area between a fence and any
lot line abutting a public street. The landscape material shall include a
combination of shrubs, deciduous plant materials, or other appropriate
plantings, approved and reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Department,
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-33
with a minimum installed height of 36 inches. The property owner must
provide written verification including, but not limited to, a landscaping or
planting plan, confirming the types and size of plant materials to be installed as
part of this project. No landscaping shall be required when the proposed fence
meets the corner side yard setback requirement of the zoning district the
proposed fence is located in.
ii. Use of existing landscaping: Landscape material located within and adjacent to
the area in which the proposed fence would be located in may fulfill the
landscaping requirements set forth within this Section. The landscape material
must meet the minimum size installation requirements for that portion of the
fence, which is subject to the request. The use of this existing plant material is
subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Department.
(Ord. 0-41-03, §2, 2-3-03, Ord. 0-84-05, §5, 4/18/05, Ord. 0-37-19, 4/8/19)
f. Rear yard abutting a street:
i. Fences located in a rear yard abutting a public street shall be setback a
minimum of 5 feet from the lot line.
ii. Landscape material shall be installed within the area between a fence and
any lot line abutting a public street. The landscape material shall include a
combination of trees and shrubs with a minimum installed height of 36
inches.
iii. Fences located in a rear yard abutting a public street shall include a gate to
allow access to the rear street (Ord. 0-115-00 ?6, 9/25/00)
(6) Special Uses. The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the
Village Board, subject to the standards set forth in section 14.05 of this appendix.
a. Fencing in any front yard, except the following shall be permitted:
i. Decorative fencing as permitted in section 6.03 of this appendix; and
ii. Temporary fencing erected to protect any seeding area.
b. Fences in rear yards where the side lot line of said rear yard abuts the side lot line of
a front yard of an adjacent lot, or where the rear lot line of said rear yard abuts the
side lot line of a front yard of an adjacent lot. Fences in side yards abutting a street,
where the side lot line of said side yard abutting a street abuts the side lot line of a
front yard of an adjacent lot or where the rear lot line of said side yard abutting a
street abuts the side lot line of a front yard of an adjacent lot.
Fences located in these yards may be approved through a building permit, if they
meet the minimum required side yard abutting a street setback for that underlying
zoning district.
(Ord. 0-60-06, §6, 4/3/06; Ord. O-135-17, 12/11/17)
(c) Business districts. All fencing in business districts is subject to review and approval by the
administrator to insure promotion of the health, safety and general welfare of the village. No fence shall exceed
six (6) feet in height, unless otherwise specified in this ordinance.
(d) Manufacturing districts. All fencing in manufacturing districts shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Height. All fencing shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height unless otherwise specified in this
ordinance.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-34
(2) Front yards. In front yards, only decorative fencing shall be permitted, and shall conform to
the following standards:
a. The total amount of all decorative fencing in any front yard shall not exceed twentyfour
(24) forty (40) linear feet in length.
b. Decorative fencing shall not exceed three (3) feet in height.
(3) Interior lots.
a. Front yard: All fencing, except decorative fencing, shall follow the required setback
of that zoning district.
b. Side yard: No setback requirement.
c. Rear yard: No setback requirement.
(4) Corner lots.
a. Front yard: All fencing, except decorative fencing, shall follow the required setback
of that zoning district.
b. Side yard: No setback requirement.
c. Rear yard: No setback requirement.
d. Side yard abutting a street: All fencing shall follow the required setback for that
zoning district.
e. Rear yard abutting a street: All fencing shall follow the required side yard setback for
that zoning district.
(e) Planned development districts. All fencing in planned development districts shall conform to the
following minimum requirements:
(1) Residential areas with lots. In all residential areas with lots, the fence regulations specified in
section 6.03(b) shall apply.
(2) Residential areas without lots. In all residential areas without lots, the fence regulations in
section 6.03(b) shall apply, unless different regulations are established in a separate
declaration approved by the village.
(3) Business areas. In all business areas, the fence regulations in section 6.03(c) shall apply.
(4) Manufacturing areas. In all manufacturing areas, the fence regulations in section 6.03(d) shall
apply.
6.04. Home occupations.
(a) Permitted home occupations. The following are permitted home occupations provided they do not
violate any of the standards of subparagraph (d) below:
(1) Babysitting, limited to three (3) children at one time.
(2) Computer programming.
(3) Day care home.
(4) Dressmaking, sewing and tailoring.
(5) Musical and dance instruction, limited to three (3) pupils at a time.
(6) Painting, sculpturing, or writing.
(7) Professional office of a clergyman, lawyer, physician, dentist, architect, engineer, or
accountant.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-35
(8) Tutoring; limited to three (3) students at a time.
(b) Prohibited home occupations. The following are not permitted as home occupations:
(1) Animal grooming establishment.
(2) Barber shop.
(3) Beauty parlor.
(4) Clinic or hospital.
(5) Commercial stable.
(6) Kennel.
(7) Real estate office.
(8) Restaurant.
(9) Tourist home.
(10) Vehicle repair or painting, excluding the repair of a resident's vehicle.
(11) Landscaping Business. Unless such operation of the landscaping business complies with all of
the standards for home occupations, as outlined in 6.04 (d). (Ord. 0-41-03, §3, 2-3-03; Ord.
0-13-07, §1, 2/20/07)
(c) Other home occupations. Any proposed home occupation that is neither specifically permitted by
section 6.04(a) nor specifically prohibited by section 6.04(b), shall be approved if it meets the standards of
section 6.04(d).
(d) Standards. The following standards shall apply to all home occupations:
(1) The home occupation shall not change the outside appearance of the dwelling.
(2) The home occupation shall not be visible from the street or create unreasonable traffic
related to the home occupation. (Ord. 0-13-07, §2, 2/20/07)
(3) The home occupation shall be carried on by a member of the immediate family residing on
the premises.
(4) No other person shall be employed or involved with said activity on premises other than a
member of the immediate family residing in the dwelling unit.
(5) All activities and all storage must be conducted within a structure.
(6) All wholesale, jobbing or retail business shall be conducted entirely by mail or telephone
or other electronic means. (Ord. 0-13-07, §3, 2/20/07)
(7) No more than six hundred (600) square feet of the area of a dwelling unit shall be devoted to
any home occupation.
(8) No motor power other than electrically operated motors shall be utilized.
(9) Not more than one truck of not more than one ton pickup capacity and no semi-trailers
incidental to a home occupation shall be kept on the site.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-36
(10) No unreasonable odor or noise shall be emitted, and no increase in odor or noise over those in
existence without the home occupation shall be permitted.
(11) Where applicable, a Village of Palatine business license must be obtained. (Ord. 0-13-07,
§4, 2/20/07)
6.05. Garage, rummage sales or owner made craft sales.
(a) Duration. Each occasion shall not take place for a period of time longer than twelve (12) hours per
day for a maximum of three (3) consecutive days.
(b) Number. There shall not be more than three (3) occasions per year.
ARTICLE VII. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
7.01. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to alleviate or prevent congestion of public streets, and to promote the
safety and welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the off-street parking and loading
and unloading of motor vehicles in accordance with the use.
7.02. General requirements.
(a) Requirements of motor vehicle parking and loading.
(1) In all zoning districts off-street automobile motor vehicle parking and loading space shall be
provided as an accessory use in accordance with the requirements of this article.
(2) At the time any building or structure is erected, enlarged, or expanded in height or ground
coverage, the accessory parking and loading area must conform to regulations in this article
and the building code.
(3) All new or enlarged parking areas and loading areas shall first secure a building permit before
commencing construction.
(4) No vehicle, including, but not limited to, motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, trailers, private
passenger vehicles, and commercial vehicles, shall be used for the purposes of human
habitation. Exceptions to this regulation may be granted by the Village Manager following
the submittal and review of a specific written request. (Ord. 0-254-05, §1, 12/19/05)
(b) Existing parking and loading spaces. Accessory off-street parking and loading spaces in existence
on the effective date of this ordinance may not be reduced in number unless already exceeding the
requirements of this section for equivalent new construction, in which event said spaces shall not be reduced
below the number required herein for such equivalent new construction.
(c) Permissive parking and loading spaces. Nothing in this Article VII shall prevent the establishment
of additional off-street parking or loading facilities to any existing use of land. However, those off-street
parking areas accessory to existing multiple family structures cannot be located off the premises containing the
main use unless on a lot adjacent thereto.
(d) Yards; use.
(1) Off-Street Parking.
a. Accessory off-street parking spaces which are required for a principal structure and
which are not enclosed may be located in any required yard on the same lot as the
principal structure.
b. In a residentially zoned district or a residential area of a planned development zone,
parking in front yards or a side yard on a corner lot abutting a street shall be only on
that portion of the yard improved for a driveway or off-street parking purposes,
pursuant to provisions of the building code and the municipal code.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-37
c. Required setbacks.
i. No off-street parking space shall be located closer than five (5) feet from any
street line, or two (2) feet from any interior property line, except when
parking and driveway are shared between two (2) adjacent properties.
ii. No off-street parking space nor portion thereof established on a zoning lot
without building shall be located closer to any street line than the established
building line on adjacent properties nor closer than the front yard setback
required for the district in which the parking lot is located.
(2) Off-street loading. Space for each off-street loading berth may occupy any part of any
required yard.
(e) Repairs.
(1) There shall be no commercial automotive repairs on a lot in a residential district.
(2) No commercial repair work or service of any kind to motor vehicles shall be conducted on
open parking areas or loading areas.
(f) Location.
(1) Off-street parking. All accessory off-street parking facilities required herein shall be located as
follows, measured as a linear distance from the nearest point of the parking area to the nearest
entrance of the structure that said parking is required to serve.
a. Spaces accessory to one-and two-family dwellings: on the same lots as the principal
use served.
b. Spaces accessory to multiple family dwellings: on the same lot as the principal use
served or within two hundred (200) feet of the main entrance to the principal building
served.
c. Spaces accessory to uses located in a business or manufacturing district: within eight
hundred (800) feet of a main entrance to the principal building served.
d. Spaces accessory to uses located in a residential district, other than residential
dwellings: within eight hundred (800) feet of a main entrance to the principal
building served.
e. No parking facilities accessory to a business or manufacturing use shall be located in
a residential district.
(2) Off-street loading. All accessory off-street loading areas required herein shall be located on
the same lot as the use to be served.
a. No such berth shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any other lot in any
residential district unless wholly within a completely enclosed building or unless
screened from such lot in the residential district by a wall or a uniformly painted solid
fence not less than six (6) feet in height.
b. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet
of the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets.
7.03. Schedule of parking requirements.
(a) General requirements.
(1) When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required by this article results
in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of one-half (1/2) or more shall be counted
as one parking space, while a fraction of less than one-half (1/2) may be disregarded.
(2) Unless the number of off-street parking spaces required by this article is greater, all retail lots
must provide a minimum of five (5) off-street parking spaces.
(3) Handicapped spaces. All required handicapped spaces shall be subject to the following
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-38
requirements.
a. All handicapped parking spaces shall be located in close proximity to the principal
building and shall offer barrier-free access to the principal building.
b. All handicapped parking spaces shall be appropriately marked by a sign containing
the word "reserved" and the standard handicapped logo.
(b) Required spaces.
(1) Spaces required for a use. The following uses shall provide as a minimum, the following
number of parking spaces.
Single-family detached dwellings 3.0 spaces per residence, including one garage space
Multiple-family dwellings 2.0 spaces per unit without garages; 2.25 spaces per unit
with garages
Hospitals 1.5 spaces per bed
Assembly uses 1 space for each 2.5 seats; or bench seating spaces based
on maximum capacity, or 30 percent capacity in persons
(capacity defined by the Fire Prevention Bureau per the
Life Safety Code.), whichever is greater. (Ord. 0-31-00,
1, 4-24-00)
Funeral homes 1 space per 100 square feet of gross chapel and lounge
areas for the public
Hotels and motels and tourist cabins 1 space for each living or sleeping unit; plus additional
spaces for affiliated uses according to the requirements
set forth in this Ordinance
Restaurants and taverns The parking for restaurants and taverns shall conform to
the greater of:
(a) 1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area,
excluding any basement or second story storage areas; or
(b) 1 space per 2.5 seats.
Carry-out restaurants without any
sitdown seating
1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
Business and retail uses 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area; except
such as would fall under one of the foregoing
classifications but not including manufacturing or
warehouse and storage uses
B-3, Central Business District or
any property bounded by Wood Street
(north), Johnson Street (south), Smith
Street (west) and Plum Grove Road
(east), regardless of the underlying
zoning (Ord. No. 0-83-10, §1, 7/19/10)
This requirement may be waived with approval from the
administrator
B-4, Office Research District 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area; plus one
visitor space for each 15,000 square feet of gross floor
area calculated in the foregoing
Manufacturing, warehouse and storage
uses
1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area in
manufacturing and warehousing uses; plus 1 space per
300 square feet of gross floor area in office uses
(Ord. 0-87-09, §1, 7/13/09)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-39
(2) Handicapped parking. All off-street parking lots shall comply with the current Illinois
Accessibility Code (IAC) requirements. (Ord. 0-22-02, §2, 2/25/02, Ord. O-37-19 04/08/19)
(3) Drive-through lane requirements.
a. Stacking. All stacking spaces shall be a minimum 12 feet in width and 22 feet in
length.
i. Banks: 7 stacking spaces for a single lane; 4 stacking spaces per lane for 2 or
more lanes.
ii. Restaurants: 7 stacking spaces.
iii. All other drive-throughs, excluding automobile marts for the sale of fuel: 5
stacking spaces.
b. Design.
i. An escape lane with a minimum width of 12’ shall be provided in the event
that the outer-most drive through lane does not have access to an adjacent
drive aisle.
ii. A drive-through lane shall be located to prevent any vehicles from extending
onto the public right-of-way or interfering with any pedestrian circulation,
traffic maneuvering, or other parking space areas.
(Ord. #0-52-08, §9, 4/21/08)
(c) Joint parking facilities. Required parking facilities serving two (2) or more uses may be located on
the same lot or in the same structure provided that the total number of parking spaces furnished shall not be
less than the sum of the separate requirements for such use.
(1) The plan commission may recommend the joint use of parking facilities by the following uses
or activities under the following conditions:
a. Up to fifty (50) percent of the parking facilities required by this article for a theatre,
bowling alley, dance hall, bar or restaurant may be supplied by the off-street parking
facilities provided by certain other types of buildings or uses specified under (e)
below.
b. Up to fifty (50) percent of the off-street parking facilities required by this article for
any building or use specified under (e) below may be supplied by the parking
facilities provided by uses specified under (f) below.
c. Up to one hundred (100) percent of the parking facilities required by this article for a
church or for an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school may be
supplied by the off-street parking facilities provided by uses specified under (e)
below.
d. Two (2) or more commercial lots, each under different ownership, may be allowed
joint parking facilities if a written agreement is made between the owners in which an
amenity is provided satisfactorily to the Village, such as landscaping, screening, or a
reduction in curb cuts.
e. For the purposes of this section the following uses are considered as primarily daytime
uses: banks, business offices, retail stores, personal service shops, household
equipment or furniture shops, clothing or shoe repair or service shops, manufacturing
or wholesale buildings and similar uses.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-40
(2) Conditions required for joint use.
a. The building or use for which application is being made to utilize off-street parking
facilities provided by another building or use shall be located within eight hundred
(800) feet of such parking facilities.
b. The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating
hours of the two buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is
proposed.
c. A properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the parties concerned for joint use of
off-street parking facilities, duly approved as to form and manner of execution by the
village attorney, shall be filed with the administrator.
(d) Parking or storage of certain vehicles in residential districts. Vehicles shall be subject to the
following regulations when parked or stored in residential districts.
(1) Yard use.
a. Parking in the front yard and corner side yard. The following may be parked in the
front yard (defined as the area between the front line of any portion of the building
and the front lot line) and in the corner side yard (defined as the area between the
corner side line of any portion of the building and the corner side lot line):
Private passenger vehicles
One of the following:
Pick-up coach when mounted on a pick-up or a truck chassis
Pick-up truck or van
b. Parking in the rear yard and interior side yard.
i. The following may be parked in the rear yard or interior side yard without
screening:
Private passenger vehicles
One of the following:
Pick-up coach when mounted on a pick-up or a truck chassis
Pick-up truck or van
ii. One of the following may be parked entirely in the rear yard (defined as the
area extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side lot
lines between the rear lot line and any portion of the rear of the building) or
interior side yard (defined as the area extending along a side lot line between
the front and rear yards) provided that it is effectively screened on all sides
by a densely planted hedge, solid masonry wall or solid fence at least four
(4) feet in height and not more than six (6) feet in height:
Recreational vehicle; twenty-two (22) feet or less in length; or
Pickup coach; twenty-two (22) feet or less in length; or
Trailer, provided that the trailer does not exceed twenty-two (22)
feet in length; or (Ord. #0-29-15, §5, 4/13/15)
Commercial vehicle; twenty-two (22) feet or less in length, when
owned or used by the occupant.
(2) In totally enclosed garages, the parking of the following vehicles shall also be permitted:
a. Any motor vehicle owned by the occupant;
b. Recreational vehicle;
c. Boats and rafts;
d. Trailers; or
e. Commercial vehicles; when owned or used by the occupant.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-41
(3) All vehicles , trailers, boats and rafts and other similar items shall be parked on a solid, dustfree
surface.
(4) A recreational vehicle, pickup coach, or boat shall not be utilized for storage of goods,
materials or equipment other than those items considered to be part of the unit or essential for
its immediate use.
(5) A recreational vehicle, pickup coach, or boat and trailer shall not be parked or stored so as to
block any public right-of-way.
(6) Recreational vehicles or pickup coaches, with trailers, not exceeding thirty-two (32) feet in
length, may be temporarily parked on premises for unloading or loading purposes without
screening for up to twelve forty-eight (48) hour periods within a given calendar year. A
minimum 48 hours shall elapse between each permitted 48 hour period. (Ord.0-13-07,§5,
2/20/07; Ord. #0-29-15, §5, 4/13/15)
(7) A motor vehicle that is in an inoperative condition or not licensed shall not be permitted on
any residential property for more than forty-eight (48) hours unless it is in a totally enclosed
garage. All major repairs shall be within an enclosed garage in residential areas. (Ord. No. 0-
210-99 ? 1, 12/13/99)
(Ord. 0-254-05, §2, 12/19/05)
7.04. Design and maintenance of off-street parking areas.
(a) Surfacing. All open off-street parking areas shall be improved with a durable and dustless surface
and graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water, according to construction standards as stated in the
Building Code.
(b) [Lighting.] All open off-street parking areas shall be illuminated and lighting shall be arranged so
as to provide glareless illumination and to reflect the light away from adjoining properties, according to the
standards as stated in the Building Code.
(c) Curbs and wheelstops. All open off-street parking areas shall provide concrete wheelstops or a
continuous curb around its perimeter, according to construction standards as stated in the Building Code.
(d) Size of parking area.
(1) The aggregate area required for each off-street parking facility shall be three hundred (300)
square feet per parking space within the facility, including access drives, aisles, ramps and
columns.
(2) Each parking space shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven (7) feet.
(3) Standard sized automobiles.
a. The following minimum requirements for parking spaces, aisles, and parking bays
shall be observed for standard sized automobiles.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-42
Angle of
parking
Width of Space
(feet)
Width of Space
Parallel to Aisle
(feet)
Depth of Spaces
Perpendicular to
Aisle (feet)
Width of Aisle
(feet)
30
9
18.0
17.3
11.0
45
9
12.7
19.8
13.0
60
9
10.4
21.0
18.0
70
9
9.6
21.0
19.0
80
9
9.1
20.3
24.0
90
9
9.0
19.0
25.0
b. Parallel parking spaces.
i. Stall length: Twenty-four (24) feet.
ii. Stall width: Eight (8) feet.
iii. Aisle width: Twelve (12) feet.
c. Cross aisle widths.
i. One-way: Fourteen (14) feet.
ii. Two-way: Twenty-four (24) feet.
d. Ingress and egress driveways shall have a forty-five (45) foot radii on returns.
(4) Compact cars.
a. Where the construction of one hundred (100) or more off-street parking spaces are
required, up to twenty-five (25) percent of the required spaces may be designed for
compact cars. Compact car parking spaces shall be at least eight (8) feet in width and
at least sixteen (16) feet in length designed with an aggregate area of two hundred
fifty (250) square feet per parking space including access drives, aisles, ramps and
columns, and shall be marked with a sign reading "compact cars only".
b. The following minimum requirements for parking spaces, aisles, and parking bays
shall be observed for compact cars.
Angle of
Parking
Width of
Space (feet)
Width of Space
Parallel to Aisle
(feet)
Depth of Spaces
Perpendicular to
aisle (feet)
Width of Aisle
(feet)
30
8
16.0
15.0
11.0
45
8
11.3
17.0
13.0
60
8
9.2
17.9
18.0
70
8
8.5
17.9
19.0
80
8
8.1
17.3
24.0
90
8
8.0
16.0
25.0
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-43
c. Parallel parking spaces.
i. Stall length: Nineteen (19.0) feet.
ii. Stall width: Eight (8.0) feet.
iii. Aisle width: Twelve (12.0) feet.
d. Cross aisle width.
i. One-way: Fourteen (14.0) feet.
ii. Two-way: Twenty-four (24.0) feet.
e. Ingress and egress driveways shall have a forty-five-foot radii on returns.
(5) Handicapped parking spaces. All handicap parking spaces shall comply with the current
Illinois Accessibility Code (IAC) requirements.
(e) Mini-warehouses. The following parking requirements shall be applicable to all mini-warehouses.
(1) All access routes leading from public streets or alleys to mini-warehouses shall be provided
with ten (10) foot wide adjacent parking lanes which shall extend the full length of the access
route.
(2) One-way access routes shall have one travel lane not less than fifteen (15) feet in width in
addition to the ten (10) foot wide parking lane.
(3) All two-way routes serving mini-warehouses shall have two (2) twelve (12) foot wide travel
lanes, each of which shall be provided with an adjacent ten (10) foot wide parking lane.
(f) Landscaping. In all open off-street parking lots, landscaping shall be provided as follows:
(1) A five (5) foot landscaped strip shall be placed between all sidewalks and parking areas.
(2) The interior of the parking lot shall be planted with overstory trees at a ratio of 1 tree for every
10 parking spaces or fraction thereof. They shall be evenly dispersed throughout the parking
area. Small shrubs, flowers and groundcovers other than turf may be planted in the tree
planting beds, in addition to the required overstory tree/s.
(3) Curbed landscaped islands shall be provided at the ends of each row of parking. They shall
be landscaped with trees, shrubs, flowers or groundcover.
(4) All planting areas shall be mulched with shredded bark, wood chips or other all organic
material.
(4) Any portion of the planting area not planted with trees, shrubs, groundcovers or flowers shall be
planted with sod.
(Ord. 0-115-00 ?7 9/25/00, O-37-19 4/8/19)
(g) Screening.
(1) Manufacturing and business districts. All open off-street commercial and industrial parking
areas which abut residential properties (including lots across the street) shall be effectively
screened along the entire boundary of the residential property by a densely planted hedge,
solid masonry wall, or solid fence.
a. Said screening device shall be at least four (4) feet in height and shall not exceed six
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-44
(6) feet in height.
b. Said screening device shall not exceed a height of three (3) feet within twenty-five
(25) feet of driveways, approachways, or intersections.
c. Said wall or fence, if painted, shall be one color.
d. All screening and/or landscaping along the periphery of parking lots with over twenty
(20) spaces shall not constitute more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total
landscaping requirement.
e. All screening and/or landscaping along the periphery of parking lots with twenty (20)
or fewer spaces may be applied toward the total landscaping requirement.
(2) B-4, Office Research District. In addition to the above requirements, all off-street parking in
B-4 Office-Research Districts shall be screened so as to be unobtrusive to passing vehicles.
(h) Maintenance. All parking areas shall be maintained at all times in a broom clean condition without
potholes, broken wheelstops or curbing, or other surface irregularities. All landscaping shall be maintained in a
flourishing condition. Striping shall be visible at all times, and all illumination shall be maintained in
functioning condition. Compliance of state maintenance standards will be enforced through inspections, as
stated in the Building Code.
(i) Design and Maintenance of Single Family Detached Residential Driveways and Single Family
Detached residential off-street parking areas. All residential driveways and residential off-street parking areas
shall conform to the following:
(1) Front yard setback: 5 feet from front lot line/public right of way
(2) Side/rear yard setback: 2 feet from interior side or interior rear lot line, except when a
driveway is shared between 2 adjacent properties
(3) Maximum width at lot line, for a minimum distance of 5 feet: 25 feet
(4) Maximum total width: 30 feet however, in the instance of a 3-car garage, a maximum
total width of 35 feet is permitted. (Ord. 0-13-03, §6, 2/20/07)
(5) Minimum Width: 9 feet (Ord. 0-142-04, §1, 7/6/04)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-45
7.05. Require off-street loading space.
(a) Off-street loading space. In connection with any structure which is to be erected or substantially
altered and which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles,
there shall be provided off-street loading space on the basis of the minimum requirements specified in this
article.
(b) Additional requirements. In addition to section 7.02, required off-street loading berths shall comply
with the following minimum standards.
(1) Size. Each off-street loading berth shall be subject to the following minimum dimensions.
a. Width: Twelve (12) feet.
b. Length: Thirty-three (33) feet.
c. Height (when covered): Fourteen (14) feet.
(2) Access. Each off-street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular
access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movement, subject
to approval by the administrator.
(3) Surfacing. Each off-street loading berth shall be improved with a durable and dustless surface
and graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water according to construction
standards as stated in the Building Code.
(c) Required loading berths. The following uses shall provide, as a minimum, the said amount of offstreet
loading berths.
(1) Hospitals, hotels, motels and similar uses:
a. One berth for ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet
of gross floor area; plus
b. One additional berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet
or fraction thereof.
(2) Banks, business/professional offices and similar uses:
a. One berth for ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet
of gross floor area; plus
b. One additional berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet
or fraction thereof.
(3) Retail, commercial uses, establishments handling the sale and/or consumption of food on the
premises and similar uses:
a. One berth for six thousand (6,000) to ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor
area; or
b. Two (2) berths for ten thousand (10,000) to twenty-five thousand (25,000) square
feet of gross floor area; or
c. Two (2) twelve-foot by fifty-foot berths for twenty-five thousand (25,000) to forty
thousand (40,000) square feet of gross floor area; or
d. Three (3) twelve-foot by fifty-foot berths for forty thousand (40,000) to one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet or fraction one-half (1/2) or more thereof.
(4) Auditoriums, theatres, places of assembly, bowling alleys and similar uses:
a. One berth for ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet
of gross floor area; plus
b. One additional berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet
or fraction thereof.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-46
(5) Industrial, manufacturing, warehouse, storage and similar uses:
a. One berth for ten thousand (10,000) to sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet of gross
floor area; or
b. One twelve-foot by fifty-foot berth for sixteen thousand (16,000) to forty thousand
(40,000) square feet of gross floor area; or
c. Two (2) twelve-foot by fifty-foot berths for forty thousand (40,000) to one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area; plus
d. One additional twelve-foot by fifty-foot [berth] for each additional one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet or fraction thereof.
(6) Undertaking establishments, funeral parlors and similar uses:
a. One eight-foot by twenty-five foot berth for five thousand (5,000) to twenty-five
thousand (25,000) square feet of gross floor area; plus
b. Additional berths to be determined by the administrator.
ARTICLE VIII. SIGNAGE
[Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-127-06, passed on July 17, 2006 replaced Article VIII in its entirety]
8.01. General requirements.
(a) Sign types. For the purposes of this section all signs shall fall into one of the following sign types.
(1) Permanent freestanding; or
(2) Permanent attached; or
(3) Temporary.
(b) Permits. Except where specifically authorized in this Article, it shall be unlawful for any person to
erect, repair, alter, relocate, or maintain within the village any sign or other advertising structure as defined in
this ordinance without first obtaining a building permit.
(1) Fees. The permit application fees for each sign shall be as provided in the fee schedule
supplement to the municipal code.
(2) Illuminated signs. All illuminated signs shall, in addition, be subject to the provisions of the
electrical code of the village and the permit fees required thereunder.
(3) Revocation. The village president and board of trustees are authorized and empowered to
revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this ordinance.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-47
(c) Construction. All signs or advertising structures shall be subject to the construction requirements of
the building code.
(d) Gross surface area calculation. When calculating the gross surface area of a sign, the following
shall be taken into account.
(1) The area within a frame and the width of a frame shall be used to calculate the gross surface
area.
(2) Should letters or graphics be mounted directly on a wall or facia or in any such way as to be
without a frame, the dimensions for calculating the square footage shall be the area contained
within the periphery formed around such letters or graphics bounded by straight lines
connecting the outermost points thereof.
(3) Only one side of a double-faced sign shall be used in computing total surface area, provided
the information on both sides is the same.
(4) The area of a multiple-faced or irregular-shaped signs shall be computed on the basis of the
greatest projected area of any plane passed through the sign face, provided the information on
all sides is the same.
(e) Location.
(1) On-premise requirement. Except where specifically authorized in this Article, all signs or
advertising structures shall be located on the lot being served.
(2) Roof-mounted prohibition. Signs or advertising structures shall not be located on or project
over the roof of a structure.
(3) Wall-painted sign prohibition. Signs shall not be painted directly on the wall of any structure.
(4) Sidewalk area requirement.
a. Signs or advertising structures that require the use of hoisting machines over the
sidewalk shall require, for the protection of the public the sidewalk to be roped off
during the work in question.
b. Under no circumstances, when work is being done pursuant to this section, shall any
hoisting machine be permitted to occupy the sidewalk area.
(5) Obstructions to exits.
a. Signs shall not be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress or
egress from any door, window or fire escape.
b. No signs of any kind shall be attached to a stand pipe or fire escape.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-48
(6) Traffic hazards prohibited.
a. Except where specifically authorized in this Article, signs or other advertising
structures shall not be placed in or above a public right-of-way.
b. Signs or other advertising structures shall not be erected in such a location where
pedestrian/vehicle conflicts occur.
c. Signs or other advertising structures shall not be erected at the intersection of any
street or in such a manner as to distract or obstruct the visibility of traffic signs or
signals or the flow of traffic.
d. Signs or other advertising structures shall not be so worded or phrased in such a
manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
e. The attachment of any balloons, streamers, or similar attention getting device to any
sign permitted within this Article shall be prohibited.
(7) Clearance from power lines. No sign shall be erected within eight (8) feet of any line
conductors, service drops or power lines.
(8) Signs shall not be permitted within or facing side or rear yards unless the front of the building
faces that yard, subject to the following exceptions for signs facing a side yard only:
a. For both single user lots and corner units in unified centers, attached signs shall be
allowed to face the side yard.
b. Signs facing the side yard adjacent to a residential use are not permitted.
(Ord. No. 0-102-13, 8/19/13; Ord. O-135-17, 12/11/17)
(9) No sign shall extend within eighteen (18) inches of a vertical line indicating the end of a
tenant space.
(10) Signs located within public right-of-ways. In addition to all other regulations, those signs
specifically permitted within the public right-of-way shall be subject to the following
restrictions unless specifically authorized by the Village of Palatine. No sign shall be located
within any boulevard landscaped area, median landscaped area, decorative planter, asphalt, or
brick paver area. All signs shall provide a minimum setback of one (1) foot from any curb,
shoulder or sidewalk. No sign shall be posted or attached to any lamppost, utility post, tree,
public structure or building, ground sign, or any other permanent structure.
(f) Illumination of signs. The following regulations shall apply to illuminated signs.
(1) Location. Illuminated signs located on a lot adjacent to any residential district shall not be
operated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. In the event the premises on which
the sign is specifically operating is engaged in the operation of its business, this requirement
shall not apply.
(2) Projection. All illuminated signs shall concentrate the illumination upon the area of the sign
and shall prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-49
(3) Operation. Unless otherwise stated, all illuminated signs shall give off an illumination which
is not intermittent and which is kept stationary or consistent in color.
(4) Goose neck reflectors. Goose neck reflectors and lights shall be permitted on freestanding
signs and attached signs, provided, however, the reflectors shall be provided with devices
concentrating the illumination upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street
or adjacent property.
[Editor’s note: Sub-paragraph (4) “Copy Changes” was deleted by Ord. #0-52-08, §10, 4-21-08, and subparagraph
(5) Goose neck reflectors was renumbered to (4)]
(g) Permanent message boards. All permanent message boards shall conform to the following
requirements.
(1) All message boards shall be included in the gross surface area of signage allowed for a sign.
(2) A permit shall not be required to change the copy on a message board.
(h) Maintenance.
(1) The owner of any sign, whether or not a permit is required, shall be required to maintain such
sign in a safe, presentable and good structural and material condition, as determined by the
administrator.
(2) The owner of any sign regulated by this Article shall be required to have properly painted at
least once every two (2) years all parts and supports of the said sign, unless the same are
galvanized or otherwise made corrosion free.
(4) Any sign not maintained in compliance with these standards shall be removed by the
administrator in accordance with this article.
(i) Electronic Message Boards.
(1) Special Use Requirement. All Electronic Message Boards shall obtain Special Use approval.
(2) Location.
a. Electronic message boards shall be restricted to business uses in the following corridors:
Northwest Highway, Rand Road, Lake Cook Road, and Dundee Road.
b. A minimum three hundred (300) feet of lot frontage along an approved corridor is required. In
the case of a lot with multiple frontages, the sign shall be placed along the approved corridor
frontage only.
c. Electronic message boards signs on multi-user lots shall not contain any other advertising or
signage other than the name of the center or development, in addition to the EMB sign. (Ord.
No. 0-123-15, §1, 10/19/15)
d. A maximum of one (1) electronic message board sign shall be permitted per zoning lot.
e. A minimum of five hundred (500) feet shall be maintained between electronic message board
signs.
f. Electronic message boards shall be prohibited for all residential uses.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-50
g. Electronic message boards shall be located on free standing signs only.
(3) Operation.
a. All illumination shall be consistent in color.
b. The message shall not flash, scroll or scintillate. Illumination representing movement shall be
prohibited. Background illumination shall be prohibited.
c. Any message on an electronic message board shall be displayed for a minimum of fifteen (15)
seconds. (Ord. No. 0-123-15, §1, 10/19/15)
(Ord. No. 0-8-12, §1, 1/9/12)
(4) Size. The electronic message board portion of a sign shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total
sign area.
(5) Existing electronic message boards. All electronic message board (copy change) signs granted Special
Use approval prior to the passing of this ordinance shall be permitted to repair or replace the sign
under the following conditions:
a. The sign shall substantially conform to plans approved by the Special Use Ordinance.
b. All sign operation regulations noted in Section 8.01 (3) shall apply
(Ord. #0-52-08, §11, 4/21/08)
8.02. Permanent signage in residential districts.
(a) Freestanding signs. The following regulations shall apply to all freestanding signs in residential
districts.
(1) Subdivision identification signs.
a. Display. Lettering shall not be more than one foot in height and shall only indicate
the name of the subdivision.
b. Gross surface area. No single subdivision identification sign shall exceed one
hundred (100) square feet in gross surface area.
c. Height. Acceptable height shall be determined by the administrator.
d. Application.
i. Applications for construction of a subdivision identification sign shall be
submitted to the administrator.
ii. Applications shall include a scaled rendering of the subject sign, location
map and a list of construction materials.
iii. The village may require alterations to the submitted plan if it is determined
that such plan is not consistent with public safety.
iv. Upon review by the administrator, the application will be forwarded to the
village board for consideration of approval or disapproval.
e. Ownership and maintenance.
i. As a condition of constructing and installing a subdivision identification
sign, a duly established homeowners association for said subdivision shall
own and maintain the sign; and shall execute an agreement acceptable to the
village board providing for such maintenance.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-51
ii. Failure of homeowners association to satisfactorily perform such agreement
shall constitute grounds for the village to cause the sign's removal.
f. Subdivision signs may be permitted within a public right-of-way by the Village
Council. The Village Council may establish specific conditions of approval,
including, but not limited to, the execution of a License Agreement.
(2) Institutional signs.
a. Total signage. The total gross surface area of all signage shall not exceed one square
foot for each linear foot of lot frontage. A minimum of forty (40) square feet shall be
maintained for all lots.
b. Number of signs. Only one freestanding sign shall be permitted per lot frontage.
(Ord. No. 0-102-13, 8/19/13)
c. Gross surface area. A single freestanding sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet
in gross surface area.
d. Height. The height of a single freestanding sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet.
(3) Nameplates.
a. Number of signs.
i. Only one nameplate shall be permitted per dwelling unit.
ii. Only one nameplate shall be permitted for each dwelling group of six (6) or
more units.
b. Gross surface area.
i. A single nameplate for a dwelling unit shall not exceed one square foot,
except for each permitted or special use, other than residential, a single
nameplate sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area per surface;
nor shall any such sign be so constructed as to have more than two (2)
surfaces.
ii. A single nameplate for a dwelling group shall not exceed six (6) square feet.
(b) Attached signs. Only the following types of permanent attached signs shall be allowed in
residential districts, subject to the following standards.
(1) Institutional signs.
a. Total signage. The total gross surface area of all signage shall not exceed one square
foot for each linear foot of lot frontage. A minimum of forty (40) square feet shall be
maintained for all lots.
b. Number of signs. There is no limit to the number of attached signs allowed on a lot.
c. Gross surface area. A single attached sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in
gross surface area.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-52
(2) Nameplates.
a. Number of signs.
i. Only one nameplate shall be permitted per dwelling unit.
ii. Only one nameplate shall be permitted for each dwelling group of six (6) or
more units.
b. Gross surface area.
i. A single nameplate for a dwelling unit shall not exceed one square foot.
ii. A single nameplate for a dwelling group shall not exceed six (6) square feet.
(c) Illumination of signs. Only non-commercial signs may be illuminated, subject to the provisions of
section 8.01(f).
8.03. Permanent signage in business districts.
(a) Single user lots. The following regulations shall apply to all signage on single user lots in all
business districts.
(1) Total signage.
a. The total gross surface area of all signage shall not exceed one square foot for each
linear foot of lot frontage, except:
i. In B-2 Districts: One and one-half (1.5) feet for each linear foot of lot
frontage.
ii. In B-5 Districts, where a single user lot is less than two (2) acres in lot area:
Two (2) feet for each linear foot of lot frontage.
b. A minimum of forty (40) square feet shall be maintained for all lots.
(2) Freestanding signs.
a. Number of signs. Only one freestanding sign shall be permitted per lot, except:
i. In B-4 Districts where a lot is greater than two (2) acres in lot area: Two (2)
freestanding signs are permitted.
ii. In B-5 Districts where a single user lot is greater than two (2) acres in lot
area: Two (2) freestanding signs are permitted.
b. Display. A sign shall display only information pursuant to the business conducted on
the single user lot.
c. Gross surface area. A single freestanding sign shall not exceed one hundred (100)
square feet in gross surface area, except:
i. In the B-3 District: Eighty (80) feet.
ii. In B-5 Districts where a single user lot is greater than two (2) acres in lot
area:
aa. Single sign. A single freestanding sign shall not exceed one hundred
twenty (120) square feet.
bb. Two (2) signs. If two (2) freestanding signs are erected, the gross
surface area of the second sign shall not exceed sixty (60) square
feet.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-53
d. Height. The height of a freestanding sign shall not exceed twenty (20) feet, except:
i. In B-5 Districts where a single user lot is greater than two (2) acres in lot
area:
aa. Single sign. A single freestanding sign shall not exceed twenty-five
(25) feet.
bb. Two (2) signs. If two (2) freestanding signs are erected, the height
of the second sign shall not exceed twenty (20) feet.
(3) Attached signs.
a. Display. A sign shall display only the name information pursuant to the business
conducted on the single user lot.
b. Gross surface area. A single attached sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square
feet in gross surface area, except in B-5 Districts where a single user lot is greater
than two (2) acres in lot area, a single attached sign shall not exceed one hundred
twenty (120) feet in gross surface area.
(4) Illumination. Signs may be illuminated according to the provisions in section 8.01(f).
(b) Unified center less than two (2) acres. The following regulations shall apply to all signage in a
unified center located on a parcel of land less than two (2) acres in all business districts.
(1) Freestanding signs.
a. Number of signs. Only one freestanding sign shall be permitted.
b. Display. A freestanding sign shall display only the name and location of the unified
center. Except in the B-3 District, the name of an individual tenant located within the
unified center may be displayed on said freestanding sign provided:
i. The gross surface area of the display of the name and location of the unified
center shall be no less than twice the gross surface area of the largest
individual tenant display.
ii. Each individual tenant display shall be a minimum of six (6) square feet in
gross surface area.
iii. All individual tenant displays shall be uniform in size.
iv. Individual tenants with a linear lot frontage of one hundred (100) feet or
greater shall be allowed to display their colored business logo.
v. In the B-3 District, information pursuant to individual tenants in a unified
center two (2) acres or less may not be displayed on freestanding signs.
c. Gross surface area. A single freestanding sign shall not exceed one hundred (100)
square feet in gross surface area, except where the unified center is located in a B-5
District, a single freestanding sign shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square
feet in gross surface area.
d. Height. The height of a freestanding sign shall not exceed twenty (20) feet.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-54
(2) Attached Signs.
a. Number of signs. Only one attached sign shall be permitted per individual store,
except where a store fronts on two (2) public streets, one attached sign shall be
permitted per each frontage.
b. Display. A sign shall display only information pursuant to the individual store located
within said unified center.
c. Gross surface area.
i. Each individual store shall be permitted one square foot of gross surface area
for each linear foot of said store frontage. A minimum of forty (40) square
feet shall be maintained for each individual store.
ii. A single attached sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in
gross surface area.
(3) Illumination. Signs may be illuminated according to the provisions in section 8.01(f).
(c) Unified center two (2) acres to five (5) acres. The following regulations shall apply to all signage in
a unified center on a parcel of land two (2) acres to five (5) acres in all business districts: (Ord. 0-9-11, §1,
2/7/11)
(1) Freestanding signs.
a. Number of signs:
i. In B-1 Districts:
aa. Corner lot: One per street frontage.
bb. Interior lot: One.
ii. In B-2 Districts: Two (2).
iii. In B-5 Districts: Two (2).
b. Display. All freestanding signs shall display only the name and location of the unified
center. Except in B-2 Districts, the name of an individual business shall be allowed
on a freestanding sign for a unified center provided:
i. The business has a linear lot frontage of one hundred (100) feet or greater,
and;
ii. The gross surface area of the display of all individual businesses allowed on
the freestanding sign shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the total gross
surface area of the said sign.
iii. In the B-2 District, information pursuant to individual tenants in a unified
center on a lot two (2) acres or greater may not be displayed on freestanding
signs.
c. Gross surface area.
i. Single sign. A single freestanding sign shall not exceed one hundred (100)
square feet in gross surface area, except in the B-5 District, a single
freestanding sign shall not exceed one-hundred twenty (120) square feet in
gross surface area.
ii. Two (2) signs. If two (2) freestanding signs are erected, the gross surface
area of the second sign shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet.
d. Height.
i. Single sign. A single freestanding sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet
in height.
ii. Two (2) signs. If two (2) freestanding signs are erected, the height of the
second sign shall not exceed twenty (20) feet.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-55
(2) Attached signs.
a. Number of signs. Only one attached sign shall be permitted per individual store.
b. Display. A sign shall display only information pursuant to the individual store located
within said unified center.
c. Gross surface area.
i. Each individual store shall be permitted one square foot of gross surface area
per linear foot of said store frontage. A minimum of forty (40) square feet
shall be maintained for each individual store.
ii. A single attached sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet of
gross surface area, except in the B-5 District, a single attached sign shall not
exceed one-hundred twenty (120) square feet of gross surface area.
iii. All signs proposed for stored with a frontage of one hundred (100) linear
feet or greater shall be entitled to additional individual sign gross surface
area over and above the one hundred (100) square foot maximum allowed
for an individual attached sign according to the following:
aa. Each first floor occupancy of a building is entitled to an additional
fifteen (15) square feet of gross surface area for such unit of ten (10)
feet that the sign is set back from the required minimum front or
side lot line, whichever the sign faces.
bb. In the event a sign faces more than one lot line, the eligibility for
additional surface area shall be based upon the number of feet the
sign is set back from the nearest lot line.
cc. A sign shall be deemed to "face a lot line" if any face of such line is
parallel to the lot line or within ten (10) degrees of parallel thereto.
(3) Illumination. Signs may be illuminated according to the provisions in section 8.01(f).
(d) Unified center five (5) acres or greater. The following regulations shall apply to all signage in a
unified center on a parcel of land five (5) acres or greater in all business districts:
(1) Freestanding signs.
a. Number of signs:
i. In B-1 Districts: Two (2)
ii. In B-2 Districts: Two (2).
iii. In B-5 Districts: Two (2).
iv. Unified centers within the B-1, B-2, and B-5 districts may be allowed to
have a third freestanding provided they meet the following standards:
aa. A minimum of five (5) acres
bb. A minimum of five hundred (500) linear feet of frontage
cc. Provide a minimum of two hundred and fifty (250) feet spacing
between signs. Any relief from this distance shall be subject to
approval by the Village Council.
b. Display. All freestanding signs may display the name of the center and an individual
business on a freestanding sign for a unified center provided:
i. The business has a linear lot frontage of one hundred (100) feet or greater,
and;
ii. The gross surface area of the display of all individual businesses allowed on
the freestanding sign shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the total gross
surface area of the said sign.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-56
c. Gross surface area.
i. Single sign. A single freestanding sign shall not exceed one hundred (100)
square feet in gross surface area, except in the B-5 District, a single
freestanding sign shall not exceed one-hundred twenty (120) square feet in
gross surface area.
ii. Two (2) signs. If two (2) freestanding signs are erected, the gross surface
area of the second sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
iii. If a unified center meets the criteria for three freestanding signs, the gross
surface area of the third sign shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet.
d. Height.
i. Single sign. A single freestanding sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet
in height.
ii. Two (2) signs. If two (2) freestanding signs are erected, the height of the
second sign shall not exceed twenty five feet.
iii. Three signs. If three (3) freestanding signs are erected, the height of the
third sign shall not exceed twenty (20) feet.
(2) Attached signs.
a. Number of signs. Only one attached sign shall be permitted per individual store.
b. Display. A sign shall display only information pursuant to the individual store located
within said unified center.
c. Gross surface area.
i. Each individual store shall be permitted one square foot of gross surface area
per linear foot of said store frontage. A minimum of forty (40) square feet
shall be maintained for each individual store.
ii. A single attached sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet of
gross surface area, except in the B-5 District, a single attached sign shall not
exceed one-hundred twenty (120) square feet of gross surface area.
iii. All signs proposed for stored with a frontage of one hundred (100) linear
feet or greater shall be entitled to additional individual sign gross surface
area over and above the one hundred (100) square foot maximum allowed
for an individual attached sign according to the following:
aa. Each first floor occupancy of a building is entitled to an additional
fifteen (15) square feet of gross surface area for such unit of ten (10)
feet that the sign is set back from the required minimum front or
side lot line, whichever the sign faces.
bb. In the event a sign faces more than one lot line, the eligibility for
additional surface area shall be based upon the number of feet the
sign is set back from the nearest lot line.
cc. A sign shall be deemed to "face a lot line" if any face of such line is
parallel to the lot line or within ten (10) degrees of parallel thereto.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-57
(3) Illumination. Signs may be illuminated according to the provisions in section 8.01(f).
(Ord. 0-9-11, §2, 2/7/11)
(e) Out building in a unified center two (2) acres or greater. The following regulations shall apply to
all signage for single user out buildings in a unified center on a parcel of land two (2) acres or greater in all
business districts. (Ord. 0-9-11, §3, 2/7/11)
(1) Freestanding signs.
a. Number of signs. Only one freestanding sign shall be permitted per lot.
b. Display. A freestanding sign shall display only the name of the business conducted
on the lot.
c. Gross surface area. A single freestanding sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet
in gross surface area, except in the B-2 District, a single freestanding sign shall not
exceed one hundred (100) square feet in gross surface area.
d. Height. The height of a freestanding sign shall not exceed five (5) feet, except that in
the B-2 District, the height of a freestanding sign shall not exceed twenty (20) feet.
(2) Attached signs.
a. Display. Any attached signs shall display only the name of the business conducted on
the lot.
b. Gross surface area. A single attached sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in
gross surface area on each frontage facing a public street, except in the B-2 District, a
single attached sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in gross surface
area on each frontage facing a public street.
c. Number. Only one attached sign per frontage shall be allowed.
(3) Illumination. Signs may be illuminated according to the provisions in section 8.01(f).
(f) All property bounded by Wood Street on the north, Johnson Street on the south, Plum Grove Road
on the east and Smith Street on the west shall be permitted to have awning canopies or marquee signs;
providing a headroom of at least (8) feet and designed to comply with all other restrictions of section 8.03.
(Ord. 0-111-06, §1, 6/26/06; Ord. 0-9-11, §3, 2/7/11)
8.04. Signage in "M", Manufacturing Districts.
(1) Total signage. The total gross surface area of all signage shall not exceed one square foot for each
linear foot of lot frontage. A minimum of forty (40) square feet shall be maintained for all lots.
(2) Freestanding signs.
a. Number of signs. Only one freestanding sign shall be permitted per lot.
b. Display. A freestanding sign shall display only the name of the business conducted
on the lot.
c. Gross surface area. A single freestanding sign shall not exceed one-hundred (100)
square feet in gross surface area.
d. Height. The height of a freestanding sign shall not exceed twenty (20) feet.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-58
(3) Attached signs.
a. Display. An attached sign shall display only the name of the business conducted on
the lot.
b. Gross surface area. A single attached sign shall not exceed one-hundred (100) square
feet in gross surface area.
(4) Illumination. Signs may be illuminated according to the provisions in section 8.01(f).
8.05. Signage in "P", Planned Development Districts.
(a) Residential areas. All residential areas shall conform to the signage regulations for residential
districts unless otherwise stated in the planned development ordinance.
(b) Commercial and business areas. All commercial areas shall conform to the signage regulations for
B-1 Shopping Center Districts unless otherwise stated in the planned development ordinance.
(c) Manufacturing areas. All manufacturing areas shall conform to the signage regulations for
manufacturing districts, unless otherwise stated in the planned development ordinance.
8.06. Temporary signs.
(a) Conflict. If the regulations of this section are in conflict with any other section of this article, the
regulations of this section shall take precedence.
(b) Development signs. The following regulations shall apply to all development signs.
(1) Permits. A permit for a development sign may be issued in connection with:
a. Residential projects of six (6) or more dwelling units.
b. Commercial areas of three (3) acres or more.
c. Industrial areas of ten (10) acres or more.
(2) Number of signs. Only one sign shall be permitted on the project site.
(3) Gross surface area. The sign shall not exceed two-hundred forty (240) square feet in gross
surface area.
(4) Duration. After such time when ninety (90) percent of the project is occupied, the sign shall
be removed.
(5) Illumination. Development signs shall not be illuminated.
(c) Construction signs. Signs denoting the architect, engineer, or contractor when placed upon
work under construction shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area; except in cases where the architect,
engineer and contractor(s) are designated on a single sign, and such single sign shall not exceed forty (40)
square feet in area.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-59
(d) Event signs. Located on private property. The following regulations shall apply to all event signs.
(1) Permits.
a. Permits for an event sign shall be limited to seven (7) days and such sign shall be
removed within twenty-four (24) hours after expiration of the permit, except that a
new business shall be permitted to have an event sign for a thirty-day period as part
of a grand opening promotion.
b. No more than four (4) event sign permits shall be issued for any one lot in any
calendar year.
c. A minimum of fourteen (14) days must elapse before another event sign permit is
issued.
d. In a unified center, no more than one event sign permit shall be issued at any one
time.
(2) Gross surface area.
a. The total gross surface area of all event signs on a lot shall not exceed two hundred
(200) square feet.
b. A single event sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in gross surface
area.
(3) Display. The display contained on any event sign shall pertain only to the business, industry
and pursuit conducted on the lot on which it is located.
(4) Illumination. Event signs shall not be illuminated according to the provisions in section
8.01(f).
(e) Event signs located within a public right-of-way: The following regulations shall apply to all Event
Signs located within a public right-of-way.
(1) Residential Districts: The following regulations shall apply to all Event Signs where the event
takes place within the Village’s residential districts, including, but not limited to, signs
advertising garage sales, yard sales, estate sales, owner made craft sales, and open houses:
i. Number of Signs. The total number of signs for one event shall be limited to five (5).
ii. Gross surface area. Any single sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in gross surface area.
iii. Height. The height of a single sign shall not exceed four (4) feet.
iv. Time Restrictions. Signs shall only be displayed between the hours of 8:00 am and 5:00 pm,
for a period not to exceed three consecutive days.
v. Location, Signs advertising the event shall be subject to the applicable regulations.
vi. Permit. No sign permit shall be required.
vii. Related Restrictions: Please refer to Section 6.05 of Appendix A for additional regulations
regarding Garage Sales, Rummage Sales or Owner Made Craft Sales.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-60
(2) Non-Residential Districts: The following regulations shall apply to all Event Signs where the
event takes place within the Village’s Non-Residential Districts:
i. Number of Signs. A maximum of five (5) signs shall be permitted per Zoning Lot. A
minimum spacing of one hundred (100) feet shall be provided between each Sign.
ii. Gross surface area. Any single sign shall not exceed eight (8)square feet in gross surface area.
iii. Height. The height of a single sign shall not exceed four (4) feet.
iv. Time Restrictions. Signs shall only be displayed between the hours of 8:00 am and 5:00 pm.
Event signs shall be limited to five (5) consecutive days and such sign shall be removed
within twenty-four (24) hours after the event. No more than two (2) event signs shall be
permitted for any one lot in any calendar year. A minimum of fourteen (14) days must elapse
between events. In a unified center, no more than one event shall be displayed at any one
time.
v. Location. Signs advertising the event shall be located within the public right-of-way that is
directly adjacent to the site of the event and shall be subject to other applicable regulations.
vi. Permit. No sign permit shall be required.
(f) Real estate signs. The following regulations shall apply to all real estate signs.
(1) Residential buildings and single vacant lots.
a. Permits. Real estate signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this
section.
b. Number of signs.
i. Interior lots. Only one real estate sign shall be permitted on interior lots.
ii. Corner lots. Two (2) real estate signs shall be permitted on corner lots,
provided there is only one sign per street frontage.
c. Gross surface area. A single real estate sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in
gross surface area.
d. Duration. All real estate signs shall be removed within seven (7) days of the sale or
lease of the premises upon which the sign is located.
e. Illumination. Real estate signs shall not be illuminated.
(2) Commercial buildings and other vacant land.
a. Permits. A permit shall be required.
b. Number of signs. Only one real estate sign shall be permitted.
c. Gross surface area. A single real estate sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in
gross surface area. (Ord. 0-87-09 §2, 7/13/09)
d. Duration. all real estate signs shall be removed within seven (7) days of the sale or
lease of the premises upon which the sign is located.
e. Illumination. Real estate signs shall not be illuminated.
(g) Temporary Directional Signs. Temporary Directional Signs shall be permitted subject to the
review and approval of the Village Manager.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-61
(h) Political signs. The following regulations shall apply to temporary political signs.
(1) Political signs located within the public right of way. Political signs shall be permitted in the
public right-of-way subject to the following regulations. Political signs shall be erected and
displayed not more than seventy-two (72) hours prior to a primary or general municipal election or
a primary or general state/federal election or as may be otherwise authorized or required by law
and shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after such election. The permitted time frame
for erecting and displaying political signs shall apply only to the actual election date and shall not
include any early or absentee balloting permitted as part of the election. Political signs shall not
exceed eight (8) square feet in gross surface area and shall be limited to a maximum height of four
(4) feet. No sign permit shall be required.
(2) Political signs located on private property. Political signs shall be permitted on private property
subject to the following regulations. Political signs shall be erected and displayed not more than
thirty (30) days prior to a primary or general municipal election or a primary or general
state/federal election or as may be otherwise authorized or required by law and shall be removed
within forty-eight (48) hours after such election. The permitted time frame for erecting and
displaying political signs shall apply only to the actual election date and shall not include any early
or absentee balloting permitted as part of the election., except for political signs displayed on
residential property, which shall have no limit on the time duration of display. Political signs shall
not exceed eight (8) square feet in gross surface area and shall be limited to a maximum height of
four (4) feet. No sign permit shall be required. (Ord. 0-178-10, §1, 12/20/10)
(i) Noncommercial signs. The following regulations shall apply to noncommercial signs.
a. The display of noncommercial signs shall be limited to seven (7) days.
b. A noncommercial sign shall be displayed no more than four (4) times in any
calendar year.
c. A minimum of fourteen (14) days must elapse between the posting of a
noncommercial sign on the same property.
d. Noncommercial signs shall be limited to eight (8) square feet in sign area and shall
have a maximum height of four (4) feet.
e. No more than one (1) noncommercial sign shall be permitted on a zoning lot at one
time.
(j) Signs on commercial vehicles and trailers on commercial zoning lots
(1) Signs that placed on, attached to, or affixed upon vehicles, and/or trailers and which are
parked within the public right-of-way, public property, or on private property and where the
use of which is intended to either act as additional signage to direct or attract people to a
business or business activity are not permitted. (NOTE - This shall not include incidental
signage painted or adhered to vehicles, which identifies a business and where the vehicles are
directly used and customarily associated with the business operations taking place on the
subject property)
(2) Vehicles which are not independently maneuverable and either have business signage or do
not shall not be parked in the front or corner side yard. No vehicle shall be parked on a lot for
the apparent purpose of identifying a business.
(Ord. No. 0-8-12, §2, 1/9/12)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-62
8.07. Removal of signs.
(a) Discontinued business signs.
(1) In the event the owner of a sign discontinues business at the place where the sign is located,
the sign shall be removed at the expense of the sign owner or property owner within ten (10)
days after such discontinuance.
(2) In the event said sign is not removed within ten (10) days, the administrator shall cause the
sign to be removed.
(3) The expense of the removal shall be borne by the owner of the sign or property owner, or the
Village shall have the right to place a lien against the property for the cost of said removal.
(4) Said sign shall not be again erected unless a permit is issued for the new installation.
(b) Removal of non-permitted, danger signs. The administrator shall cause the immediate removal of
any sign that endangers the public safety of any sign that is electrically or structurally defective or any sign for
which no permit has been issued.
(c) Removal of signs by village.
(1) Any sign or advertising structure, which is located on property which becomes vacant and
unoccupied or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies,
shall be removed by the administrator.
(2) Upon determination of removal, the administrator shall provide written notification stating
that removal must take place within thirty (30) days upon receipt of such notice.
(3) Failure to comply with such notice within the time specified will cause removal of such sign.
The expense of removal shall be borne by the owner of the sign or property owner.
8.08. Non-conforming signs.
(a) On-site. All on-site nonconforming signs or other advertising structures not otherwise prohibited by
the provisions of this Article shall be removed or altered to conform to the provisions of this article, when:
(1) The sign is changed or altered either in shape, size or content due to a change in the nature of
business conducted on the premises.
(2) The sign is changed or altered either in shape, size, or content due to a change in the name of
the business.
(3) The sign is repaired or altered due to damage.
(4) Three (3) years have elapsed from the effective date of this ordinance.
(b) Off-site. All off-site nonconforming signs or other advertising structures not otherwise prohibited
by the provisions of this article shall be removed so as to conform with the provisions of this article within
three (3) years of the effective date of this ordinance.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-63
8.09. Exempt signs.
The following signs are exempt from the provisions and regulations of this ordinance.
(a) Flags. The flags, emblems, or insignia of any nation or political subdivision or corporate flag.
(b) Memorial signs. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into
any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other non-combustible materials.
(c) Municipal. Municipal signs shall include traffic signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger
and such temporary, emergency or non-advertising signs as may be approved by the village board.
(d) Nameplates. Nameplates shall be exempt provided the sign does not exceed one square foot in
area.
(e) No trespassing/no dumping signs. No trespassing or no dumping signs shall be exempt provided
the sign does not exceed one and one-half (1 1/2) square feet in area per sign and not exceed four (4) in
number per lot.
(f) Occupational signs. Occupational signs denoting only the name and profession of an occupant in a
commercial building or public institutional building, shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
(g) Window promotional signs. Window promotional signs shall be exempt provided they are located
in the interior of the window.
(h) Community signs. Signs installed by the Village of Palatine to identify the Village’s boundaries,
specific areas of interest, or other Village related information.
ARTICLE IX. NONCONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES
9.01. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming uses, buildings or
structures, and to specify those circumstances and conditions under which those nonconforming uses, buildings
or structures which adversely affect the maintenance, development or use and taxable value of other property in
the district in which they are located may be eliminated.
9.02. Authority to continue nonconforming uses and structures.
Any nonconforming use, building or structure which existed lawfully at the time of the adoption of this
amendatory ordinance (April 1, 1988) and which remains nonconforming and any such use, building or
structure which shall become nonconforming upon the adoption of this article, or of any subsequent
amendments thereto, may be continued, subject to the regulations which follow.
9.03. Nonconforming uses within buildings or structures.
(a) Change. The nonconforming use of a building or structure, all or substantially all of which is
designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, may be changed to a use
permitted in that same district. But no:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-64
(1) Change shall not extend or otherwise modify any provision made in this article for elimination
of such nonconforming use. For the purposes of this section only, the R-1 District shall be
considered the most restrictive and the M District the least restrictive district.
(2) Nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use when such
nonconforming use is located in a building or structure, all or substantially all of which
building or structure is designed or intended for a permitted use.
(b) Expansion of nonconforming use. The nonconforming use of part of a building or structure, all or
substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in
which it is located, shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such building or structure nor
changed to any other nonconforming use.
(c) Discontinuance. If a nonconforming use of a building or structure, all or substantially all of which
building or structure is designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in which it is located, is
discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive months, it shall not be renewed, and any subsequent use of the
building or structure shall conform to the use regulations of the district in which the premises are located.
(d) Destroyed. If a building or structure in which a nonconforming use is being conducted, and all or
substantially all of such building or structure is designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in which
it is located, is destroyed or severely damaged to the extent that the cost of restoration of the damaged portion
exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the building or structure, it shall not be renewed, and any subsequent
use of the building or structure shall conform to the use regulations of the district in which the premises are
located.
(e) [Exception.] For the purpose of this ordinance, any use lawfully established on the effective date of
this ordinance which is non-conforming solely by virtue of lacking off-street parking or loading facilities as
required hereinafter for new uses shall not be deemed a non-conforming use.
(f) [Exception] Any structure used as a model home which existed lawfully at the time of the adoption
of this amendatory ordinance (September 25, 2000) shall cease to be used as a model no later than (March 25,
2001), or shall be approved as a Special Use pursuant to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located. (Ord. 0-115-00 ?8, 9/25/00)
9.04. Nonconforming building or structure.
(a) Expansion. A nonconforming building or structure shall not be expanded or otherwise extended
unless it is made to conform with the regulations of the district in which the premises are located.
(b) Destroyed. If a nonconforming building or structure is destroyed or severely damaged to the extent
that the cost of restoration of the damaged portion exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the building or
structure, it shall not be renewed, and any subsequent building or structure shall conform to the regulations of
the district in which the premises are located.
9.05. Nonconforming use of land.
(a) Continuance. The nonconforming use of land not involving a building or structure, or in
connection with which any building or structure thereon is incidental or accessory to the principal use of the
land, may be continued subject to the regulations which follow.
(b) Change. The nonconforming use of land shall not be changed to any other use except to a use
permitted in the district in which the land is located.
(c) Expansion. A nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded or extended beyond the area it
occupies.
(d) Discontinuance. If the nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a period of six (6)
consecutive months, it shall not thereafter be renewed, and any subsequent use of the land shall conform to the
regulations of the district in which the land is located.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-65
ARTICLE X. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
10.01. General requirements of all residential districts.
(a) Dwelling standards.
(1) Every dwelling shall conform to the housing standards established by Chapter 10 of the
Municipal Code.
(2) Every dwelling hereinafter erected or altered shall conform to the building code.
(3) Every dwelling shall be maintained in a neat and orderly condition.
(4) All accessory uses and permitted obstructions shall be utilized in a tasteful manner and shall
not provide a nuisance to any surrounding property.
(b) Building line. Where a building line has been established in the recording of a plat of subdivision,
such building line shall determine the yard requirements of this ordinance and shall be observed.
(1) Where no building line has been established, setback requirements of the particular residential
district shall be followed.
(2) Where there is a conflict between the established building line and the setback of the zoning
district, the more restrictive shall apply.
(c) Structures per lot.
(1) Each lot in every zoning district in this Article X shall be improved with no more than one
principal structure, together with any permissible accessory building.
(2) Accessory structures shall be permitted only with a principal structure.
(3) A residentially zoned parcel of land, whether created as a Lot as defined in the Zoning
Ordinance of the Village of Palatine or whether created by a real estate tax division by Cook
County, which parcel of land is improved with a principal structure, all on or before
December 31, 2005, shall be considered a buildable parcel of land and shall be subject to the
applicable bulk requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. (Ord. 0-37-06, §1,
2/13/06)
(d) Permitted obstructions. For the purpose of residential districts, the following shall not be
considered as obstructions when located in the required yards:
(1) In any required front yard or required side yard abutting a street:
a. Overhanging roof, eave, canopy, awning, gutter, cornice or other architectural feature,
projecting not more than three (3) feet;
b. Fences, in accordance with Section 6.03 of this appendix;
c. Bay windows, projecting not more than two (2) feet;
d. Driveways in accordance with Section 7.04(i) of this appendix;
e. Flagpoles;
f. Landscape features;
g. Retaining walls;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-66
h. Sidewalks, which are permitted to terminate, without a setback, into a public sidewalk at
the property line; (Ord. No. 0-102-13, 8/19/13)
i. Mailboxes;
j. Ornamental light fixtures;
k. Steps or stairs;
l. Stoops, not exceeding nine (9) feet in width and five (5) feet in depth. The stoop may
include a roof, provided the roof does not project more than one (1) foot beyond the
outside edge of the stoop;
m. Landscaping embellishments; including but not limited to steps, arbors or trellises, the
aggregate total of which shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the required yard
area; and
n. Chimneys, projecting not more than three (3) feet.
o. Basketball backboard systems. For the purposes of this Section, typical basketball backboard
systems are contemplated and the measurement shall be taken to the pole. Not withstanding
the provisions of this Section, all existing basketball backboard systems (as of July 21, 2008)
located in the front yard shall not be deemed illegal or non-conforming solely by their
location. (Ord. #0-98-08, §1, 7/21/08)
(2) In any required side yard or required rear yard:
a. Accessory off-street parking;
b. Accessory structures, in compliance with Section 6.01 of this appendix;
c. Overhanging roof, eave, canopy, awning, gutter, cornice or other architectural feature,
projecting not more than three (3) feet;
d. Fences, in accordance with Section 6.03 of this appendix;
e. Bay windows, projecting not more than two (2) feet;
f. Driveways in accordance with Section 7.04 (i) of this appendix;
g. Flagpoles;
h. Landscape features;
i. Retaining walls;
j. Sidewalks;
k. Mailboxes
l. Ornamental light fixtures;
m. Steps or stairs;
n. Stoops, not exceeding four (4) feet in width and four (4) feet in depth. The stoop may
include a roof, provided the roof does not project more than one (1) foot beyond the
outside edge of the stoop.
o. Landscaping embellishments; including but not limited to steps, arbors or trellises, the
aggregate total of which shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the required yard
area;
p. Chimneys, projecting not more than three (3) feet;
q. Patios, decks, and terraces that are 16” or less above grade;
r. Compressor or condenser units and heating pump systems for residential air conditioning
systems and/or heating systems, and permanent electric generators projecting not more than
four (4) feet into the yard and maintaining a minimum two (2) foot setback from any lot line;
(Ord. 0-117-11, §1, 10/10/11)
s. Dumpster enclosures;
t. Laundry drying equipment (rear yard only);
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-67
u. Porches, breezeways, balconies, decks, terraces and patios more than 16” above grade,
greenhouses or any structure permanently attached to the principal building, the aggregate
floor area of which is less than ten (10) percent of the required rear yard area, and located at
least twenty-five (25) feet from the rear lot line, and not encroaching in the required side yard
setback of that district. The principal building or portions therein are not considered as
permitted obstructions. Any addition or portion of the principal structure approved as a
permitted encroachment prior to February 20, 2007 shall be considered as conforming to the
Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 0-84-05, §6, 4/18/05; Ord. 0-60-06, §7, 4/3/06; Ord. 0-13-07, §7,
2/20/07)
v. Basketball backboard systems. For the purposes of this Section, typical basketball backboard
systems are contemplated and the measurement shall be taken to the pole. Notwithstanding
the provisions of this Section, basketball backboard systems shall maintain a minimum (2)
foot setback from the side and rear property lines. (Ord. No. 0-102-13, 8/19/13)
(3) Exceptions to the above permitted obstructions:
a. On a corner lot, no obstruction higher than thirty (30) inches above curb level shall
be located in any portion of a required front or side yard situated within twenty (20)
feet of the lot corners formed by the intersection of any two (2) streets or the street
lines extended.
b. No permitted obstruction other than landscaping and fences shall be located any
closer than two (2) feet to a rear lot line or interior side lot line and no closer than
five (5) feet to a front lot line or side lot line abutting a street. (Ord. 0-60-06, §9,
4/3/06)
(e) Swimming pool standards.
(1) All swimming pools must comply with all applicable standards as stated in the building code.
(2) All swimming pools shall be located in rear or side yards only, and may not be located in a
side yard abutting a street.
(3) Any portion thereof and accessory equipment, such as a deck or filter enclosure, shall not be
located closer than five (5) feet from any rear or side lot line.
(f) Development in residential districts. All excavation, movement of earth, site development and
execution of an erosion and sedimentation control plan in any residential district shall be subject to the rules
and regulations of the erosion and sedimentation control ordinance found in the subdivision ordinance
[Appendix B].
(g) Use of floodplain areas. All properties deemed to be in the floodplain shall be subject to the
regulations of section 4.12 of this ordinance and rules and regulations of the floodplain ordinance found in the
subdivision ordinance [Appendix B].
(h) Temporary Model Home Regulations.
(1) Temporary model homes may only be used to offer for sale, dwelling units located within the
same subdivision or planned unit development in which the model home is located.
(2) Building materials may be stored only within the garage space of each model home but not
upon the lot on which the model is situated.
(3) Sales offices and construction offices may be contained in a model home; provided that the
appearance of the model home is not substantially different from that of the other dwelling
units in the subdivision or planned unit development.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-68
(4) Temporary off-street parking facilities shall be provided containing not less than 5 parking
spaces, subject to Section 7.04 of the Palatine Zoning Ordinance.
(5) Exterior lighting may be used to illuminate the model home; provided that lights are
sufficiently screened so that private dwelling units and traffic are not adversely affected by the
lighting. (Ord. 0-115-00 ?9 9/25/00)
10.02. R-1, Single-Family District.
(a) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Churches; located twenty (20) feet or more from another residential lot, with any dwelling
housing pastors, clergy or oth er administrators located not further than three hundred (300)
feet from the lot of the principal church building.
(3) Institutional uses; the following uses, provided any principal structure shall be located thirty
(30) feet or more from any other lot in a residential district.
a. Public and denominational schools; elementary and high school, including
playgrounds and athletic fields incidental thereto.
b. Public libraries, museums and art galleries.
c. Public parks, public playgrounds and public community centers; including customary
park activities and functions.
(4) Day care facility; when operated on the premises of churches, schools, community centers or
recreational buildings in public parks.
(5) Day care homes.
(6) Village operated facilities; fire and police stations, public works garages, when deemed in the
public interest.
(7) Temporary buildings; for construction purposes not to exceed the duration of construction.
(8) Gardening and other horticultural uses; where no building is involved and when no sale of
products is conducted on the premises.
(9) Group homes, subject to the following:
9.01. No more than four (4) persons plus staff.
9.02. For existing homes that are converted to a Group Home, the residential occupancy
must also comply with the International Property Maintenance Code in terms of
bedroom occupancy, inclusive of residents and staff that regularly sleep overnight.
For new construction, the residential occupancy must comply with the International
Building and International Residential Codes, inclusive of residents and staff that
regularly sleep overnight.
9.03. Licensed or certified by the State of Illinois.
9.04. A minimum distance of one thousand (1,000) feet, measured from lot line to lot line
is maintained between group homes.
9.05 The group home conforms to all provisions outlined in chapter 10 in the Village of
Palatine Code of Ordinances or state licensing standards, if applicable to the use. (O-
92-93 8/9/93)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-69
9.06 Parking for the staff and residents, if applicable, shall be provided on-site and
contained within the subject property of the Group Home (garage parking, driveway,
or other paved parking, as required and permitted by code). Such parking shall
conform to the residential parking requirements found in Article 7 and the lot
coverage and building coverage limitations in Article 10 of the Village of Palatine
Zoning Ordinance. Required parking for group homes shall be calculated at one (1)
parking space per staff per shift and one (1) parking space per resident, maintaining a
car on site. This required parking is reflected in the required parking table found in
Section 7.03 (b) (1) of the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance.
9.07 If the staff and resident parking requirements cannot be met within the boundaries of
the subject property, then a variation shall be required.
9.08 The Group Home shall meet the fire prevention requirements of the International Fire
Code and Life Safety Code, as set forth in Section 10-27 (d) of the Palatine Code of
Ordinances.
(Ord. #0-32-12, §1, 3/12/12)
(b) Accessory uses.
(1) Those customarily incidental to the permitted uses including but not limited to the following:
(2) Private stable: on a lot at least one and one-half (1 1/2) acres in area, and set back one
hundred (100) or more feet from any lot line.
(3) Communication devices; per regulations in section 6.02 of this appendix.
(4) Fences; per regulations in section 6.03 of this appendix.
(5) Home occupations; per regulations in section 6.04 of this appendix.
(6) Garage and rummage sales; per regulations in section 6.05 of this appendix.
(7) Swimming pools; per regulations in section 10.01 of this appendix.
(8) Parking of vehicles; per regulations in Article VII of this appendix.
(9) Signs; per regulations in Article VIII of this appendix.
(c) Special uses. The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the village
council, subject to the standards set forth in section 14.05 of this appendix. (Ord. #0-85-12, §9, 6/18/12)
(1) Monasteries, theological schools, social agencies; or any other similar uses.
(2) Public service facilities; including electric distributing sub-stations, telephone exchanges,
radio and television transmission stations, but not including yards or garages for storage or
service.
(3) Hospitals and sanitoriums; having less than sixty (60) beds.
(4) School office buildings; not including the parking or storage of buses.
(5) Public colleges and universities; for academic instruction.
(6) Swimming pools; owned and utilized by a homeowner's association.
(7) Communication devices; which exceed the height limitations set forth for residential districts.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-70
(8) Fencing; in any front yard or side yard/rear yard abutting a street, except for:
a. Decorative fencing.
b. Temporary fencing; erected to protect any seeding area, with the permission of the
administrator.
(9) Wind energy conversion systems.
(10) Group homes that have five (5) or more persons plus staff, subject to the following:
10.01. A minimum distance of one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet is maintained
between group homes.
10.02 For existing homes that are converted to a Group Home, the residential
occupancy must also comply with the International Property Maintenance
Code in terms of bedroom occupancy, inclusive of residents and staff that
regularly sleep overnight. For new construction, the residential occupancy
must comply with the International Building and International Residential
Codes, inclusive of residents and staff that regularly sleep overnight.
10.03. The group home conforms to all provisions outlined in chapter 10 of the
Code of Ordinances or state licensing standards, if applicable to the use. (O-
92-93 8/9/93)
10.04 Parking for the staff and residents, if applicable, shall be provided on-site
and contained within the subject property of the Group Home (garage
parking, driveway, or other paved parking, as required and permitted by
code). Such parking shall conform to the residential parking requirements
found in Article 7 and the lot coverage and building coverage limitations in
Article 10 of the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance. Required parking for
group homes shall be calculated at one (1) parking space per staff per shift
and one (1) parking space per resident, maintaining a car on site. This
required parking is reflected in the required parking table found in Section
7.03 (b) (1) of the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance.
10.05 If the staff and resident parking requirements cannot be met within the
boundaries of the subject property, then a variation shall be required, in
conjunction with the Special Use for the Group Home.
10.06 The Group Home shall meet the fire prevention requirements of the
International Fire Code and Life Safety Code, as set forth in Section 10-27
(d) of the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
10.07 All Group Homes not required to be licensed or certified by the State of
Illinois shall comply with the licensing and background investigation
requirements of Title 89 Illinois Administrative Code 385 et al. (Illinois
Administrative Code Title 89, Chapter 111, Subchapter D, Part 385
Background Checks.)
(Ord. #0-32-12, §1, 3/12/12)
(11) Reserved. (Ord. #0-85-12, §3, 6/18/12)
(12) Hospice.
(13) Setback reductions; reductions in required yard setbacks shall be conditioned upon a site plan
and shall be assigned to the property, not the current owner(s).
(14) Structures which exceed the permitted rear yard encroachment pursuant to Sec. 10.01 (d)2(u)
(Ord.# 0-4-97, §5, 1-13-97; Ord. #0-138-07, §2, 8/13/07)
(15) Fences in rear yards where the side lot line of said rear yard abuts the side lot line of a front
yard of an adjacent lot, or where the rear lot line of said rear yard abuts the side lot line of a
front yard of an adjacent lot. (Ord.# 0-4-97, §6, 1-13-97)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-71
(16) Non-conforming multifamily dwellings for which legal documentation indicating that the
dwellings conform to the Zoning Ordinance cannot be provided subject to the following
conditions:
16.01 The dwelling shall contain three or fewer dwelling units.
16.02 The dwelling shall have been in continuous use as a multi-family dwelling
since January 1, 1987; and
16.03 The owner of the dwelling shall obtain a rental license from the Health
Department as required by Sec. 10-15 of the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
(Ord.No. 0-32-97, ?1, 3-24-97)
(17) Temporary Model Home/s, pursuant to the regulations of Section 10.01(h). (Ord. 0-115-00
?10, 9/25/00)
(18) Accessory unique use. (Ord. No. 0-115-12, §2, 8/6/12)
(d) Minimum ground floor area per dwelling.
(1) One-story dwellings: One thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) square feet.
(2) Multiple story dwellings: Eight hundred fifty (850) square feet.
(e) Minimum lot area per dwelling.
(1) Lots platted after January 12, 1958: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
(2) Lots platted on or before January 12, 1958: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
(f) Minimum lot width
(1) Lots platted after January 12, 1958: One hundred (100) feet.
(2) Lots platted on or before January 12, 1958: Fifty (50) feet.
(g) Maximum lot coverage:
(1) Single family uses:
a) Maximum building coverage: 25%
b) Maximum lot coverage: 35%
(Ord. 0-54-07, §8, 4/16/07)
(2) All other uses: 30% (Ord. 0-115-00 ?11 9/25/00)
(h) Minimum Setbacks.
(1) Front: Forty (40) feet
(2) Rear: Fifty (50) feet
(3) Corner Side Abutting a Street: Forty (40) feet
(4) Interior Side: Interior side yard setbacks shall be provided as follows:
Lot Width Required Interior Side Yard
91 feet and up 15 feet
76 feet to 90 feet 10 feet
Less than 75 feet 5 feet
(Ord. 0-37-06, §2. 2/13/06)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-72
(i) [Reserved]
(j) Maximum building height: Two and one-half (2 1/2) stories not to exceed thirty (30) feet to the
midpoint of the roof and not to exceed a maximum peak height of forty (40) feet.
(Ord. No. O-147-90, ? 2, 11-26-90; Ord. 0-54-07, §9, 4/16/07)
10.03. R-1A, Single-Family Dwelling District.
(a) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Churches; located twenty (20) feet or more from another residential lot, with any dwelling
housing pastors, clergy or other administrators located not further than three hundred (300)
feet from the lot of the principal church building.
(3) Institutional uses; the following uses, provided any principal structure shall be located thirty
(30) feet or more from any other lot in a residential district.
a. Public and denominational schools; elementary and high school, including
playgrounds and athletic fields incidental thereto.
b. Public libraries, museums and art galleries.
c. Public parks, public playgrounds and public community centers; including customary
park activities and functions.
(4) Day care facility; when operated on the premises of churches, schools, community centers or
recreational buildings in public parks.
(5) Day care homes.
(6) Village-operated facilities; fire and police stations, public works garages, when deemed in the
public interest.
(7) Temporary buildings; for construction purposes not to exceed the duration of construction.
(8) Gardening and other horticultural uses; where no building is involved and when no sale of
products is conducted on the premises.
(9) Group homes, subject to the following:
9.01. No more than four (4) persons plus staff.
9.02. For existing homes that are converted to a Group Home, the residential occupancy
must also comply with the International Property Maintenance Code in terms of
bedroom occupancy, inclusive of residents and staff that regularly sleep overnight.
For new construction, the residential occupancy must comply with the International
Building and International Residential Codes, inclusive of residents and staff that
regularly sleep overnight.
9.03. Licensed or certified by the State of Illinois.
9.04. A minimum distance of one thousand (1,000) feet, measured from lot line to lot line
is maintained between group homes.
9.05 The group home conforms to all provisions outlined in chapter 10 in the Village of
Palatine Code of Ordinances or state licensing standards, if applicable to the use. (O-
92-93 8/9/93)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-73
9.06 Parking for the staff and residents, if applicable, shall be provided on-site and
contained within the subject property of the Group Home (garage parking, driveway,
or other paved parking, as required and permitted by code). Such parking shall
conform to the residential parking requirements found in Article 7 and the lot
coverage and building coverage limitations in Article 10 of the Village of Palatine
Zoning Ordinance. Required parking for group homes shall be calculated at one (1)
parking space per staff per shift and one (1) parking space per resident, maintaining a
car on site. This required parking is reflected in the required parking table found in
Section 7.03 (b) (1) of the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance.
9.07 If the staff and resident parking requirements cannot be met within the boundaries of
the subject property, then a variation shall be required.
9.08 The Group Home shall meet the fire prevention requirements of the International Fire
Code and Life Safety Code, as set forth in Section 10-27 (d) of the Palatine Code of
Ordinances.
(Ord. #0-32-12, §1, 3/12/12)
(10) Reserved. (Ord. #0-85-12, §4 6/18/12)
(11) Hospice.
(b) Accessory uses.
(1) Those customarily incidental to the permitted uses, including but not limited to the following.
(2) Private stable on a lot at least one and one-half (1 1/2) acres in area, and set back one hundred
(100) or more feet from any lot line.
(3) Communication devices; per regulations in section 6.02 of this appendix.
(4) Fences; per regulations in section 6.03 of this appendix.
(5) Home occupations; per regulations in section 6.04 of this appendix.
(6) Garage and rummage sales; per regulations in section 6.05 of this appendix.
(7) Swimming pools; per regulations in section 10.01 of this appendix.
(8) Parking of vehicles; per regulations in Article VII of this appendix.
(9) Signs; per regulations in Article VIII of this appendix.
(c) Special uses. The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the village
board, subject to the standards set forth in section 14.05 of this ordinance:
(1) Monasteries, theological schools, social agencies; or any other similar uses.
(2) Public service facilities; including electric distributing sub-stations, telephone exchanges,
radio and television transmission stations, but not including yards or garages for storage or
service.
(3) Hospitals and sanitoriums; having less than sixty (60) beds.
(4) School office buildings; not including the parking or storage of buses.
(5) Public colleges and universities; for academic instruction.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-74
(6) Swimming pools; owned and utilized by a homeowner's association.
(7) Communication devices; which exceed the height limitations set forth for residential districts.
(8) Fencing; in any front yard except for:
a. Decorative fencing.
b. Temporary fencing; erected to protect any seeding area, with the permission of the
administrator.
(9) Wind energy conversion systems.
(10) Group homes that have five (5) or more persons plus staff, subject to the following:
10.01. A minimum distance of one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet is maintained
between group homes.
10.02 For existing homes that are converted to a Group Home, the residential
occupancy must also comply with the International Property Maintenance
Code in terms of bedroom occupancy, inclusive of residents and staff that
regularly sleep overnight. For new construction, the residential occupancy
must comply with the International Building and International Residential
Codes, inclusive of residents and staff that regularly sleep overnight.
10.03. The group home conforms to all provisions outlined in chapter 10 of the
Code of Ordinances or state licensing standards, if applicable to the use. (O-
92-93 8/9/93)
10.04 Parking for the staff and residents, if applicable, shall be provided on-site
and contained within the subject property of the Group Home (garage
parking, driveway, or other paved parking, as required and permitted by
code). Such parking shall conform to the residential parking requirements
found in Article 7 and the lot coverage and building coverage limitations in
Article 10 of the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance. Required parking for
group homes shall be calculated at one (1) parking space per staff per shift
and one (1) parking space per resident, maintaining a car on site. This
required parking is reflected in the required parking table found in Section
7.03 (b) (1) of the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance.
10.05 If the staff and resident parking requirements cannot be met within the
boundaries of the subject property, then a variation shall be required, in
conjunction with the Special Use for the Group Home.
10.06 The Group Home shall meet the fire prevention requirements of the
International Fire Code and Life Safety Code, as set forth in Section 10-27
(d) of the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
10.07 All Group Homes not required to be licensed or certified by the State of
Illinois shall comply with the licensing and background investigation
requirements of Title 89 Illinois Administrative Code 385 et al. (Illinois
Administrative Code Title 89, Chapter 111, Subchapter D, Part 385
Background Checks.)
(Ord. #0-32-12, §1, 3/12/12)
(11) Setback reductions; reductions in required yard setbacks shall be conditioned upon a site plan
and shall be assigned to the property, not the current owner(s).
(12) Structures which exceed the permitted rear yard encroachment pursuant to Sec. 10.01 (d)2(u)
(Ord.No. 0-4-97, ?5, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 0-138-07, §3, 8/13/07)
(13) Fences in rear yards where the side lot line of said rear yard abuts the side lot line of a front
yard of an adjacent lot, or where the rear lot line of said rear yard abuts the side lot line of a
front yard of an adjacent lot. (Ord.No. 0-4-97, ?6, 1-13-97)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-75
(14) Non-conforming multifamily dwellings for which legal documentation indicating that the
dwellings conform to the Zoning Ordinance cannot be provided subject to the following
conditions:
14.01 The dwelling shall contain three or fewer dwelling units.
14.02 The dwelling shall have been in continuous use as a multi-family dwelling
since January 1, 1987; and
14.03 The owner of the dwelling shall obtain a rental license from the Health
Department as required by Sec. 10-15 of the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
(Ord.No. 0-32-97, ?1, 3-24-97)
(15) Temporary Model Home/s, subject to the regulations in Section 10.01 (h). (Ord. 0-115-00
?12, 9/25/00)
(16) Accessory unique use. (Ord. No. 0-115-12, §3, 8/6/12)
(d) Minimum ground floor area per dwelling unit.
(1) One-story dwellings: One thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet.
(2) Multiple story dwellings: Eight hundred fifty (850) square feet.
(e) Minimum lot area per dwelling: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
(f) Minimum lot width: Ninety (90) feet.
(g) Maximum lot coverage:
(1) Single family uses:
a) Maximum building coverage: 30%
b) Maximum lot coverage: 40%
(Ord. 0-54-07, §10, 4/16/07)
(2) All other uses: 30% (Ord. 0-115-00 ?13 9/25/00)
(h) Minimum Setbacks.
(1) Front: Thirty (30) feet
(2) Rear: Forty-five (45) feet
(3) Side:
(a) Interior lots: Ten (10) feet on one side; twenty-five (25) feet total on both sides.
(b) Corner lots:
(i) Interior side: ten (10) feet
(ii) Side abutting street: thirty-five (35) feet
(Ord. 0-37-06, §3, 2/13/06)
(i) [Reserved.]
(j) Maximum building height: Two and one-half (2 1/2) stories, not to exceed thirty (30) feet to the
midpoint of the roof and not to exceed a maximum peak height of thirty-six (36) feet. (Ord. No. O-147-90, ?
2, 11-26-90; Ord. 0-54-07, §11, 4/16/07)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-76
10.04. R-1B, Single-Family District.
(a) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Churches; located twenty (20) feet or more from another residential lot, with any dwelling
housing pastors, clergy or other administrators located not further than three hundred (300)
feet from the lot of the principal church building.
(3) Institutional uses; the following uses, provided any principal structure shall be located thirty
(30) feet or more from any other lot in a residential district.
a. Public and denominational schools; elementary and high school, including
playgrounds and athletic fields incidental thereto.
b. Public libraries, museums and art galleries.
c. Public parks, public playgrounds and public community centers; including customary
park activities and functions.
(4) Day care facility; when operated on the premises of churches, schools, community centers or
recreational buildings in public parks.
(5) Day care homes.
(6) Village operated facilities; fire and police stations, public works garages, when deemed in the
public interest.
(7) Temporary buildings; for construction purposes not to exceed the duration of construction.
(8) Gardening and other horticultural uses; where no building is involved and when no sale of
products is conducted on the premises.
(9) Group homes, subject to the following:
9.1. No more than four (4) persons plus staff.
9.2. For existing homes that are converted to a Group Home, the residential occupancy
must also comply with the International Property Maintenance Code in terms of
bedroom occupancy, inclusive of residents and staff that regularly sleep overnight.
For new construction, the residential occupancy must comply with the International
Building and International Residential Codes, inclusive of residents and staff that
regularly sleep overnight.
9.3. Licensed or certified by the State of Illinois.
9.4. A minimum distance of one thousand (1,000) feet, measured from lot line to lot line
is maintained between group homes.
9.5 The group home conforms to all provisions outlined in chapter 10 in the Village of
Palatine Code of Ordinances or state licensing standards, if applicable to the use. (O-
92-93 8/9/93)
9.6 Parking for the staff and residents, if applicable, shall be provided on-site and
contained within the subject property of the Group Home (garage parking, driveway,
or other paved parking, as required and permitted by code). Such parking shall
conform to the residential parking requirements found in Article 7 and the lot
coverage and building coverage limitations in Article 10 of the Village of Palatine
Zoning Ordinance. Required parking for group homes shall be calculated at one (1)
parking space per staff per shift and one (1) parking space per resident, maintaining a
car on site. This required parking is reflected in the required parking table found in
Section 7.03 (b) (1) of the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-77
9.7 If the staff and resident parking requirements cannot be met within the boundaries of
the subject property, then a variation shall be required.
9.8 The Group Home shall meet the fire prevention requirements of the International Fire
Code and Life Safety Code, as set forth in Section 10-27 (d) of the Palatine Code of
Ordinances.
(Ord. #0-32-12, §1, 3/12/12)
(b) Accessory uses.
(1) Those customarily incidental to the permitted uses, including but not limited to the following.
(2) Private stable: on a lot at least one and one-half (1 1/2) acres in area, and set back one
hundred (100) or more feet from any lot line.
(3) Communication devices; per regulations in section 6.02 of this ordinance.
(4) Fences; per regulations in section 6.03 of this ordinance.
(5) Home occupations; per regulations in section 6.04 of this ordinance.
(6) Garage and rummage sales; per regulations in section 6.05 of this ordinance.
(7) Swimming pools; per regulations in section 10.01 of this ordinance.
(8) Parking of vehicles; per regulations in Article VII of this ordinance.
(9) Signs; per regulations in Article VIII of this ordinance.
(c) Special uses. The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the village
council, subject to the standards set forth in section 14.05 of this ordinance; (Ord. #0-85-12, §9, 6/18/12)
(1) Monasteries, theological schools, social agencies; or any other similar uses.
(2) Public service facilities; including electric distributing substations, telephone exchanges, radio
and television transmission stations, but not including yards or garages for storage or service.
(3) Hospitals and sanitoriums; having less than sixty (60) beds.
(4) School office buildings; not including the parking or storage of buses.
(5) Public colleges and universities; for academic instruction.
(6) Swimming pools; owned and utilized by a homeowner's association.
(7) Communication devices; which exceed the height limitations set forth for residential districts.
(8) Fencing; in any front yard except for:
a. Decorative fencing.
b. Temporary fencing; erected to protect any seeding area, with the permission of the
administrator.
(9) Wind energy conversion systems.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-78
(10) Group homes that have five (5) or more persons plus staff, subject to the following:
10.01. A minimum distance of one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet is maintained
between group homes.
10.02 For existing homes that are converted to a Group Home, the residential
occupancy must also comply with the International Property Maintenance
Code in terms of bedroom occupancy, inclusive of residents and staff that
regularly sleep overnight. For new construction, the residential occupancy
must comply with the International Building and International Residential
Codes, inclusive of residents and staff that regularly sleep overnight.
10.03. The group home conforms to all provisions outlined in chapter 10 of the
Code of Ordinances or state licensing standards, if applicable to the use. (O-
92-93 8/9/93)
10.04 Parking for the staff and residents, if applicable, shall be provided on-site
and contained within the subject property of the Group Home (garage
parking, driveway, or other paved parking, as required and permitted by
code). Such parking shall conform to the residential parking requirements
found in Article 7 and the lot coverage and building coverage limitations in
Article 10 of the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance. Required parking for
group homes shall be calculated at one (1) parking space per staff per shift
and one (1) parking space per resident, maintaining a car on site. This
required parking is reflected in the required parking table found in Section
7.03 (b) (1) of the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance.
10.05 If the staff and resident parking requirements cannot be met within the
boundaries of the subject property, then a variation shall be required, in
conjunction with the Special Use for the Group Home.
10.06 The Group Home shall meet the fire prevention requirements of the
International Fire Code and Life Safety Code, as set forth in Section 10-27
(d) of the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
10.07 All Group Homes not required to be licensed or certified by the State of
Illinois shall comply with the licensing and background investigation
requirements of Title 89 Illinois Administrative Code 385 et al. (Illinois
Administrative Code Title 89, Chapter 111, Subchapter D, Part 385
Background Checks.)
(Ord. #0-32-12, §1, 3/12/12)
(11) Reserved. (Ord. #0-85-12, §5, 6/18/12)
(12) Hospice.
(13) Setback reductions; reductions in required yard setbacks shall be conditioned upon a site plan
and shall be assigned to the property, not the current owner(s).
(14) Structures which exceed the permitted rear yard encroachment pursuant to Sec. 10.01 (d)2(u)
(Ord.No. 0-4-97, ?5, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 0-138-07, §4, 8/13/07)
(15) Fences in rear yards where the side lot line of said rear yard abuts the side lot line of a front
yard of an adjacent lot, or where the rear lot line of said rear yard abuts the side lot line of a
front yard of an adjacent lot. (Ord.No. 0-4-97, ?6, 1-13-97)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-79
(16) Non-conforming multifamily dwellings for which legal documentation indicating that the
dwellings conform to the Zoning Ordinance cannot be provided subject to the following
conditions:
16.01 The dwelling shall contain three or fewer dwelling units.
16.02 The dwelling shall have been in continuous use as a multi-family dwelling
since January 1, 1987; and
16.03 The owner of the dwelling shall obtain a rental license from the Health
Department as required by Sec. 10-15 of the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
(Ord.No. 0-32-97, ?1, 3-24-97)
(17) Temporary Model Home/s, pursuant to the regulations in Section 10.01 (h).
(Ord. 0-115-00 ?14 9/25/00)
(18) Accessory unique use. (Ord. No. 0-115-12, §4, 8/6/12)
(d) Minimum ground floor area per dwelling.
(1) One-story dwellings: One thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet.
(2) Multiple story dwellings: Eight hundred fifty (850) square feet.
(e) Minimum lot area per dwelling: Fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet. The lot area may be
reduced to twelve thousand (12,000) square feet if the president and board of trustees determine that adequate
public land has been provided within or near the subdivision for park, recreation, school, or other public
purposes, in accordance with Article V of the village subdivision regulations [Appendix B].
(f) Minimum lot width: Eighty-five (85) feet.
(g) Maximum lot coverage:
(1) Single family uses:
a) Maximum building coverage: 30%
b) Maximum lot coverage: 40%
(ORd. 0-54-07, §12, 4/16/07)
(2) All other uses: 30% (Ord. 0-115-00 ?15 9/25/00)
(h) Minimum setbacks.
(1) Front: Thirty (30) feet.
(2) Rear: Forty-five (45) feet.
(3) Side:
a. Interior lots: Ten (10) feet on one side; twenty-five (25) feet total on both sides.
b. Corner lots.
i. Interior side: Ten (10) feet.
ii. Side abutting street: Thirty-five (35) feet.
(i) [Reserved]
(j) Maximum building height: Two and one-half (2 1/2) stories, not to exceed thirty (30) feet to the
midpoint of the roof and not to exceed a maximum peak height of thirty-six (36) feet.
.(Ord. No. O-147-90, ? 2, 11-26-90; Ord. 0-54-07, §13, 4/16/07)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-80
10.05. R-1C, Single-Family District.
(a) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Churches; located twenty (20) feet or more from another residential lot, with any dwelling
housing pastors, clergy or other administrators located not further than three hundred (300)
feet from the lot of the principal church building.
(3) Institutional uses; the following uses, provided any principal structure shall be located thirty
(30) feet or more from any other lot in a residential district.
a. Public and denominational schools; elementary and high school, including
playgrounds and athletic fields incidental thereto.
b. Public libraries, museums and art galleries.
c. Public parks, public playgrounds and public community centers; including customary
park activities and functions.
(4) Day care facility; when operated on the premises of churches, schools, community centers or
recreational buildings in public parks.
(5) Day care homes.
(6) Village operated facilities; fire and police stations, public works garages, when deemed in the
public interest.
(7) Temporary buildings; for construction purposes not to exceed the duration of construction.
(8) Gardening and other horticultural uses; where no building is involved and when no sale of
products is conducted on the premises.
(9) Group homes, subject to the following:
9.1. No more than four (4) persons plus staff.
9.2. For existing homes that are converted to a Group Home, the residential occupancy
must also comply with the International Property Maintenance Code in terms of
bedroom occupancy, inclusive of residents and staff that regularly sleep overnight.
For new construction, the residential occupancy must comply with the International
Building and International Residential Codes, inclusive of residents and staff that
regularly sleep overnight.
9.3. Licensed or certified by the State of Illinois.
9.4. A minimum distance of one thousand (1,000) feet, measured from lot line to lot line
is maintained between group homes.
9.5 The group home conforms to all provisions outlined in chapter 10 in the Village of
Palatine Code of Ordinances or state licensing standards, if applicable to the use. (O-
92-93 8/9/93)
9.6 Parking for the staff and residents, if applicable, shall be provided on-site and
contained within the subject property of the Group Home (garage parking, driveway,
or other paved parking, as required and permitted by code). Such parking shall
conform to the residential parking requirements found in Article 7 and the lot
coverage and building coverage limitations in Article 10 of the Village of Palatine
Zoning Ordinance. Required parking for group homes shall be calculated at one (1)
parking space per staff per shift and one (1) parking space per resident, maintaining a
car on site. This required parking is reflected in the required parking table found in
Section 7.03 (b) (1) of the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-81
9.7 If the staff and resident parking requirements cannot be met within the boundaries of
the subject property, then a variation shall be required.
9.8 The Group Home shall meet the fire prevention requirements of the International Fire
Code and Life Safety Code, as set forth in Section 10-27 (d) of the Palatine Code of
Ordinances.
(Ord. #0-32-12, §1, 3/12/12)
(b) Accessory uses.
(1) Those customarily incidental to the permitted uses, including but not limited to the following.
(2) Private stable: on a lot at least one and one-half (1 1/2) acres in area, and set back one
hundred (100) or more feet from any lot line.
(3) Communication devices; per regulations in section 6.02 of this appendix.
(4) Fences; per regulations in section 6.03 of this appendix.
(5) Home occupations; per regulations in section 6.04 of this appendix.
(6) Garage and rummage sales; per regulations in section 6.05 of this appendix.
(7) Swimming pools; per regulations in section 10.01 of this appendix.
(8) Parking of vehicles; per regulations in Article VII of this appendix.
(9) Signs; per regulations in Article VIII of this appendix.
(c) Special uses. The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the village
council, subject to the standards set forth in section 14.05 of this ordinance: (Ord. #0-85-12, §9, 6/18/12)
(1) Monasteries, theological schools, social agencies; or any other similar uses.
(2) Public service facilities; including electric distributing substations, telephone exchanges, radio
and television transmission stations, but not including yards or garages for storage or service.
(3) Hospitals and sanitoriums; having less than sixty (60) beds.
(4) School office buildings; not including the parking or storage of buses.
(5) Public colleges and universities; for academic instruction.
(6) Swimming pools; owned and utilized by a homeowner's association.
(7) Communication devices; which exceed the height limitations set forth for residential districts.
(8) Fencing; in any front yard except for:
a. Decorative fencing.
b. Temporary fencing; erected to protect any seeding area, with the permission of the
Administrator.
(9) Wind energy conversion systems.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-82
(10) Group homes that have five (5) or more persons plus staff, subject to the following:
10.01. A minimum distance of one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet is maintained
between group homes.
10.02 For existing homes that are converted to a Group Home, the residential
occupancy must also comply with the International Property Maintenance
Code in terms of bedroom occupancy, inclusive of residents and staff that
regularly sleep overnight. For new construction, the residential occupancy
must comply with the International Building and International Residential
Codes, inclusive of residents and staff that regularly sleep overnight.
10.03. The group home conforms to all provisions outlined in chapter 10 of the
Code of Ordinances or state licensing standards, if applicable to the use. (O-
92-93 8/9/93)
10.04 Parking for the staff and residents, if applicable, shall be provided on-site
and contained within the subject property of the Group Home (garage
parking, driveway, or other paved parking, as required and permitted by
code). Such parking shall conform to the residential parking requirements
found in Article 7 and the lot coverage and building coverage limitations in
Article 10 of the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance. Required parking for
group homes shall be calculated at one (1) parking space per staff per shift
and one (1) parking space per resident, maintaining a car on site. This
required parking is reflected in the required parking table found in Section
7.03 (b) (1) of the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance.
10.05 If the staff and resident parking requirements cannot be met within the
boundaries of the subject property, then a variation shall be required, in
conjunction with the Special Use for the Group Home.
10.06 The Group Home shall meet the fire prevention requirements of the
International Fire Code and Life Safety Code, as set forth in Section 10-27
(d) of the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
10.07 All Group Homes not required to be licensed or certified by the State of
Illinois shall comply with the licensing and background investigation
requirements of Title 89 Illinois Administrative Code 385 et al. (Illinois
Administrative Code Title 89, Chapter 111, Subchapter D, Part 385
Background Checks.)
(Ord. #0-32-12, §1, 3/12/12)
(11) Reserved. (Ord. #0-85-12, §6, 6/18/12)
(12) Hospice.
(13) Setback reductions; reductions in required yard setbacks shall be conditioned upon a site plan
and shall be assigned to the property, not the current owner(s).
(14) Structures which exceed the permitted rear yard encroachment pursuant to Sec. 10.01 (d)2(u)
(Ord.No. 0-4-97, ?5, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 0-138-07 §5, 8/13/07)
(15) Fences in rear yards where the side lot line of said rear yard abuts the side lot line of a front
yard of an adjacent lot, or where the rear lot line of said rear yard abuts the side lot line of a
front yard of an adjacent lot. (Ord.No. 0-4-97, ?6, 1-13-97)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-83
(16) Non-conforming multifamily dwellings for which legal documentation indicating that the
dwellings conform to the Zoning Ordinance cannot be provided subject to the following
conditions:
16.01 The dwelling shall contain three or fewer dwelling units.
16.02 The dwelling shall have been in continuous use as a multi-family dwelling
since January 1, 1987; and
16.03 The owner of the dwelling shall obtain a rental license from the Health
Department as required by Sec. 10-15 of the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
(Ord.No. 0-32-97, ?1, 3-24-97)
(17) Temporary Model Home/s, pursuant to the regulations in Section 10.01 (h).
(Ord. 0-115-00 ?16 9/25/00)
(18) Accessory unique use. (Ord. No. 0-115-12, §5, 8/6/12)
(d) Minimum ground floor area per dwelling.
(1) One-story dwellings: One thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet.
(2) Multiple story dwellings: Eight hundred fifty (850) square feet.
(e) Minimum lot area per dwelling: Eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet.
(f) Minimum lot width: Sixty-six (66) feet.
(g) Maximum lot coverage:
(1) Single family uses:
a) Maximum building coverage: 25%
b) Maximum lot coverage: 35%
(Ord. 0-54-07, §14, 4/16/07)
(2) All other uses: 30% (Ord. 0-115-00 ?17 9/25/00)
(h) Minimum setbacks.
(1) Front: Forty (40) feet.
(2) Rear: Forty-five (45) feet.
(3) Side:
a. Interior lots: Five (5) feet.
b. Corner lots:
i. Interior side: Five (5) feet.
ii. Side abutting street: Twenty (20) feet.
(i) Maximum building height: Two and one-half (2 1/2) stories not to exceed thirty (30) feet to the
midpoint of the roof and not to exceed a maximum peak height of thirty-six (36) feet.
.(Ord. No. O-147-90, ? 2, 11-26-90; Ord. 0-54-07, §7, 4/16/07)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-84
10.06. R-2, Single-Family Dwelling District.
(a) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted. Those permitted in an R-1 District.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Churches; located twenty (20) feet or more from another residential lot, with any dwelling
housing pastors, clergy or other administrators located not further than three hundred (300)
feet from the lot of the principal church building.
(3) Institutional uses; the following uses, provided any principal structure shall be located thirty
(30) feet or more from any other lot in a residential district.
a. Public and denominational schools; elementary and high school, including
playgrounds and athletic fields incidental thereto.
b. Public libraries, museums and art galleries.
c. Public parks, public playgrounds and public community centers; including customary
park activities and functions.
(4) Day care facility; when operated on the premises of churches, schools, community centers and
recreational buildings in public parks.
(5) Day care homes.
(6) Village operated facilities; fire and police stations, public works garages, when deemed in the
public interest.
(7) Temporary buildings; for construction purposes not to exceed the duration of construction.
(8) Gardening and other horticultural uses; where no building is involved and when no sale of
products is conducted on the premises.
(9) Group homes, subject to the following:
9.01. No more than four (4) persons plus staff.
9.02. For existing homes that are converted to a Group Home, the residential occupancy
must also comply with the International Property Maintenance Code in terms of
bedroom occupancy, inclusive of residents and staff that regularly sleep overnight.
For new construction, the residential occupancy must comply with the International
Building and International Residential Codes, inclusive of residents and staff that
regularly sleep overnight.
9.03. Licensed or certified by the State of Illinois.
9.04. A minimum distance of one thousand (1,000) feet, measured from lot line to lot line
is maintained between group homes.
9.05 The group home conforms to all provisions outlined in chapter 10 in the Village of
Palatine Code of Ordinances or state licensing standards, if applicable to the use. (O-
92-93 8/9/93)
9.06 Parking for the staff and residents, if applicable, shall be provided on-site and
contained within the subject property of the Group Home (garage parking, driveway,
or other paved parking, as required and permitted by code). Such parking shall
conform to the residential parking requirements found in Article 7 and the lot
coverage and building coverage limitations in Article 10 of the Village of Palatine
Zoning Ordinance. Required parking for group homes shall be calculated at one (1)
parking space per staff per shift and one (1) parking space per resident, maintaining a
car on site. This required parking is reflected in the required parking table found in
Section 7.03 (b) (1) of the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-85
9.07 If the staff and resident parking requirements cannot be met within the boundaries of
the subject property, then a variation shall be required.
9.08 The Group Home shall meet the fire prevention requirements of the International Fire
Code and Life Safety Code, as set forth in Section 10-27 (d) of the Palatine Code of
Ordinances.
(Ord. #0-32-12, §1, 3/12/12)
(b) Accessory uses.
(1) Those customarily incidental to the permitted uses, including but not limited to the following.
(2) Private stable: on a lot at least one and one-half (1 1/2) acres in area, and set back one
hundred (100) or more feet from any lot line.
(3) Communication devices; per regulations in section 6.02 of this appendix.
(4) Fences; per regulations in section 6.03 of this appendix.
(5) Home occupations; per regulations in section 6.04 of this appendix.
(6) Garage and rummage sales; per regulations in section 6.05 of this appendix.
(7) Swimming pools; per regulations in section 10.01 of this appendix.
(8) Parking of vehicles; per regulations in Article VII of this appendix.
(9) Signs; per regulations in Article VIII of this appendix.
(c) Special uses. The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the village
council, subject to the standards set forth in section 14.05 of this appendix: (Ord. #0-85-12, §9, 6/18/12)
(1) Monasteries, theological schools, social agencies; or any other similar uses.
(2) Public service facilities; including electric distributing sub-stations, telephone exchanges,
radio and television transmission stations, but not including yards or garages for storage or
service.
(3) Hospitals and sanitoriums; having less than sixty (60) beds.
(4) School office buildings; not including the parking or storage of buses.
(5) Public colleges and universities; for academic instruction.
(6) Swimming pools; owned and utilized by a homeowner's association.
(7) Communication devices; which exceed the height limitations set forth for residential districts.
(8) Fencing; in any front yard except for:
a. Decorative fencing.
b. Temporary fencing; erected to protect any seeding area, with the permission of the
administrator
(9) Wind energy conversion systems.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-86
(10) Group homes that have five (5) or more persons plus staff, subject to the following:
10.01. A minimum distance of one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet is maintained
between group homes.
10.02 For existing homes that are converted to a Group Home, the residential
occupancy must also comply with the International Property Maintenance
Code in terms of bedroom occupancy, inclusive of residents and staff that
regularly sleep overnight. For new construction, the residential occupancy
must comply with the International Building and International Residential
Codes, inclusive of residents and staff that regularly sleep overnight.
10.03. The group home conforms to all provisions outlined in chapter 10 of the
Code of Ordinances or state licensing standards, if applicable to the use. (O-
92-93 8/9/93)
10.04 Parking for the staff and residents, if applicable, shall be provided on-site
and contained within the subject property of the Group Home (garage
parking, driveway, or other paved parking, as required and permitted by
code). Such parking shall conform to the residential parking requirements
found in Article 7 and the lot coverage and building coverage limitations in
Article 10 of the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance. Required parking for
group homes shall be calculated at one (1) parking space per staff per shift
and one (1) parking space per resident, maintaining a car on site. This
required parking is reflected in the required parking table found in Section
7.03 (b) (1) of the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance.
10.05 If the staff and resident parking requirements cannot be met within the
boundaries of the subject property, then a variation shall be required, in
conjunction with the Special Use for the Group Home.
10.06 The Group Home shall meet the fire prevention requirements of the
International Fire Code and Life Safety Code, as set forth in Section 10-27
(d) of the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
10.07 All Group Homes not required to be licensed or certified by the State of
Illinois shall comply with the licensing and background investigation
requirements of Title 89 Illinois Administrative Code 385 et al. (Illinois
Administrative Code Title 89, Chapter 111, Subchapter D, Part 385
Background Checks.)
(Ord. #0-32-12, §1, 3/12/12)
(11) Reserved. (Ord. #0-85-12, §7, 6/18/12)
(12) Hospice.
(13) Setback reductions; reductions in required yard setbacks shall be conditioned upon a site plan
and shall be assigned to the property, not the current owner(s).
(14) Structures which exceed the permitted rear yard encroachment pursuant to Sec. 10.01 (d)2(u)
(Ord.No. 0-4-97, ?5, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 0-138-07 §6, 8/13/07)
(15) Fences in rear yards where the side lot line of said rear yard abuts the side lot line of a front
yard of an adjacent lot, or where the rear lot line of said rear yard abuts the side lot line of a
front yard of an adjacent lot. (Ord.No. 0-4-97, ?6, 1-13-97)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-87
(16) Non-conforming multifamily dwellings for which legal documentation indicating that the
dwellings conform to the Zoning Ordinance cannot be provided subject to the following
conditions:
16.01 The dwelling shall contain three or fewer dwelling units.
16.02 The dwelling shall have been in continuous use as a multi-family dwelling
since January 1, 1987; and
16.03 The owner of the dwelling shall obtain a rental license from the Health
Department as required by Sec. 10-15 of the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 0-32-97, ?1, 3-24-97)
(17) Temporary Model Home/s, pursuant to the regulations in Section 10.01 (h).
(Ord. 0-115-00 ?18 9/25/00)
(18) Accessory unique use. (Ord. No. 0-115-12, §6, 8/6/12)
(d) Minimum ground floor area per dwelling
(1) One-story dwellings: One thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet.
(2) Multiple story dwellings: Eight hundred fifty (850) square feet.
(e) Minimum lot area per dwelling.
(1) Lots platted after January 12, 1958:
a. Interior lots: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
b. Corner lots: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
(2) Lots platted on or before January 12, 1958: Five thousand four hundred (5,400) square feet.
(f) Minimum lot width.
(1) Lots platted after January 12, 1958:
a. Interior lots: Seventy-five (75) feet.
b. Corner lots: Eighty-five (85) feet.
(2) Lots platted on or before January 12, 1958: Fifty (50) feet.
(g) Maximum lot coverage:
(1) Single family uses:
a) Maximum building coverage: 35%
b) Maximum lot coverage: 45%
(Ord. 0-54-07, §16, 4/16/07)
(2) All other uses: 30% (Ord. 0-115-00 ?18 9/25/00)
(h) Minimum Setbacks.
1. Front: Thirty (30) feet
2. Rear: Forty (40) feet
3. Interior Side: Interior side yard setbacks shall be provided as follows:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-88
Lot Width Required Interior Side Yard
67 feet or greater 10 feet
Less than 67 feet 5 feet
4) Side abutting street: Twenty (20) feet, although side yards abutting state or county
highways shall have a minimum setback of thirty (30) feet.“
(Ord. 0-37-06, §4, 2/13/06; Ord. 0-111-06, §2, 6/26/06)
(i) Maximum building height: Two and one-half (2 1/2) stories not to exceed thirty (30) feet to the
midpoint of the roof and not to exceed a maximum peak height of thirty-six (36) feet.
.(Ord. No. O-147-90, ? 2, 11-26-90; Ord. 0-54-07, §17, 4/16/07)
10.07. R-3, High Density Multifamily District.
(a) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Attached single-family dwellings.
(3) Two-family dwellings.
(4) Multiple-family dwellings.
(5) Churches; located twenty (20) feet or more from another residential lot, with any dwelling
housing pastors, clergy or other administrators located not further than three hundred (300)
feet from the lot of the principal church building.
(6) Institutional uses; the following uses, provided any principal structure shall be located thirty
(30) feet or more from any other lot in a residential district.
a. Public and denominational schools; elementary and high school, including
playgrounds and athletic fields incidental thereto.
b. Public libraries, museums and art galleries.
c. Public parks, public playgrounds and public community centers; including customary
park activities and functions.
(7) Day care facility; when operated on the premises of churches, schools, community centers or
recreational buildings in public parks.
(8) Day care homes.
(9) Village operated facilities; fire and police stations, public works garages, when deemed in the
public interest.
(10) Temporary buildings; for construction purposes not to exceed the duration of construction.
(11) Gardening and other horticultural uses; where no building is involved and when no sale of
products is conducted on the premises.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-89
(12) Group homes, subject to the following:
12.01. No more than four (4) persons plus staff.
12.02. For existing homes that are converted to a Group Home, the residential occupancy
must also comply with the International Property Maintenance Code in terms of
bedroom occupancy, inclusive of residents and staff that regularly sleep overnight.
For new construction, the residential occupancy must comply with the International
Building and International Residential Codes, inclusive of residents and staff that
regularly sleep overnight.
12.03. Licensed or certified by the State of Illinois.
12.04. A minimum distance of one thousand (1,000) feet, measured from lot line to lot line
is maintained between group homes.
12.05 The group home conforms to all provisions outlined in chapter 10 in the Village of
Palatine Code of Ordinances or state licensing standards, if applicable to the use. (O-
92-93 8/9/93)
12.06 Parking for the staff and residents, if applicable, shall be provided on-site and
contained within the subject property of the Group Home (garage parking, driveway,
or other paved parking, as required and permitted by code). Such parking shall
conform to the residential parking requirements found in Article 7 and the lot
coverage and building coverage limitations in Article 10 of the Village of Palatine
Zoning Ordinance. Required parking for group homes shall be calculated at one (1)
parking space per staff per shift and one (1) parking space per resident, maintaining a
car on site. This required parking is reflected in the required parking table found in
Section 7.03 (b) (1) of the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance.
12.07 If the staff and resident parking requirements cannot be met within the boundaries of
the subject property, then a variation shall be required.
12.08 The Group Home shall meet the fire prevention requirements of the International Fire
Code and Life Safety Code, as set forth in Section 10-27 (d) of the Palatine Code of
Ordinances.
(Ord. #0-32-12, §1, 3/12/12)
(b) Accessory uses.
(1) Those customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, including but not limited to the
following.
(2) Home occupations; per regulations in section 6.04 of this appendix.
(3) Boarding houses.
(4) Signs; per regulations in Article VIII of this appendix.
(5) Private stable: on a lot at least one and one-half (1 1/2) acres in area, and set back one
hundred (100) or more feet from any lot line.
(6) Communication devices; per regulations in section 6.02 of this appendix.
(7) Fences; per regulations in section 6.03 of this appendix.
(8) Garage and rummage sales; per regulations in section 6.05 of this appendix.
(9) Swimming pools; per regulations in section 10.01 of this appendix.
(10) Parking of vehicles; per regulations in Article VII of this appendix.
(11) Dumpster enclosures.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-90
(c) Special uses. The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the village
council, subject to the standards set forth in section 14.05 of this appendix: (Ord. #0-85-12, §9, 6/18/12)
(1) Monasteries, theological schools, social agencies; or any other similar uses.
(2) Montessori school.
(3) Public service facilities; including electric distributing substations, telephone exchanges, radio
and television transmission stations, but not including yards or garages for storage or service.
(4) Hospitals and sanitoriums; having less than sixty (60) beds.
(5) School office buildings; not including the parking or storage of buses.
(6) Offices, professional, with such professional office uses as approved by the village president
and board of trustees. A list of permitted professional office uses shall be incorporated into
the special use ordinance whereby such special use is approved.
(7) Nursery, truck garden or greenhouses.
(8) Day care facility.
(9) Public colleges and universities; for academic instruction.
(10) College fraternities and sororities.
(11) Rest home or nursing home; for children and the aged.
(12) Swimming pools; owned and utilized by a homeowner's association.
(13) Communication devices; which exceed the height limitations set forth for residential districts.
(14) Fencing; in any front yard except for:
a. Decorative fencing.
b. Temporary fencing; erected to protect any seeding area, with the permission of the
administrator.
(15) Wind energy conversion systems.
(16) Group homes that have five (5) or more persons plus staff, subject to the following:
16.01. A minimum distance of one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet is maintained
between group homes.
16.02 For existing homes that are converted to a Group Home, the residential
occupancy must also comply with the International Property Maintenance
Code in terms of bedroom occupancy, inclusive of residents and staff that
regularly sleep overnight. For new construction, the residential occupancy
must comply with the International Building and International Residential
Codes, inclusive of residents and staff that regularly sleep overnight.
16.03. The group home conforms to all provisions outlined in chapter 10 of the
Code of Ordinances or state licensing standards, if applicable to the use. (O-
92-93 8/9/93)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-91
16.04 Parking for the staff and residents, if applicable, shall be provided on-site
and contained within the subject property of the Group Home (garage
parking, driveway, or other paved parking, as required and permitted by
code). Such parking shall conform to the residential parking requirements
found in Article 7 and the lot coverage and building coverage limitations in
Article 10 of the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance. Required parking for
group homes shall be calculated at one (1) parking space per staff per shift
and one (1) parking space per resident, maintaining a car on site. This
required parking is reflected in the required parking table found in Section
7.03 (b) (1) of the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance.
16.05 If the staff and resident parking requirements cannot be met within the
boundaries of the subject property, then a variation shall be required, in
conjunction with the Special Use for the Group Home.
16.06 The Group Home shall meet the fire prevention requirements of the
International Fire Code and Life Safety Code, as set forth in Section 10-27
(d) of the Palatine Code of Ordinances.
16.07 All Group Homes not required to be licensed or certified by the State of
Illinois shall comply with the licensing and background investigation
requirements of Title 89 Illinois Administrative Code 385 et al. (Illinois
Administrative Code Title 89, Chapter 111, Subchapter D, Part 385
Background Checks.)
(Ord. #0-32-12, §1, 3/12/12)
(17) Reserved. (Ord. #0-85-12, §9, 6/18/12)
(18) Hospice.
(19) Setback reductions; reductions in required yard setbacks shall be conditioned upon a site plan
and shall be assigned to the property, not the current owner(s).
(20) Structures which exceed the permitted rear yard encroachment pursuant to Sec. 10.01 (D)(4)c.
(Ord. No. 0-4-97, ?5, 1-13-97)
(21) Fences in rear yards where the side lot line of said rear yard abuts the side lot line of a front
yard of an adjacent lot, or where the rear lot line of said rear yard abuts the side lot line of a
front yard of an adjacent lot. (Ord. No. 0-4-97, ?6, 1-13-97)
(22) Temporary Model Home/s, pursuant to the regulations in Section 10.01 (h).
(Ord. 0-115-00 ?20 9/25/00)
(23) Hair Salons (Ord. 0-93-04, ?1??5/17/04)
(24) Temporary Amusement Events for Non-Residential Properties (Ord. 0-188-04, §1, 9/13/04)
(25) Accessory unique use. (Ord. No. 0-115-12, §7, 8/6/12)
(d) Minimum ground floor area per dwelling unit.
(1) Detached single-family dwellings: Eight hundred (800) square feet.
(2) Multifamily units: Five hundred (500) square feet per unit.
(e) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
(1) Detached single-family dwellings.
a. Lots platted after January 12, 1958: Eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
b. Lots platted on or before January 12, 1958: Four thousand eight hundred (4,800)
square feet.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-92
(2) Multiple-family dwellings.
a. One bedroom and efficiency units: Two thousand one hundred (2,100) square feet
per dwelling unit.
b. Two (2) bedroom units: Two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet per dwelling
unit.
c. Three (3) and four (4) bedroom units: Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
(f) Minimum lot width: None.
(g) Maximum lot coverage:
(1) Maximum floor area ratio
(a) Multiple family uses: .50
(2) Maximum lot coverage
(a) Single family-attached uses: 40%
(maximum of 8-units)
(b) All other uses: 30% (Ord. 0-115-00 ?21 9/25/00)
(h) Minimum setbacks.
(1) Interior lots.
a. Front: Thirty (30) feet.
b. Rear: Forty (40) feet.
c. Side: Six (6) feet on one side; sixteen (16) feet total on both sides.
(2) Corner lots.
a. Front; Thirty (30) feet.
b. Rear: Twenty (20) feet, if interior side yard of six (6) feet is provided; ten (10) feet if
interior side yard of twenty (20) feet is provided.
c. Side: Twenty-five (25) feet.
(i) [Reserved.]
(j) Maximum building height: Four (4) stories not to exceed fifty (50) feet.
(Ord. No. O-44-89, ? 1, 4-24-89; Ord. No. O-147-90, ? 2, 11-26-90)
ARTICLE XI. BUSINESS DISTRICTS
11.01. General requirements of all business districts.
(a) Conformance to other laws. All permitted uses, special uses, and accessory uses permitted herein
shall conform to all federal, state and local laws. The village has the right to disallow or suspend those uses
which are in violation of other laws.
(b) Business operating standards.
(1) There shall be no manufacture, processing or treatment of products other than those which are
clearly incidental and essential to retail business conducted on the same premises.
(2) Such uses shall not be objectionable due to odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration or other similar
causes.
(3) No unified music system, speaker or communication device shall be heard outside the
boundaries of the site.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-93
(c) Outside sales and display. All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandising sales
and display shall be conducted wholly within enclosed structures, unless otherwise qualifying under one or
more of the following:
(1) Exceptions; when the use is permitted only when outside sales are accessory to inside sales on
the same lot.
a. The sale of automotive fuels, lubricants and coolants in automotive service stations.
b. Nursery stock, garden and farm equipment, and outdoor furniture and recreation
equipment.
c. New or used automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, trailers, boats or any other motor
vehicles; all in operable condition.
d. Vending machines; in conjunction with another permitted use.
e. Outdoor recreational uses; including swimming pools, golf courses, golf driving
ranges and miniature golf and parking lots.
f. Drive-in and drive-through restaurants.
g. Drive-in financial institutions.
h. Building materials; when enclosed by a fence.
j. Community-wide annual promotional events; not exceeding ten (10) consecutive
days in duration, with the permission of the village board at least ten (10) days in
advance.
(2) Standards. All outside sales and display shall conform to the following standards:
a. All items shall be displayed wholly upon the parcel on which the principal sales
structure is located.
b. Items shall not be displayed or sold upon public property or within any public rightof-
way, except for annual promotional events referred to in section 11.01(c)(1)j.
c. All merchandise displayed outdoors shall be so displayed in a neat and orderly
manner.
(d) Outdoor Restaurant Seating in the Public Right-of-Way
(1) Permitted Use. Outdoor seating in the public right-of-way shall only be permitted within the
area bound by Wood Street on the north, Smith Street on the west, Plum Grove Road on the
east, and Johnson Street on the south. The outdoor seating shall be incidental to the operation
of a restaurant on private property, only along the frontage of said restaurant, and subject to
the design standards in Section 11.01 (d) (4).
(2) Application. A complete Outdoor Seating application shall be submitted and include the
following:
(a) Scaled site plan indicating table locations/dimensions and the minimum open portion of
the sidewalk in compliance with Section 11.01(d)(4)(b). The site plan shall also include a
designated smoking area in compliance with the Village’s Clean Indoor Air Ordinance
(b) Annual fee of $100
(c) Any other information deemed necessary by the Village
(3) Administrative Review. Within 30 days following the submission of all documentation
required in Section 11.01 (d) (2), the Zoning Administrator shall conduct an internal review
and complete the following:
(a) Provide a summary of any concerns generated by the internal review to the applicant, or
(b) Forward a determination and any recommended conditions to the Village Manager for
final consideration.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-94
(c) If the Outdoor seating application is found to comply with the Outdoor Seating
Design and Operation Standards, as well as any other recommended conditions, the
Village Manager shall approve and issue the License.
(d) If an Outdoor Seating application does not meet the minimum Ordinance
requirements, the Village Manager shall deny said application. The Village
Manager’s denial may be appealed to the Village Council, at the request of the
Petitioner, but in no instance shall the proposed site plan interfere with accessibility
or pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(4) Outdoor Seating Design and Operation Standards. All outdoor seating located in the public
right-of-way shall be subject to the following standards:
(a) Maintenance. The public right-of-way associated with the outdoor seating shall be
kept in a neat, orderly and clean condition. General maintenance and upkeep shall be
the responsibility of the business owner. General maintenance and upkeep does not
include the repair, replacement, or other improvement to any public infrastructure.
(b) Accessibility. The operation of an outdoor seating shall not reduce the open portion
of the public sidewalk to less than the minimum required width identified in the
Illinois Accessibility Code, but in no event shall an outdoor seating use permitted by
this section reduce the open portion of any sidewalk to less than five (5) feet in width.
For the purposes of this subsection, “open portion” shall be defined as the area of
sidewalk lying between the outermost restaurant table or chair placed in its normal
position for use by restaurant patrons and the curb or, if closer, the nearest permanent
obstruction, including, but not limited to, traffic sign, tree or tree well, bicycle rack,
or other natural or manmade object located on or adjacent to the sidewalk or public
right-of-way, except as otherwise authorized by the Village of Palatine through an
approved license agreement. Such restrictions shall not apply to areas where seating
is at the end of a sidewalk area and the required five (5) foot width is provided closer
to the building from the seating area.
(c) Outdoor Furnishings. All outdoor furnishings shall be composed of durable and
heavyweight materials.
(d) No Permanent Fixtures. All tables, chairs and other fixtures shall be constructed in
such a manner that they can be easily removed at the end of the lease period or as
required by the Village. Said tables and chairs shall be secured, in a manner
acceptable to the Village, when the subject business is closed.
(e) Outside Storage. In no event shall any food, serving materials, or other restaurant
supplies be stored in the outdoor seating area.
(f) The proposed use shall not unreasonably interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic
or obstruct any means of required ingress or egress in the area as determined by the
Village.
(g) Liquor Sales and Consumption. The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in
the outdoor dining area shall be restricted by the liquor license governing the
restaurant.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-95
(h) Service Materials. The outdoor service of all food and beverages shall utilize the
same serving materials as indoor service.
(i) Outdoor Music. Amplified sound systems shall be no louder than conversation level.
(j) Parking. The Zoning Administrator may waive the parking requirements for outdoor
seating in accordance with Section 7.03 (b) (1).
(k) Public Health and Safety. Any other condition(s) deemed necessary by the Village
Manager to protect the public health, safety and welfare may be imposed.
(5) Additional Requirements for Outdoor Seating in Public Right-of-Way. The applicant shall
enter into a license agreement for use of the public right-of-way. The license agreement shall
address the following:
(a) License Period and permitted hours of operation. Outdoor seating shall be permitted
from March 1 through November 30 of each year that said lease is in effect and the
allowable hours of operation shall be consistent with a licensee’s applicable liquor
license hours of operation.
(b) Insurance. The applicant shall provide the Village evidence of general liability and
dram shop insurance (if required) in an amount acceptable to the Village Attorney.
The policy shall include the Village shall be a named insured and insure the Village
against any liability resulting from the operation of the outdoor seating.
(c) Hold Harmless. The applicant shall agree to indemnify the Village from any
liabilities that might arise that are related to the outdoor seating.
(6) Expiration and Revocation. An outdoor seating agreement shall be subject to an annual review
and may be revoked by the Village at any time upon thirty (30) days advanced written notice.
(Ord. No. 0-54-08, §1, 4/21/08; Ord. No. 0-28-16 3/14 16)
(e) Standards for storage of vehicles for sale.
(1) There shall be at least three hundred (300) square feet of lot area per each outdoor displayed
vehicle, not including structural coverage in the calculation.
(2) Outdoor storage of inoperable vehicles shall not be allowed unless adequate screening is
provided.
(f) Permitted obstructions. For the purpose of business districts, the following shall not be considered
as obstructions when located in the required yards.
(1) In any required yard.
a. Landscaping embellishments; including but not limited to steps, arbors or trellises,
the aggregate total of which shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the required
yard area.
b. Flag poles.
c. Lighting standards.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-96
d. Signs.
e. Accessory off-street parking; open.
(2) In any required front yard.
a. Overhanging roof eaves, awnings or canopies; projecting not more than three (3) feet
into the yard.
b. Decorative fencing.
(3) In any required side yard.
a. Overhanging roof eaves, awnings or canopies; projecting not more than thirty (30)
percent of the required side yard width, with a maximum three (3) feet overhang.
b. Accessory structures; garages, tool rooms or other similar structures pursuant to
standards set forth in section 6.01 of this ordinance.
c. Fences.
d. Compressor or condenser units; for air conditioning systems, except in a side yard
abutting a street.
e. Dumpster enclosures.
(4) In any required rear yard.
a. Accessory structures; garages, tool rooms or other similar structures pursuant to
standards set forth in section 6.01 of this ordinance.
b. Portions of the principal building; porches, breezeways, balconies, greenhouses or
any structure permanently attached to the principal building, the aggregate area of
which is less than ten (10) percent of the required rear yard area, and located at least
twenty-five (25) feet from the rear lot line, and not encroaching the side yard setback
of that district.
c. Fences.
d. Recreational equipment; necessary for the permitted use.
e. Overhanging roof eaves, awnings or canopies; projecting not more than three (3) feet
into the yard.
f. Compressor or condenser units; for air conditioning systems.
g. Dumpster enclosures.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-97
(5) Exceptions to the above permitted obstructions.
a. On a corner lot, no obstruction higher than thirty (30) inches above the curb level
shall be located in any portion of a required front or side yard situated within twenty
(20) feet of the lot corners formed by the intersection of any two (2) streets, or the
intersection of the street lines extended.
b. For the purpose of permitted obstructions in the side yard abutting a street, the front
yard obstructions shall be followed.
c. No permitted obstruction, other than the principal building, shall be located closer
than five (5) feet to any lot line; except fences. If the principal building is set back
five (5) feet or less, then the permitted obstruction setback is two (2) feet from any lot
line.
(g) Compatible uses. A proposed use which is not specified as a permitted, special or accessory use in
a particular business district shall be considered compatible if it meets the following standards, as determined
by the administrator and ratified by the village board:
(1) The proposed use shall meet the intent of the subject zoning district.
(2) The proposed use shall meet the general requirements of the subject zoning district.
(3) The proposed use shall be consistent with other uses in the subject zoning district.
(4) The proposed use shall not be detrimental to other uses within the subject zoning district.
(5) Any proposed use which is not ratified by the village board shall be considered as a unique
use.
(h) Dumpster enclosures. Before any permit for development is issued, the administrator shall require
that dumpster enclosures be provided in suitable locations to insure the promotion of the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the village.
(i) Development in business districts. All excavation, movement of earth, site development and
execution of an erosion and sedimentation control plan in any business district shall be subject to the rules and
regulations of the erosion and sedimentation control ordinance found in the village subdivision regulations
[Appendix B].
(j) Screening of roof-top units. All mechanical equipment and other similar devices located on any roof
shall be visually and acoustically screened on all sides. Said screening shall be constructed in a manner
acceptable to the administrator. (Ord. No. 0-210-99 ?4 12/13/99)
(k) Use of floodplain areas. All properties deemed to be in the floodplain shall be subject to the
regulations of section 4.11 and the floodplain ordinance found in the subdivision regulations [Appendix B].
(l) General conditions for residential uses with the Business Districts.
(1) For the purposes of this section of the zoning ordinance, dwelling units shall be allowed
within all property bounded by Wood Street on the north, Johnson Street on the south, Plum
Grove Road on the east and Smith Street on the west and subject to the following conditions:
(2) Dwelling units shall have a minimum floor area of three hundred (300) square feet per
bedroom or meet the minimum building code and life safety requirements
(3) Dwelling units shall be attached and accessory to the principal business use.
(4) In any building occupied in part by residential uses, business uses shall not be located above
the level of the first story ceiling.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-98
(5) Dwelling units shall conform to the parking regulations set forth in Article VII.
(6) Dwelling units wholly or any part thereof below the second story shall not be part of the store
front.
(Ord. # 0-83-10, §2, 7/19/10)
(m) Business Standards for the Properties located within the Central Business District. The
following standards apply to all commercial properties within the Central Business District; defined as the
area bounded by Wood Street on the north, Smith Street on the west, Johnson Street on the south, and
Plum Grove Road on the east.
(1) Uses and Bulk Standards. All business zoned property within the Central Business District
shall be allowed to follow either the use lists and bulk standards of their underlying zoning
classification or the uses lists and bulk standards of the B-3 zoning district, regardless of
the underlying zoning classification. For the purposes of this section of the zoning
ordinance, in the event there is conflict between the underlying zoning bulk standards and
use lists, the least restrictive requirement shall apply.
(Ord. #0-93-12, §1, 6/25/12)
11.02. B-1, Shopping Center District.
(a) Legislative intent. The purpose of the B-1, Shopping Center District is to provide for retail
shopping and financial services within a unified shopping center.
(b) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
(1) Accountant's and tax consultant offices.
(2) Antique shops; of refurbished and refinished materials.
(3) Appliance stores.
(4) Art supply stores.
(5) Automotive accessory stores; including but not limited to batteries, tires, engine parts; but not
including on-site repair of autos or replacement of sold items.
(6) Bakeries; manufacturing of goods limited to those retailed on the premises.
(7) Banks and/or financial institutions. (Ord. #0-111-06, §3, 6/26/06)
(8) Barber shops.
(9) Beauty parlors.
(10) Book and stationery stores.
(11) Building materials and supplies; provided that no outdoor storage of such products shall be
permitted.
(12) Camera and photographic supply stores.
(13) Candy, confectionery and ice cream stores; with no on-site manufacturing of goods.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A-99
(14) Card shops.
(15) Carpet and rug stores.
(16) China and glassware stores.
(17) Clothing and apparel stores.
(18) Clothes and costume rental agencies.
(19) Currency exchanges.
(20) Dance Studios (Ord. No. 0-141-15, §1, 12/7/15)
(21) Department stores and variety stores.
(22) Drapery stores.
(23) Dressmaking and millinery shops.
(24) Dry goods and variety stores; textiles, clothing and related articles of trade.
(25) Electronic communications equipment sales.
(26) Florists.
(27) Furrier shops.
(28) Furniture stores.
(29) Gift shops.
(30) Hardware stores.
(31) Health Clubs which are 3,000 square feet or less. (Ord. 0-199-07, §1, 12/3/07)
(32) Hearing aid stores.
(33) Hobby shops; for retailing of items to be assembled or uses away from the premises.
(34) Home supply centers.
(35) Insurance agencies.
(36) Jewelry stores (including watch repair).
(37) Leather goods and luggage stores.
(38) Linoleum and tile stores.
(39) Medical appliance stores.
(40) Musical instrument sales.
(41) Municipal parking lots.
(42) Notion stores.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -100
(43) Office supply stores.
(44) Offices-business, professional or governmental.
(45) Opticians sales; retail.
(46) Paint and wallpaper stores.
(47) Parking lots; for private self-propelled passenger vehicles.
(48) Pet shops.
(49) Pharmacies.
(50) Picture framing.
(51) Post office sub-stations.
(52) Prerecorded Audio or Video Sales or Rental (Ord. No. 0-40-95 5-8-95).
(53) Prerecorded music sales; any medium.
(54) Railroad passenger station.
(55) Second hand thrift shops.
(56) Sewing machine sales and service; household machines only.
(57) Shoe stores.
(58) Sporting goods stores.
(59) Temporary buildings; on the premises for construction purposes for a period not to exceed the
duration of such construction.
(60) Temporary uses of special events; for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours; as
approved by the village board at least ten (10) days before the event.
(61) Ticket agencies; amusement.
(62) Toy stores.
(63) Travel agencies, bureaus and transportation ticket offices.
(64) Mixed uses; combination of economically compatible permitted uses listed above.
(65) Compatible uses; per procedure and standards listed in section 11.01(f) of this ordinance.
(Ord. 0-111-06, §4, 6/26/06)
(66) Tanning Salons. (Ord. 0-22-02 §6, 2/25/02)
(67) Village Operated Facilities (Ord. 0-14-10, §1, 2/16/10)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -101
(c) Accessory uses.
(1) Those customarily incidental to the permitted uses.
(2) Signs, except those requiring special use approval; per regulations in Article VIII of this
ordinance. (Ord. 0-133-00. ?2, 10-23-00)
(3) Communication devices; per regulations in section 6.02 of this ordinance.
(d) Special uses. The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the village board
subject to the standards set forth in section 14.05 of this ordinance:
(1) Automobile diagnostic center and repair; when part of a department store and without the
disbursement of fossil fuels or other forms of energy or material that assists automobile
movement.
(2) Automobile service station and mart; within a unified center for disbursement of fossil fuels
or other forms of energy or material that assists automobile movement, without repair.
(3) Banquet and meeting facility; with or without another use, includes the service of food, liquor
and live entertainment.
(4) Bowling alleys.
(5) Bus stations; provided that direct access to a major or secondary thoroughfare is available.
(6) Communication devices; which exceed the height limitations set forth for business districts.
(7) Day care facility.
(8) Fencing; in any front yard except for:
a. Decorative fencing.
b. Temporary fencing; erected to protect any seeding area, with the permission of the
administrator.
(9) Gold and Silver dealers (as defined within Division 16 of the Palatine Code of Ordinances),
whose gross business receipts result in 20% or more from the purchase of gold or silver.
(Ord. No. 0-144-11, §1, 11/21/11)
(10) Laundries; Launderettes.
(11) Live entertainment.
(12) Martial arts schools.
(13) Montessori schools. (Ord.No.0-111-98, ?1, 7-27-98)
(14) Movie theatres; indoor.
(15) Offices: Medical and dental, including, but not limited to physicians, surgeons and dentists
(Ord. 0-84-05, §7, 4/18/05)
(16) Physical and health services; includes health clubs greater than 3,000 square feet, swimming
pools, and masseuses. (Ord. 0-199-07, §3, 12/3/07)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -102
(17) Piercing studios and stores, operating in a manner that is not exempted under the Tattoo and
Body Piercing Establishment Registration Act (410 ILCS 54/). This shall not include
practices that are considered medical procedures or the puncturing of the outer perimeter or
lobe of the ear using the pre-sterilized, single-use stud and clasp piercing system. (Ord. #0-144-
11,§1, 11/21/11)
(18) Public service facilities; including electric distributing sub-stations, telephone exchanges and
similar non-municipal uses. (Ord. No. 0-37-94 4/11/94)
(19) Restaurants.
(20) School office buildings; not including the parking or storage of buses.
(21) Taverns or bars.
(22) Wind energy conversion systems.
(23) Unique or new uses; not listed within this ordinance; provided that the use complies with the
intent of the B-1 District.
(24) Taxicab Dispatching Office Facility. (Ord.No.0-16-99, ?1, 3-8-99)
(25) Copy changes, pursuant to Section 8.01(f)(4). (Ord. 0-133-00 ?3, 10-23-00)
(26) Food stores, grocery stores, meat markets and frozen foods. (Ord. 0-104-01 ?3, 7-23-01)
(27) Car rental facilities. (Ord. 0-22-02, ?3, 2/25/02)
(28) Dry Cleaners. (Ord. 0-41-03. §5, 2-3-03)
(29) Liquor Stores; package stores only. (Ord. 0-50-03, §3, 2/18/03)
(30) Tobacco Shops and electronic cigarette stores. (Ord. 0-14-04, §3, 2-2-04, Ord. No. 0-123-15,
§1, 10/19/15)
(31) Drive-Thrus (Ord. 0-142-04, §2, 7/6/04)
(Ord. O-135-17, 12/11/17
(e) Minimum lot width: Two hundred (200) feet.
(f) Maximum floor area ratio: 1.0.
(g) Minimum setbacks:
(1) Front: Thirty (30) feet.
(2) Rear: Twenty (20) feet.
(3) Side: Ten (10) feet.
(h) Transitional yards.
(1) Where a rear or side lot line coincides with a rear or side lot line in an adjacent Village of
Palatine residentially zoned district, rear and side yard setbacks of at least thirty (30) feet shall
be provided.
(2) A landscaped buffer strip of at least twelve (12) feet shall be provided immediately adjacent
to any residential district.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -103
(i) [Reserved.]
(j) Maximum building height: Three (3) stories, not to exceed forty-five (45) feet.
(Ordinance No. 0-40-95 ?1, 2, 3 & 4, 5-8-95)
11.03. B-2, General Business District.
(a) Legislative intent. The purpose of the B-2, General Business District is to provide areas for
business establishments which offer retail convenience goods and services to residents located in the general
vicinity of the district.
(b) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
(1) Accountant's and tax consultant offices.
(2) Antique shops; of refurbished and refinished materials.
(3) Appliance stores and repair; household.
(4) Art supply stores.
(5) Artist studios.
(6) Automotive accessory store, including, but not limited to, batteries, tires, engine parts, but not
including on-site repair of autos or replacement of sold items, with the exception of
automobile cellular telephones, stereos, vinyl window tinting and specialty lighting, which
may be installed in an enclosed building.
(7) Automotive sales; for the sale of new and used automobiles and including auxiliary service
and repairs in conjunction with, if conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building,
on not less than one acre.
(8) Bakeries; manufacturing of goods limited to those retailed on the premises.
(9) Banks and financial institutions. (Ord. 0-111-06, §5, 6/26/06)
(10) Barber shops.
(11) Baseball academy.
(12) Beauty parlors.
(13) Beauty schools; when the service of a beauty parlor is offered to the public.
(14) Bicycle sales and repair shops, not including motorized bicycles.
(15) Blueprinting and photostating establishments.
(16) Book and stationery stores.
(17) Building materials.
(18) Business machine sales and service.
(19) Camera and photographic supply stores.
(20) Candy, confectionery and ice cream stores; with no on-site manufacturing of goods.
(21) Card shops.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -104
(22) Carpet and rug stores; including the cleaning of such items, with fire department approval of
all utilized cleaning agents.
(23) Catalog stores.
(24) China and glassware stores.
(25) Clothes and costume rental agencies.
(26) Clothes and apparel stores.
(27) Clothing repair stores; including tailoring, shoe and hat repair.
(28) Coin and stamp stores.
(29) Currency exchanges.
(30) Dancing schools and studios; with instruction and sound to be totally confined inside the
subject building.
(31) Drapery stores.
(32) Dressmaking and millinery shops.
(33) Dry good stores; textiles, clothing and related articles of trade.
(34) Electronic communications equipment sales; including television and radio repair of such
items.
(35) Florists.
(36) Furnace supplies and service.
(37) Furniture stores.
(38) Furrier shops.
(39) Gift shops.
(40) Hardware stores.
(41) Health Clubs which are 3,000 square feet or less. (Ord. 0-199-07, §4, 12/3/07)
(42) Hearing aid stores.
(43) Hobby shops.
(44) Home supply centers.
(45) Hotels, motels and lodging houses.
(46) Insurance agencies.
(47) Interior decorating and upholstering shops.
(48) Jewelry stores.
(49) Laundries; launderettes.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -105
(50) Leather goods and luggage stores.
(51) Linoleum and tile stores.
(52) Locksmith.
(53) Machinery; small motorized sales and service.
(54) Medical appliance stores.
(55) Mini-parcel service; with maximum square footage of two thousand (2,000) square feet.
(56) Monument sales.
(57) Musical instruction.
(58) Musical instrument sales.
(59) Municipal parking lots.
(60) Newspaper distribution agencies.
(61) Notion stores.
(62) Offices, newspapers.
(63) Offices: Business, professional or governmental. (Ord. 0-84-05, §8, 4/18/05)
(64) Office supply stores.
(65) Optician sales; retail.
(66) Paint and wallpaper stores.
(67) Parking lots; for private self-propelled passenger vehicles.
(68) Pet shops.
(69) Pharmacies.
(70) Photographic studios.
(71) Picture framing.
(72) Post offices or sub-stations.
(73) Pre-recorded audio or video sales or rental.
(74) Printing, lithographing or publishing establishments; for letter press, business cards,
mimeographing and any other similar custom service.
(75) Railroad passenger station.
(76) Sales and service of the following items; with a retail showroom:
a. Electrical.
b. Flooring.
c. Glass.
d. Heating and ventilation.
e. Painting.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -106
f. Paper hanging.
g. Plumbing.
h. Roofing.
(77) Second hand thrift shops.
(78) Sewing machine sales and service; household machines only.
(79) Shoe stores.
(80) Sporting good stores.
(81) Swimming pool sales and service.
(82) Taxidermists.
(83) Ticket agencies; amusement.
(84) Toy stores.
(85) Travel agencies, bureaus and transportation ticket offices.
(86) Temporary buildings; on the premises for construction purposes for a period not to exceed the
duration of such construction.
(87) Temporary uses of special events; for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours; as
approved by the village board at least ten (10) days before the event.
(88) Mixed uses; combination of economically compatible permitted uses listed above.
(89) Compatible uses; per procedure and standards listed in section 11.01(f) of this ordinance.
(Ord. 0-111-06, §6, 6/26/06)
(90) Tanning Salons. (Ord. 0-22-02 §7, 2/25/02)
(91) Village Operated Facilities (Ord. 0-14-10, §1, 2/16/10)
(c) Accessory uses.
(1) Those customarily incidental to the permitted uses.
(2) Signs, except those requiring special use approval; per regulations in Article VIII of this
ordinance. (Ord. 0-133-00 ?4, 10-23-00)
(3) Communication devices; per regulations in section 6.02 of this ordinance.
(d) Special uses. The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the village
council subject to the standards set forth in section 14.05 of this ordinance:
(1) Animal hospitals and kennels.
(2) Automobile diagnostic center and repair; when part of a department store and without the
disbursement of fossil fuels or other forms of energy or material that assists automobile
movement.
(3) Automobile laundries; provided adequate reservoir space for fueling of autos is furnished and
provided traffic congestion is minimized.
(4) Automotive sales; for the sale of used automobiles and including auxiliary service and repairs
in conjunction with, if conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, on not less
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -107
than one acre.
(5) Automobile service and repair; where automobiles are painted, repaired, rebuilt, reconstructed
or stored for compensation.
(6) Automobile service station and mart; for disbursement of fossil fuels or other forms of energy
or material that assists automobile movement and retail sale of other items without on-site
consumption of food or repair.
(7) Automobile service stations; for disbursement of fossil fuels or other forms of energy or
material that assists automobile movement, with repair.
(8) Banquet and meeting facility; with or without another use, includes the serving of food, liquor
and live entertainment.
(9) Bowling alleys.
(10) Bus stations; provided that direct access to a major or secondary thoroughfare is available.
(11) Communication devices; which exceed the height limitations set forth for business districts.
(12) Day care facility.
(13) Dwelling units, accessory.
(14) Fencing; in any front yard except for:
a. Decorative fencing.
b. Temporary fencing; erected to protect any seeding area, with the permission of the
administrator.
(15) Gold and Silver dealers (as defined within Division 16 of the Palatine Code of Ordinances),
whose gross business receipts result in 20% or more from the purchase of gold or silver.
(Ord. No. 0-144-11, §1, 11/21/11)
(16) Hospitals and sanitoriums.
(17) Indoor sports and recreational facilities.
(18) Laboratories, research, experimental and testing; for testing and research, including medical
and dental.
(19) Live entertainment.
(20) Martial arts schools.
(21) Movie theatres; indoor.
(22) Physical and health services; includes health clubs greater than 3,000 square feet, swimming
pools, and masseuses. (Ord. 0-199-07, §6, 12/3/07)
(23) Piercing studios and stores, operating in a manner that is not exempted under the Tattoo and
Body Piercing Establishment Registration Act (410 ILCS 54/). This shall not include
practices that are considered medical procedures or the puncturing of the outer perimeter or
lobe of the ear using the pre-sterilized, single-use stud and clasp piercing system. (Ord. No.
0-144-11, §1, 11/21/11)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -108
(24) Public community center. (Ord.No.0-55-99, 5/24/99)
(25) Public service facilities; including electric distributing sub-stations, telephone exchanges and
similar non-municipal uses. (Ord. No. 0-37-94 4/11/94)
(26) School office buildings; not including the parking or storage of buses.
(27) Restaurants; with or without drive-through.
(28) Taverns or bars.
(29) Truck rental.
(30) Trailer rental.
(31) Undertaking establishments and funeral parlor; with one attached residential unit.
(32) Wind energy conversion systems.
(33) Unique or new uses; not listed within this ordinance; provided that the use complies with the
intent of the B-2 District.
(34) Homeless day facility. (Ord. 0-115-00 ?22, 9/25/00]
(35) Copy changes, pursuant to Section 8.01(f)(4). (Ord. 0-133-00 ?5, 10-23-00)
(36) Food stores, grocery stores, meat markets and frozen foods. (Ord. 0-104-01 ?6 7-23-01)
(37) Car rental facilities. (Ord. 0-22-02, ?4, 2/25/02)
(38) Dry Cleaners. (Ord. 0-41-03, ?7, 2-03-03)
(39) Liquor Stores; package stores only. (Ord. 0-50-03, §6, 2/18/03)
(40) Tobacco Shops and electronic cigarette stores. (Ord. 0-14-04, §6, 2/2/04, Ord. No. 0-123-15,
§1, 10/19/15)
(41) Drive-Thrus (Ord. 0-142-04, §3, 7/6/04)
(42) Offices: Medical and dental, including, but not limited to physicians, surgeons and dentists.
(Ord. 0-84-05, §9, 4/18/05; O-135-17, 12/11/17)
(e) Minimum lot width: Fifty (50) feet.
(f) Maximum floor area ratio: 1.0.
(g) Minimum setbacks:
(1) Front: Twenty-five (25) feet depth.
(2) Rear: Twenty (20) feet.
(3) Side: Five (5) feet.
(4) Side abutting street: Ten (10) feet.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -109
(h) Transitional yard. When a side lot line coincides with a side lot line in an adjacent Village of
Palatine residentially zoned district, a landscaped buffer of at least fifteen (15) feet shall be provided.
(i) [Reserved.]
(j) Maximum building height: Three (3) stories, not to exceed forty-five (45) feet.
(Ord. No. O-60-92, ? 1, 4-27-92)
11.04. B-3, Central Business District.
(a) Legislative intent. The purpose of the B-3, Central Business District is to provide a centrally
located shopping and service area within Palatine for the retail sale of small items and essential services.
(b) Boundaries. Only the following described property in the village, and none other, shall be eligible
for B-3, Central Business District zoning:
All property bounded by Wood Street on the north, Johnson street on the south, Plum Grove Road on
the east, and Smith Street on the west.
(c) Reserved. (Ord. 0-83-10, §3, 7/19/10)
(d) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
(1) Antique shops; of refurbished and refinished materials.
(2) Appliance stores; of household items which can be carried by one individual without
assistance.
(3) Art supply stores.
(4) Artist's studio.
(5) Bakeries; manufacturing of goods limited to those retailed on the premises.
(6) Banks and financial institutions; without drive-in facilities.
(7) Barber shops.
(8) Beauty parlors.
(9) Beauty schools; when the service of a beauty parlor is offered to the public.
(10) Bicycle sales and repair.
(11) Book and stationery stores.
(12) Camera and photographic supply stores.
(13) Candy stores.
(14) Card shops.
(15) Catalog stores.
(16) China and glassware stores.
(17) Clothes and costume rental agencies.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -110
(18) Clothing repair stores; including tailoring, shoe and hat repair.
(19) Clubs, lodges, temples, fraternal and not for profit organizations; not to be confused with
synagogue or private club.
(20) Coin and stamp stores.
(21) Currency exchanges.
(22) Dancing schools and studios.
(23) Delicatessens; where no on-site consumption of food is accomplished.
(24) Drapery stores.
(25) Dressmaking and millinery shops.
(26) Dry good stores; textiles, clothing and related articles of trade.
(27) Dwelling units; subject to the general conditions of section 11.04(c).
(28) Electronic communications equipment sales; including television and radio and repair of such
items.
(29) Florists.
(30) Furrier shops.
(31) Gift shops.
(32) Hardware stores.
(33) Health Clubs which are 3,000 square feet or less. (Ord. 0-199-07, §7, 12/3/07)
(34) Hearing aid stores.
(35) Historical buildings and landmarks; preserved for the public.
(36) Hobby shops.
(37) Interior decorating studios and shops.
(38) Jewelry stores.
(39) Laundries, launderettes; hand or automatic, self-service only.
(40) Leather goods and luggage stores.
(41) Loan offices.
(42) Locksmith shops.
(43) Medical appliance stores.
(44) Mini-parcel service; with maximum square-footage of one thousand five hundred (1,500)
square feet.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -111
(45) Musical instruction.
(46) Musical instrument sales and repair.
(47) Municipal parking lots.
(48) Newspaper distribution agencies.
(49) Newspaper offices (public).
(50) Nursing home.
(51) Notion stores.
(52) Offices: Business, professional or governmental. (Ord. 0-84-05, §10, 4/18/05)
(53) Office supply stores.
(54) Opticians and optometrists shops.
(55) Paint and wallpaper stores.
(56) Parking lots; for private self-propelled passenger vehicles.
(57) Pet shops.
(58) Pharmacies.
(59) Photographic studios and equipment supply.
(60) Picture framing.
(61) Post offices or sub-stations.
(62) Prerecorded music sales; any medium.
(63) Public parks, public playgrounds and public community centers.
(64) Second hand thrift shop.
(65) Sewing machine sales and service; household machines only.
(66) Sporting good stores.
(67) Telephone exchanges.
(68) Ticket agencies; amusement.
(69) Toy stores.
(70) Travel agencies, bureaus and transportation ticket offices.
(71) Temporary buildings; on the premises for construction purposes for a period not to exceed the
duration of such construction.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -112
(72) Temporary uses of special events; for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours; as
approved by the village board at least ten (10) days before the event.
(73) Mixed uses; combination of economically compatible permitted uses listed above provided
that the floor area of such establishment does not exceed fifty thousand (50,000) square feet.
(74) Compatible uses; per procedure and standards listed in section 11.01(f) of this ordinance.
(Ord. 0-111-06, §7, 6/26/06)
(75) Village Operated Facilities (Ord. 0-14-10, §1, 2/16/10)
(e) Accessory uses.
(1) Those customarily incidental to the permitted uses.
(2) Signs, except those requiring special use approval; per regulations in Article VIII of this
ordinance. (Ord. 0-133-00, ?6, 10-23-00)
(3) Communication devices; per regulations in section 6.02 of this ordinance.
(Ord. 0-111-06, §8, 6/26/06)
(f) Special uses. The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the village board
subject to the standards set forth in section 14.05 of this ordinance:
(1) Art galleries and public museums.
(2) Auction rooms.
(3) Banks and financial institutions; with drive-in facilities.
(4) Communication devices which exceed height limit.
(5) Fences, front yard.
(6) Gold and Silver dealers (as defined within Division 16 of the Palatine Code of Ordinances),
whose gross business receipts result in 20% or more from the purchase of gold or silver.
(Ord. No. 0-144-11, §1, 11/21/11)
(7) Live entertainment.
(8) Meeting halls; with a legal capacity of one hundred (100) or more people.
(9) Physical and health services: includes health clubs greater than 3,000 square feet, swimming
pools, and masseuses. (Ord. 0-199-07, §9, 12/3/07)
(10) Piercing studios and stores, operating in a manner that is not exempted under the Tattoo and
Body Piercing Establishment Registration Act (410 ILCS 54/). This shall not include
practices that are considered medical procedures or the puncturing of the outer perimeter or
lobe of the ear using the pre-sterilized, single-use stud and clasp piercing system. (Ord. No.
0-144-11, §1, 11/21/11)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -113
(11) Public service facilities; including electric distributing sub-stations, telephone exchanges and
similar non-municipal uses. (Ord. No. 0-37-94 4/11/94)
(12) Restaurants, excluding drive-in or drive-through facilities.
(13) Taverns and bars.
(14) Unique or new uses; not listed within this ordinance; provided that the use complies with the
intent of the B-3 District.
(15) Wind energy conservation system.
(16) Copy changes, pursuant to Section 8.01(f) (4). (Ord. 0-133-00 ?7, 10-23-00)
(17) Food stores, grocery stores, meat markets and frozen foods. (Ord. 0-104-01 ?9 7-23-01)
(18) Dry Cleaners. (Ord. 0-41-03, ?9, 2-03-03)
(19) Liquor Stores; package stores only. (Ord. 0-50-03, §9, 2/18/03)
(20) Tobacco Shops and electronic cigarette stores. (Ord. 0-14-04, §9, 2/2/04, Ord. No. 0-123-15,
§1, 10/19/15)
(21) Drive-Thrus (Ord. 0-142-04, §4, 7/6/04)
(22) Offices: Medical and dental, including, but not limited to physicians, surgeons and dentists.
(Ord. 0-84-05, §11, 4/18/05, Ord. O-135-17, 12/11/17)
(g) Minimum lot width: None.
(h) Maximum floor area ratio: 1.5.
(i) [Reserved.]
(j) Minimum setbacks:
(1) Front: Five (5) feet.
(2) Rear: Twenty (20) feet.
(3) Side: Zero (0) feet; or if provided, it shall be at least five (5) feet.
(k) Maximum building height: Three (3) stories, not to exceed forty-five (45) feet.
11.05. B-4, Office-Research District.
(a) Legislative intent. The purpose of the B-4, Office-Research District is to provide for professional
and corporate office and research facilities within a unified area. All development on a B-4 parcel shall have a
single user or firm, subject to the requirements of this section.
(b) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
(1) Corporate, business, charitable, not-for-profit organizations and labor union offices and
headquarters; housing management and administrative personnel only, except:
a. Any sales of products shall be allowed as an accessory use only.
b. Any display of products shall be allowed as an accessory use only.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -114
(2) Professional offices; occupied by one firm, including its subsidiaries, except:
a. Any sales of products shall be allowed as an accessory use only.
b. Any display of products shall be allowed as an accessory use only.
(3) Laboratories, offices and other facilities; for research and development including basic,
applied development and technical services.
(4) Production of prototype products; when limited to scale reasonably necessary for a full
investigation of the merits of a product, including commercial viability, provided, however,
that products using or involving explosives or volatile chemicals shall be prohibited.
(5) Engineering and testing laboratories.
(6) Village Operated Facilities (Ord. 0-14-10, §1, 2/16/10)
(c) Accessory uses.
(1) Those customarily incidental to the permitted uses.
(2) Signs, except those requiring special use approval; per regulations in Article VIII of this
ordinance. (Ord. 0-133-00 ?8 10-23-00)
(3) Communication devices; per regulations in section 6.02 of this ordinance.
(4) Sales and display of products; which are customarily incidental to the firm or one of its
subsidiaries which is located on said B-4 parcel.
(d) Special uses. The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the village board
subject to the standards set forth in section 14.05 of this ordinance:
(1) Private trade schools; located totally within a single structure.
(2) Financial institutions.
(3) Fencing; in any front yard except for:
a. Decorative fencing.
b. Temporary fencing; erected to protect any seeding area, with the permission of the
administrator.
(4) Communication devices which exceed height limits.
(5) Unique uses.
(6) Solar or wind energy conversion systems. (Ord. 0-110-09, §1, 9/8/09)
(7) Public service facilities; including electric distributing sub-stations, telephone exchanges and
similar non-municipal uses. (Ord. No. 0-37-94 4/11/94)
(8) Copy changes, pursuant to Section 8.01(f)(4). (Ord. 0-133-00 ?9 10-23-00)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -115
(e) Minimum lot area: Four hundred thousand (400,000) square feet, unless a smaller lot area is
approved by the village as part of a planned development with a greater degree of site coordination,
landscaping, and architectural quality.
(f) Minimum lot width: None.
(g) Maximum floor area ratio: 0.50.
(h) Minimum setbacks:
(1) Front: Fifty (50) feet.
(2) Rear: Sixty (60) feet.
(3) Side: Twenty (20) feet.
(i) [Reserved.]
(j) Transitional yards. Where a rear or side lot line coincides with a rear or side lot line in an adjacent
Village of Palatine residentially zoned district, rear and side yard setbacks of at least thirty (30) feet shall be
provided.
(k) Landscaping and aesthetic requirements.
(1) All aforementioned yards shall be permanently landscaped and maintained according to the
landscape plan approved by the administrator.
(2) The administrator shall require a greater degree of architectural compatibility, landscaping
and public art for proposals on lots of less than four hundred thousand (400,000) square feet.
(l) Maximum building permitted height. The height of any structure (except flag poles) above the
ground elevation shall be no greater than one-third (1/3) the distance from the base of such
structure to the nearest property line, except that where the nearest property line adjoins a
public right-of-way, the height shall be no greater than one-half (1/2) the distance from the
base of such structure to the centerline of such right-of-way.
(m) Restrictions on use.
(1) Noise. Maximum sound pressure level and frequency radiated by any use or facility when
measured at any point on the lot lines shall not exceed the values shown in the following
table:
Frequency Octave Band Range Cycles
Per Second
Sound Pressure Level Decibels 9.002
dynel Cm.2
Below 75
72
75—150
67
150--300
59
300--600
52
600-1,200
46
1,200--2,400
40
2,400--4,800
34
Over 4,800
32
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -116
(2) Vibrations. Uses shall not be located and equipment shall not be installed in such a way as to
produce intense, earthshaking vibrations which are noticeable at the property lines of the
subject premises.
(3) Smoke and particulate matter.
a. No emission shall be located at any point, from any chimney or otherwise, of visible
grey smoke or dust equal to or darker than No. 1 on the Standard Ringelmann Smoke
Chart, Information Circular 7718, as issued by the U.S. Bureau of Mines, August,
1955, except that visible smoke of a shade equal to No. 2 on said chart may be
emitted for not more than six (6) minutes in any one hour. These provisions shall
apply also to any visible smoke of a different color but with an apparent equal
opacity.
b. No smoke, dirt, dust or particulate matter resulting from operations shall be permitted
in such a manner or quantity as to endanger or be detrimental to the public health,
safety, comfort or welfare, or which causes soiling at or beyond the lot line(s).
c. No emission shall be permitted of any particulate matter in excess of two-tenths (0.2)
grams per cubic foot of flue gas at stack temperature of five hundred (500) degrees
Fahrenheit (or the equivalent).
(4) Glare and heat. No direct or reflective glare from floodlights, welding or any other source or
process which glare is visible from any point on any lot line of the property from which the
glare emanates shall be permitted.
(5) Fire and explosive hazards.
a. Liquid or gaseous fuels and flammable chemicals. Storage of all liquid or gaseous
fuels and flammable chemicals shall be provided and maintained in accordance with
the safety standards and means for fire protection as prescribed by the National Fire
Protection Association and as may be required by the fire chief of the village. All
bulk storage shall be underground.
b. Detonatable materials. Activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of
materials which decompose by detonation shall not be allowed.
c. Radiation hazards. The release of radioactive materials or the emission of ionizing
radiation outside of the property line shall be in accordance with rules and regulations
of the State of Illinois.
(6) Waste. All waste shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable ordinances of the
village and as approved by the administrator.
11.06. B-5, Highway Business District.
(a) Legislative intent. The purpose of the B-5, Highway Business District is to provide for intensive
retail or wholesale sales with appeal on a regional basis.
(b) Boundaries. Only the following described properties in the village, and none other, may be eligible
to be classified as "B-5," Highway Business District: All lots with frontage on Rand Road (U.S. Route 12).
(c) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the village
board subject to the standards set forth in section 14.05 of this ordinance:
(1) Appliance stores (large).
(2) Appliance stores (small).
(3) Auction rooms.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -117
(4) Automotive sales; for the sale of new and used automobiles and including auxiliary service
and repairs in conjunction with, if conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building.
(5) Automotive accessory store, including, but not limited to, batteries, tires, engine parts, but not
including on-site repair of autos or replacement of sold items, with the exception of
automobile cellular telephones, stereos, vinyl window tinting and specialty lighting, which
may be installed in an enclosed building.
(6) Banks or financial institutions, without drive-in.
(7) Baseball academy.
(8) Blue printing or photostating establishments.
(9) Boat and marine showroom and sales.
(10) Bowling alleys.
(11) Building materials and supplies; including outdoor storage when totally fenced.
(12) Business machine sales and service.
(13) Business schools.
(14) Carpet and rug stores.
(15) Casket sales and supplies.
(16) Catering establishments.
(17) Clothes stores.
(18) Commercial printing.
(19) Department stores; offering for sale at retail some or all of the goods permitted in the B-1 and
B-2 districts.
(20) Electronic communication equipment sales.
(21) Equipment rental and leasing service; home, office, business and industrial.
(22) Exterminator shops.
(23) Feed and seed stores.
(24) Furniture stores.
(25) Halls; capable for use as meeting rooms, party rooms and dance halls with or without live
entertainment, food service and alcohol.
(26) Health clubs, which are 3,000 square feet or less. (Ord. 0-89-16; 7/11/16)
(27) Homes supply centers.
(28) Hotels, motels of lodging houses.
(29) Greenhouses; retail and wholesale items.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -118
(30) Linen, towel and diaper service.
(31) Linoleum or tile.
(32) Live bait stores.
(33) Machinery rental and sales.
(34) Monument sales.
(35) Movie theaters; indoor.
(36) Offices: Business, professional, or governmental. (Ord. 0-60-06, §14, 4/3/06)
(37) Photograph developing and processing shops.
(38) Paint or wallpaper stores.
(39) Publishing of newspapers.
(40) Printing, commercial.
(41) Public garages.
(42) Studios; commercial, photographic, recording, radio and television.
(43) Second hand thrift stores; if conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building.
(44) Sign painting establishments.
(45) Snowmobile sales and service.
(46) Taxicab dispatching office facility; including accessory communications equipment.
(47) Temporary buildings; on the premises for construction purposes for a period not to exceed the
duration of such construction.
(48) Temporary uses of special events; for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours; as
approved by the village board at least ten (10) days before the event.
(49) Mixed uses; combination of economically compatible permitted uses listed above, provided
that the floor area of such establishment does not exceed fifty thousand (50,000) square feet.
(50) Compatible uses; per procedure and standards listed in section 11.01(f) of this ordinance.
(Ord. 0-111-06, §9, 6/26/06)
(51) Delicatessens (Ord. 0-67-00 ?1, 7/17/00)
(52) Bakeries (Ord. 0-67-00 ?1, 7/17/00)
(53) Tanning Salons. (Ord. 0-22-02 §8, 2/25/02)
(54) Village Operated Facilities (Ord. 0-14-10, §1, 2/16/10)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -119
(d) Accessory uses.
(1) Those customarily incidental to the permitted uses.
(2) Signs, except those requiring special use approval; per regulations in Article VIII of this
ordinance. (Ord. 0-133-00 ?10 10-23-00)
(3) Communication devices; per regulations in section 6.02 of this ordinance.
(e) Special uses. The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the village board
subject to the standards set forth in section 14.05 of this ordinance:
(1) Animal hospital or kennels.
(2) Adult bookstores.
(3) Adult movie theaters.
(4) Amusement establishment; including permanent carnivals, kiddie parks, golf driving ranges,
miniature golf courses and skating rinks.
(5) Ambulance services.
(6) Automotive sales; for the sale of used automobiles and including auxiliary service and repairs
in conjunction with, if conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building.
(7) Automobile, bus and truck laundries; provided adequate space for fueling of vehicles is
furnished and traffic congestion is minimized.
(8) Automobile service station and mart; for disbursement of fossil fuels or other forms of energy
or material that assists automobile movement and retail sale of other items without on-site
consumption of food or repair.
(9) Automobile service stations; for disbursement of fossil fuels or other forms of energy or
material that assists automobile movement, with repair.
(10) Banquet and/or meeting room.
(11) Bus stations; provided that direct access to a major or secondary thoroughfare is available.
(12) Communication devices; for radio and television transmission.
(13) Day care facilities.
(14) Communication devices; which exceed the height limitations set forth for business districts.
(15) Martial arts school.
(16) Movie theaters; outdoor.
(17) Fence, front yard.
(18) Undertaking establishments and funeral parlor; with one attached residential unit.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -120
(19) Automobile diagnostic center and repair; when part of a department store and without the
disbursement fossil fuels or other forms of energy or material that assists automobile
movement.
(20) Automobile service and repair; where automobiles are painted, repaired, rebuilt, reconstructed
or stored for compensation.
(21) Indoor sports and recreational facilities.
(22) Live entertainment.
(23) Public service facilities; including electric distributing sub-stations, telephone exchanges and
similar non-municipal uses. (Ord. No. 0-37-94 4/11/94)
(24) Restaurants.
(25) Trailer rental.
(26) Truck rental.
(27) Unique uses.
(28) Wind energy conservation systems.
(29) Used auto and machinery party.
(30) Hospital and sanitoriums.
(31) Sales and service uses; with a retail sales showroom and storage conducted within a totally
enclosed building;
a. Electrical.
b. Flooring.
c. Glass.
d. Heating and ventilation.
e. Masonry.
f. Painting.
g. Paper hanging.
h. Plumbing.
i. Refrigeration.
j. Roofing.
(32) Copy changes, pursuant to Section 8.01(f)(4). (Ord. 0-133-00 ?11 10-23-00)
(33) Car rental facilities. (Ord. 0-22-02, §5, 2/25/02)
(34) Dry Cleaners (Ord. 0-41-03, §10, 2-03-03)
(35) Liquor Stores; package stores only. (Ord. 0-50-03, §10, 2/18/03)
(36) Tobacco Shops and electronic cigarette stores. (Ord. 0-14-04, §11, 2/2/04, Ord. No. 0-123-
15, §1, 10/19/15)
(37) Drive-Thrus (Ord. 0-142-04, §5, 7/6/04)
(38) Offices: Medical and dental, including, but not limited to physicians, surgeons and dentists.
(Ord. 0-60-06, §15, 4/3/06)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -121
(39) Gold and Silver dealers (as defined within Division 16 of the Palatine Code of Ordinances),
whose gross business receipts result in 20% or more from the purchase of gold or silver.
(Ord. No. 0-144-11, §1, 11/21/11)
(40) Piercing studios and stores, operating in a manner that is not exempted under the Tattoo and
Body Piercing Establishment Registration Act (410 ILCS 54/). This shall not include
practices that are considered medical procedures or the puncturing of the outer perimeter or
lobe of the ear using the pre-sterilized, single-use stud and clasp piercing system. (Ord. No.
0-144-11, §1, 11/21/11)
(41) Physical and health services: including health clubs greater than 3,000 square feet, swimming
pools, and masseuses. (Ord. 0-89-16; 7/11/16; Ord. O-135-17, 12/11/17)
(f) Minimum lot width: One hundred (100) feet.
(g) Maximum floor area ratio: 1.50.
(h) Minimum setbacks:
(1) Front: Forty (40) feet.
(2) Rear: Thirty-five (35) feet.
(3) Side: Twenty (20) feet.
(i) Transitional yards. Where a rear or side lot line coincides with a rear or side lot line in an adjacent
Village of Palatine residentially zoned district, rear and side yard setbacks of at least twenty-five (25) feet shall
be provided, plus adjoining parking areas shall be screened from residential view by a landscape plan approved
by the administrator.
(j) Maximum building height. Three (3) stories, not to exceed forty-five (45) feet.
(Ord. No. O-60-92, ? 1, 4-27-92)
ARTICLE XII. MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
12.01. General requirements of all manufacturing districts.
(a) Legislative intent. The manufacturing district is intended to accommodate manufacturing activities
which are most appropriate when located apart from or well buffered from residential development and which
meet the general requirements and performance standards contained in this article.
(b) Permitted obstructions. For the purpose of manufacturing districts, the following shall not be
considered as obstructions when located in the required yards.
(1) In any required yard.
a. Landscaping embellishments; including but not limited to steps, arbors or trellises,
the total of which shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the required yard area.
b. Flag poles.
c. Lighting standards.
d. Signs.
e. Accessory off-street parking; open.
(2) In any required front yard.
a. Overhanging roof eaves, awnings or canopies; projecting not more than three (3) feet
into the yard.
b. Decorative fencing.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -122
(3) In any required side yard.
a. Overhanging roof eaves, awnings or canopies; projecting not more than thirty (30)
percent of the required side yard width, with a maximum three (3) feet overhang.
b. Fences; not to exceed eight (8) feet in height.
c. Compressor or condenser or heat pump units; for air conditioning and/or heating
systems, except in a side yard abutting a street.
d. Dumpster enclosures.
(4) In any required rear yard.
a. Accessory structures; garages, sheds, toolrooms or other similar structures pursuant to
standards set forth in section 6.01 of this ordinance.
b. Portions of the principal building; porches, breezeways, balconies, greenhouses or
any structure permanently attached to the principal building, the aggregate area of
which is less than ten (10) percent of the required rear yard area, and located at least
twenty-five (25) feet from the rear lot line, and not encroaching the side yard setback
of that district.
c. Fences; not to exceed eight (8) feet in height.
d. Recreational equipment; permanent, necessary for the use conducted on a lot.
e. Overhanging roof eaves, awnings or canopies; projecting not more than three (3) feet
into the yard.
f. Compressor or condenser or heat pump units; for air conditioning and/or heating
systems.
g. Dumpster enclosures.
(5) Exceptions to the above permitted obstructions.
a. On a corner lot, no obstruction higher than thirty (30) inches above curb level shall
be located in any portion of a required front or side yard situated within twenty (20)
feet of the lot corners formed by the intersection of any two (2) streets, or the
intersection of the street lines extended.
b. For the purpose of permitted obstructions in the side yard abutting a street, the front
yard obstructions shall be followed.
c. No permitted obstruction, other than the principal building, shall be located closer
than five (5) feet to any lot line; except fences. If the principal building is set back
five (5) feet or less, then the permitted obstruction setback is two (2) feet from any lot
line.
(c) Development of manufacturing districts. All excavation movement of earth, site development, and
execution of an erosion and soil sedimentation control plan shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the
erosion and sedimentation control ordinance found in the village subdivision regulations [Appendix B].
(d) Use of floodplain areas. All properties deemed to be in the floodplain shall be subject to the
regulations of section 4.11 and the floodplain ordinance found in the village subdivision regulations [Appendix
B].
(e) Dumpster enclosures. Before any permit for development is issued, the administrator shall require
that dumpster enclosures be provided in suitable locations to insure the promotion of the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the village.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -123
(f) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
(1) Artists Studios, with accessory sales (Ord. No. 0-82-11, §1, 7/18/11)
(2) Automotive sales; for the sale of new and used automobiles when accessory to an automotive
repair facility (Ord. No. 0-82-11, §1, 7/18/11)
(3) Boat building and repair; for boats less than forty (40) feet in length.
(4) Building and material sales.
(5) Cameras and other photographic equipment; except film.
(6) Cartage or express establishments.
(7) Car washes; with a minimum 200 foot separation from any residentially zoned use, as
measured from the property line of the residential parcel (Ord. No. 0-82-11, §1, 7/18/11)
(8) Catering Establishments. (Ord. 0-18-07, §2, 3/5/07)
(9) Commercial/trade school
(10) Contractor's shops.
(11) Equipment rental (Ord. No. 0-82-11, §1, 7/18/11)
(12) Fuel and ice sales; bulk.
(13) Garages for storage, repair and servicing of motor vehicles; including body repairs, painting
and engine rebuilding.
(14) Greenhouses and nurseries.
(15) Indoor recreational facilities (health clubs, bowling alleys, indoor soccer fields, training
facilities for athletes, and other similar uses) (Ord. No. 0-82-11, §1, 7/18/11)
(16) Laboratories, research, experimental and testing, for testing and research, including medical
and dental, including labs (Ord. No. 0-82-11, §1, 7/18/11)
(17) Lawn care/landscaping (Ord. No. 0-82-11, §1, 7/18/11)
(18) Machinery sales.
(19) Medical/Dental clinic (Ord. No. 0-82-11, §1, 7/18/11)
(20) Mini-warehouse.
(21) Nursery, truck garden or greenhouse.
(22) Offices; business, governmental, professional (Ord. No. 0-82-11, §1, 7/18/11)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -124
(23) Photographic studio and equipment sales/service including film development (Ord. No. 0-82-
11, §1, 7/18/11)
(24) Printing, commercial.
(25) Public garages and parking lots.
(26) Towing services, with a minimum 200 foot separation from any residential use, as measured
from the property line of the residential parcel (Ord. No. 0-82-11, §1, 7/18/11)
(27) Upholstering.
(28) Village Operated Facilities (Ord. 0-14-10, §1, 2/16/10)
(29) Any manufacturing, fabricating processing, assembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing
or testing of materials, goods or products, and related office uses that conform to the
performance standards of this article, with or without accessory showroom.
(g) Accessory uses.
(1) Those customarily incidental to the above uses.
(2) Signs, except those requiring special use approval; per regulations in Article VIII of this
ordinance. (Ord. 0-133-00 ?12 10-23-00)
(3) Communication devices; per regulations in section 6.02.
(h) Special uses. The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the village board
subject to standards set forth in section 14.05 of this ordinance.
(1) Alternative Education Facilities. (Ord. 0-29- -25-02)
(2) Ambulance services.
(3) Animal Hospitals and Kennels (Ord. 0-170-10, §1, 12/20/10)
(4) Automotive sales; for the sale of new or used vehicles (Ord. No. 0-82-11, §1, 7/18/11)
(5) Automotive service station and mart; for disbursement of fossil fuels or other forms of energy
or material that assist in automotive movement and retail sales of other items without on site
consumption (Ord. No. 0-82-11, §1, 7/18/11)
(6) Car washes within 200 feet of a residential use, as measured from the property line of the
residential parcel (Ord. No. 0-82-11, §1, 7/18/11)
(7) Communication devices which exceed the height limitations set forth for manufacturing
districts.
(8) Consignment shops with limited hours. (Ord. No. O-92-17, 8/21/17)
(9) Copy changes, pursuant to Section 8.02(f)(4). (Ord. 0-133-00 §13 10-23-00)
(10) Instructional and training facilities for cheerleaders and athletes. (Ord. No. 0-12-96 §1, 1-22-
96)
(11) Martial Arts Instruction and Training facilities, including any related offices (Ord. No. 0-1-02,
§1,1-14-02)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -125
(12) Medical Offices (Ord. No. 0-79-13, 7/8/13)
(13) Medical Marijuana Cultivation Centers and Dispensaries, subject to the State of Illinois
Regulations (Ord. No. 0-61-14, §1, 5/12/14)
(14) Public parks, playgrounds, and community centers; where said facilities are owned and
operated by a village, park district, or other municipal corporation including uses customarily
or incidental to the above uses.
(15) Public service facilities; including electric distributing sub-stations, telephone exchanges and
similar non-municipal uses. (Ord. No. 0-37-94 4/11/94)
(16) Restaurants.
(17) Towing services within 200 feet of a residential use, as measured from the property line of the
residential parcel (Ord. No. 0-82-11, §1, 7/18/11)
(18) Transfer, Storage, and Treatment of General Construction Materials, Demolition Debris, and
Wood Waste. (Ord. 0-38-05, §1, 3/7/05)
(19) Unique Uses in compliance with the District’s performance standards. (Ord. 0-72-07, §6,
5/14/07)
(20) Wind energy conservation system.
(21) Reserved (Ord. 0-111-06, §10 6/26/06)
(i) [Reserved.]
(j) Minimum lot width: None.
(k) Maximum floor area ratio: 0.70.
(l) Minimum setbacks:
(1) Front: Thirty (30) feet.
(2) Rear: Fifteen (15) feet.
(3) Side: Fifteen (15) feet.
(4) Side abutting street: Thirty (30) feet.
(m) Maximum building height:
(1) Lot abutting single-family residential district: Three (3) stories, not to exceed forty-five (45)
feet.
(2) All other lots: Four (4) stories, not to exceed sixty (60) feet.
12.02. Performance standards.
(a) General
(1) Any activity which is coincidental or primary to the operation of the use established in a
manufacturing district shall conform to the performance standards as outlined in this section.
(2) Under no circumstances shall any use, already established on the effective date of this
ordinance, be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with
such applicable performance standards for the district in which such use is located.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -126
(b) Buffers.
(1) Landscaped strip. Any portion of a manufacturing district which lies within two hundred
(200) feet of any zoned residential land or any planned residential land use according to the
village's comprehensive plan shall not be devoted to any use unless a fifty (50) foot wide
landscaped strip has been installed along the boundary in common with residential land.
a. Such planting strip shall be installed in accordance with plans prepared by a
landscape architect.
b. Such planting strip must be approved by the village board or such installation
guaranteed by a bond suitable to the village board.
(2) Height standards. Except for chimneys, vents, flag poles or communication devices, no
portion of any building or structure shall have a vertical dimension from ground level to its
highest point greater than one-third (1/3) the distance from said portion of the building to any
residential land.
(c) Screening. The following requirements shall apply to all businesses or firms in manufacturing
districts.
(1) All activities involving the manufacturing, storing, cleaning, servicing, and testing of
materials, products and goods -may be out of doors if completely screened by a solid wall or
uniformly colored fence at least eight (8) feet in height, and if there is no open storage of a
greater height than that of the enclosing screening.
(2) All owners or developers of manufacturing businesses or firms that abut residentially zoned
property shall be required to provide acceptable screenage along the lot lines.
a. Screenage shall include but not be limited to fences, shrubs, hedges and walls.
b. The height of the screenage shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet high.
(d) Noise.
(1) Prohibited noise levels. At no point on the property line on which the operation is located
shall the sound intensity level of any individual operation or plant (other than noises produced
by the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation vehicles) exceed the decibel limits
in the octave bands designated below levels shown in the, following table.
TABLE OF MAXIMUM PERMITTED
SOUND LEVEL (DECIBELS)
Octave Band (Frequency)
Cycles Per Second
Manufacturing Adjoining
Residential Land
Manufacturing Adjoining
Zoning Districts Other Than
Manufacturing or Residential
0 to 75
72
79
75 to 150
67
74
150 to 300
59
66
300 to 600
52
59
600 to 1200
46
53
1200 to 2400
47
42
2400 to 4800
38
41
Above 4800
38
39
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -127
(2) Noise testing. Noise testing is to be accomplished at the property line of the noise emitting source, with
an octave band analyzer manufactured according to standards prescribed by the American Standards
Association.
(3) Unmeasurable noises. Noises incapable of being measured, such as those of an irregular and
intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
(e) Vibration.
(1) Any industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any time and at any point along the
nearest adjacent lot line, earth borne vibration, (other than background vibrations produced by
some source not under control of this ordinance, such as the operation of motor vehicles or
other transportation facilities) in excess of the limits set forth in Column I is prohibited.
(2) Any industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any time and at any point along a
residential district boundary line, earth borne vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in
Column II is prohibited.
(3) Vibration shall be expressed as displacement in inches and shall be measured with a threecomponent
measuring system approved by the administrator.
Frequency (Cycles per
second)
I* Displacement (inches)
II* Displacement (inches)
0 to 10
.0008
.0004
10 to 20
.0005
.0002
20 to 30
.0002
.0001
30 to 40
.0002
.0001
40 and over
.0001
.0001
*Steady state--Vibrations, for the purpose of this ordinance which are continuous, or, if in
discrete pulses are more frequent than one hundred (100) per minute. Impact vibration, that is
discrete pulse which do not exceed one hundred (100) impulses per minute shall not cause in
excess of twice the displacement stipulated.
(f) Smoke and particulate matter. The emission of smoke or particulate matter in such manner or
quantity as to endanger or to be detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is prohibited.
(1) Grading the density of smoke and particulate matter. For the purpose of grading the density of
smoke, the Ringelmann Chart, published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines shall
be employed.
(2) Emission standards from concentrated sources.
a. The emission of more than twenty (20) smoke units per hour per stack is prohibited.
b. The emission of smoke or particulate matter shall not have a density in excess of
Ringelmann No. 2.
c. For fire-cleaning purposes, each stack may emit up to thirty-five (35) smoke units
once during any six-hour period. In this period, smoke of Ringelmann No. 3 will be
permitted for no longer than four (4) minutes per period.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -128
(3) Emission standards from all sources.
a. The rate of emission or particulate matter from all sources within the boundaries of
any lot shall not exceed a net figure of one pound per acre of lot area during any one
hour, after deducting from the gross hourly emission per acre the correction factor set
forth in the following table:
ALLOWANCE FOR HEIGHT OF EMISSION*
Height of Emission Above Grade (feet)
Correction (Pounds per Hour per Acre)
50
0.01
100
0.06
150
0.10
200
0.16
300
0.30
400
0.50
*Interpolate for intermediate values not shown in table.
b. Determination of the total net rate of emission of particulate matter within the
boundaries of any lot shall be made as follows:
i. Determine the maximum emission in pounds per hour from each source of
emission and divide this figure by the number of acres of lot area--thereby
obtaining the gross hourly rate of emission in pounds per acre.
ii. From each gross hourly rate of emission derived in (i), above, deduct the
correction factor (interpolating as required) for height of emission set forth in
the table, thereby obtaining the net rate of emission in pounds per acre per
hour from each source of emission.
iii. Add together the individual net rates of emission derived in (ii) above, to
obtain the total net rate of emission from all sources of emission with the
boundaries of the lot. Such total shall not exceed one pound per acre of lot
area during any one hour.
(g) Toxic and noxious matter. No use shall, for any period of time, emit into the atmosphere, store on
site, or discharge across the boundaries of the lot wherein it is located, toxic or noxious matter in such
concentrations as to be detrimental to, or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare or cause injury
or damage to property or business.
(h) Odorous matter. No use shall, for any period of time, emit an odorous matter in such quantity as to
be readily detectable at any point along lot lines or as to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond lot line.
(i) [Reserved.]
(j) Glare and heat. No use or activity shall be permitted which causes glare or heat to be transmitted or
reflected in such quantities as to be detrimental or harmful to the use of adjacent properties. Such exposed
sources of light shall be shielded so as not to create a nuisance across along lot lines.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -129
(k) Fire and explosive hazards.
(1) The storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from
incombustible to moderate burning, as determined by the administrator, is permitted.
(2) The storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from free to
active burning is permitted provided that said materials or products shall be stored, utilized or
manufactured within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior walls and
protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system.
(3) The storage, utilization, or manufacture of flammable liquids or materials* which produce
flammable or explosive vapors or gases, shall be permitted in accordance with the following
table--exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed containers, which shall be
unrestricted:
TOTAL CAPACITY OF FLAMMABLE MATERIALS PERMITTED (in gallons)
Industries Engaged in Storage Only
Aboveground
Underground
Materials having a closed cup flash point
over 187? F.
Prohibited
100,000
From and including 105? F to and including
187? F.
Prohibited
100,000
Materials having a closed cup flash point of
less than 105? F. (except liquefied
petroleum gas)
Prohibited
100,000
Liquefied petroleum gas
75,000
Prohibited
Industries Engaged in Utilization and/or
Manufacture of Flammable Materials
Aboveground
Underground
Materials having a closed cup flash point
over 187? F.
50,000
100,000
From and including 105? F. to and
including 187? F.
20,000
100,000
Materials having a closed cup flash point of
less than 105? F.
5,000
100,000
*When flammable gases are stored, utilized, or manufactured in cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet
(at S.T.P.) permitted shall not exceed three hundred (300) times the quantities as listed above.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -130
ARTICLE XIII. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
13.01. Legislative intent.
Planned development districts are the means by which planned developments are established.
13.02. Purpose.
The purposes of planned development districts are as follows:
(a) To promote flexibility in the planning, design, and construction of development projects and
to permit diversification in land uses and the location of structures, in accordance with an
approved planned development that also protects adjacent land uses; (Ord. O-34-17, 4/3/17)
(b) To promote the effective use of land to facilitate a more economic arrangement of buildings,
circulation systems, land uses and utilities;
(c) To preserve to the greatest extent possible the open space, landscape features and amenities
and to utilize such features in a harmonious fashion;
(d) To combine and coordinate architectural styles, building forms and building relationships
within the planned development;
(e) To insure a quality of design and construction, commensurate with other developments within
the Village; and
(f) To provide developers reasonable assurance of approval before expenditure of complete
design monies, while providing Village officials with assurance that the project will retain the
character envisioned at the time of approval.
13.03. Standards.
(a) Standards for all planned developments. All planned developments shall comply with the
following general standards.
(1) The planned development shall be designed, located and proposed to be operated so that the
public health, safety and welfare will be protected.
(2) The planned development shall not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in
the area in which it is located.
(3) The establishment of the planned development shall not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of surrounding property.
(4) Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or other necessary facilities have been or are
being provided.
(5) Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to
minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
(b) Design standards. To supplement and support the general standards of this Planned Development
section, all planned developments shall comply with the following design standards:
(1) All Planned developments shall be subject to the applicable regulations governing required
project improvements (as defined in Appendix B of the Palatine Code of Ordinances entitled
Subdivision, Site Development, and Floodplain Regulations) or within the approved Planned
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -131
Development Ordinance, including the dedication of park lands and school sites or for
payment of fees in lieu thereof, for residential projects.
a. Where deviations from the applicable requirements are desired, such deviations shall
be requested in writing, as a component of the appropriate application submission to
the Village and will be reviewed in conjunction with that application process.
b. The owner or developer shall install all required Public Improvements, including but
not limited to sanitary and storm sewers, water supply facilities, stormwater detention
area, public utilities, and those Project Improvements as required by the applicable
Planned Development Ordinance or as required by the Subdivision, Site
Development, and Floodplain Regulations.
(2) Floodplain and storm water management.
a. All parts of planned developments deemed to be in the floodplain shall be subject to
the regulations of the floodplain ordinance found in the Subdivision, Site
Development, and Floodplain Regulations.
b. Compensatory storage, detention and/or retention basins shall be provided for the
storage of surface and stormwater in the planned development in accordance with all
village standards.
(3) Erosion control. All excavation, movement of earth, site development and execution of an
erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the
erosion and sedimentation control measures found in the Subdivision, Site Development, and
Floodplain Regulations.
(4) Impact on public facilities and services. The proposed Planned Development shall not impose
an undue burden on public facilities and services.
(5) Distance between principal structures. The minimum distance between principal structures
shall either be thirty (30) feet or other such distance adopted within the applicable Planned
Development Ordinance. However, as the height of the proposed structure increases, a
greater distance may be required if necessary, to insure safe access, light and circulation of air.
(6) Traffic circulation.
a. External traffic circulation system. The proposed planned development shall be
accessible from public roads and so located with regard to major thoroughfares and
uses outside the proposed development that traffic congestion will be minimized and
uses adjacent to such thoroughfares will not be adversely affected.
b. Internal traffic circulation system. All streets and driveways constructed within the
proposed planned development, whether public or private, shall be adequate to serve
the needs of the community and shall meet the minimum standards of the
Subdivision, Site Development, and Floodplain Regulations and all other applicable
ordinances and Village Codes.
c. Vehicular access points. Principal vehicular access points shall be designed to
promote smooth traffic flow with controlled turning movements and minimum
hazards to vehicular, bicycle and or pedestrian traffic. Minor streets within the
proposed planned development shall not be connected to streets outside the
development in such a way as to encourage their use by through traffic.
(7) Pedestrian circulation system. The pedestrian circulation system and its related walkways
shall be insulated as completely and as reasonably as is possible from the vehicle street system
in order to provide separation of vehicular, pedestrian, and, where appropriate, bicycle traffic
movement.
(8) Open space. The proposed planned development shall attempt to preserve as much open space
as possible. Existing trees, waterways, scenic points, and other community assets must be
considered when planning for open space and preserved wherever possible.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -132
(9) Parking. The proposed planned development shall conform to all parking regulations in this
ordinance, unless evidence is presented to justify deviation from said regulations.
(10) Dumpster enclosures. The location and area of all dumpster enclosures shall be designated on
the plans for all planned developments and located and screened in compliance with the
applicable Codes and Ordinances, except as may be provided in the approved Planned
Development.
(11) Guidelines. In order to assist the Village in evaluating the merits and appropriateness of
applications for planned developments in the Village, the Planning and Zoning Department
shall prepare and coordinate the recommended guidelines, based upon the input from the
other Village Departments.
a. Unless these guidelines are included as a condition within the Planned Development
ordinance, said guidelines shall not be binding but shall be designed and intended to
illustrate the types of amenities, standards and conditions which shall be given weight
and consideration by the Village Council in determining whether to approve or
disapprove a Planned Development.
b. Said guidelines, and all amendments thereto, shall be presented by the Planning and
Zoning Department and then to the Plan Commission, which shall review the same
and make any changes deemed appropriate.
c. Thereafter, the guidelines shall be submitted to the Village Council for the review
and consideration.
d. The guidelines shall become effective upon approval by the Village Council, and
shall be on file in the Planning and Zoning Department.
(Ord. O-34-17, 4/3/17)
13.04. Preliminary Planned Development application process.
(a) Pre-application submittal. Prior to filing a planned development application, the applicant shall
provide the following:
(1) Three (3) copies of the plat of survey of the property in question.
(2) Aerial photograph(s) of the subject site.
(3) Preliminary plans and sketches.
(4) An outline summarizing the proposed development and the project timelines for the
construction and completion of the proposed project.
(5) Other site information, in such quantity as may be deemed necessary by either the
Administrator or applicant.
(b) Pre-application conference.
(1) If requested within ten (10) working days after receipt of documents required above, the
Administrator shall schedule a pre-application conference with the applicant and planning
staff. If such a conference is not requested, the standard project application process shall be
followed.
(2) The said conference shall be for the purpose of reviewing the applicant's proposal and to
provide the applicant with a general indication of the feasibility of the proposal and required
procedures.
(c) Preliminary Planned Development and Rezoning Application. Following the initial pre-application
conference, a Preliminary Planned Development and Rezoning applications may be filed with the Village,
subject to the following.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -133
(1) Said application shall contain the following information:
a. Filing fees, as required in the fee supplement schedule;
b. Petition for hearing;
c. Real Estate Interest Disclosure Form;
d. Village of Palatine Notice Affidavit;
e. Development narrative including a description of how the proposed development relates to
the Village’s Comprehensive Plan, surrounding zoning classifications, and surrounding
land uses;
f. Proof of ownership, including signature(s) of owner(s) on the petition for hearing or on a
statement attached to said form giving owner’s consent of the petition;
g. Plat of survey and legal description of the entire subject property; and
h. Site plan and supporting documents.
(2) The following materials may be required by the Village, either as part of the application or as a
condition of approval:
a. Preliminary Plat of Subdivision;
b. Tree survey;
c. Tree preservation plan;
d. Preliminary engineering plans, including;
i. Existing conditions
ii. Topography
iii. Utility connections
iv. Utility mains and layouts
v. Grading Plan
vi. Preliminary detention calculations
e. Soil borings and analysis report;
f. Landscape plan;
g. Architectural plans;
h. Declarations, covenants, grants of easements and other limitations or restrictions;
i. Development schedule, including marketing, construction, and estimated development
completion timetables;
j. Market analysis;
k. Traffic analysis;
l. Impact analysis to municipal systems;
m. Developer information;
n. List of proposed permitted uses within the development;
o. The following quantitative data:
i. Total number and type of dwelling units
ii. Parcel size
iii. Lot coverage of buildings and structures
iv. Total amount of open, and usable open space
v. Number of parking spaces.
p. Lighting plan;
q. Marketing materials;
r. Economic impact analysis;
s. Professional engineer’s estimate of probable cost for all public and project improvements,
submitted in a manner acceptable to the Village Engineer.
t. Associated documentation required by any jurisdictional regulatory agency; and
u. Any other information deemed necessary by the Village.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -134
(Ord. 0-60-06, §16, 4/3/06; Ord. O-34-17, 4/3/17)
(3) In conjunction with the Preliminary Planned Development application or Preliminary and Final
Planned Development application, the applicant shall be responsible to pay the Village Attorney’s
fees, outside consultant’s fees and any other direct costs incurred by the Village in reviewing the
application. To accomplish this, the applicant shall provide the Village a sum of ten thousand
($10,000) dollars to be placed into an escrow fund. The initial sum may be reduced at the discretion
of the Village Manager based on the size or complexity of the proposed planned development.
Following completion of the Village’s review of the application, final action by the Village’s
Corporate Authorities, and payment of all associated costs incurred by the Village, any remaining
balance of the escrow fund shall be returned to the applicant.
(d) Administrative Report. Within a maximum of forty-five (45) days following the submission of all
documentation required in section 13.04(c), the administrator shall:
(1) Schedule a public hearing for the purpose of review of the Preliminary Planned Development
application and associated plans.
(2) Report to the applicant all concerns regarding submission of documents.
(3) Provide public notice of the public hearing pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance requirements.
(Ord.No.0-72A-98,?10,5/26/98; Ord. No. O-34-17, 4/3/17)
(e) Public Hearing and Report.
(1) Public hearing. At the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall receive the administrator's
report and solicit testimony from the general public. After due consideration, the Plan
Commission shall vote, based on the standards of section 13.03, to take one of three (3)
actions:
a. Recommend approval of the Preliminary Planned Development;
b. Not recommend approval of the Preliminary Planned Development;
c. Recommend approval of the Preliminary Planned Development with modifications
and conditions.
(2) Report to Village Council. Within a maximum of forty-five (45) days of the completion of the
public hearing, the Plan Commission shall report its findings to the Village Council together
with the administrator's report.
(f) Actions by the Village Council.
(1) The Village Council shall consider the recommendations of the Plan Commission, public
record, and the standards within Article 13.03 of the Palatine Zoning Ordinance, shall pass a
Motion to take one of three actions:
a. Approve the preliminary plan;
b. Do not approve the preliminary plan;
c. Approve the preliminary plan with modifications and conditions.
(2) Rezoning of the property shall not be considered by the Village Council at this Preliminary
Planned Development phase. The rezoning of the property to Planned Development shall not
occur until the Final Planned Development approval is granted. Preliminary Planned
Development approval is advisory only, is not a final or binding decision, and shall not entitle
the applicant to Final Planned Development approval.
(g) Review fee. Plan review fee, based 1.5% of total project improvement costs (which shall consist of,
but not exclusively of curb and gutters, sidewalks, pavements, sanitary sewer system, storm sewer system,
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -135
water distribution system, stormwater detention facilities, parkway trees, landscaping, street lights, plus soil
erosion control measures) as estimated by the design engineer and approved by the Village Engineer.
13.05. Final Planned Development and Planned Development Amendment application processes.
(a) Time for filing final plans.
(1) Time requirement - Upon final action of the Preliminary Planned Development application
by the Village Council, the applicant has twelve (12) months from the date said final action
on the Preliminary Planned Development application in which to submit an application and
required materials to the Administrator for Final Planned Development approval for the
proposed development.
(2) Time extension. If, for whatever reason, the applicant cannot meet the twelve-month deadline,
the Plan Commission, in its sole discretion, may grant a single six-month extension at a public
meeting, given cause by the applicant, but only when a time extension application is made to
the Department of Planning and Zoning, prior to the expiration of a Preliminary Planned
Development.
(3) Failure to comply. If the applicant fails to apply for final approval for any reason within the
time period allowed and does not receive a time extension pursuant to 13.05 (a) (2), the
preliminary approval shall be deemed to be revoked and all portions of the area included in
the preliminary development plan shall be subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations
otherwise applicable.
(b) Final Planned Development and Planned Development Amendment applications. Following
Village Council action on the Preliminary Planned Development application, a Final Planned Development or
Planned Development Amendment application may be filed with the Village, subject to the following:
(1) Said application shall contain the following information:
a. Filing fees, as required in the fee supplement schedule;
b. Petition for hearing;
c. Real Estate Interest Disclosure Form;
d. Village of Palatine Notice Affidavit;
e. Development narrative including a description of how the proposed development relates to
the Village’s Comprehensive Plan, surrounding zoning classifications, and surrounding
land uses;
f. Proof of ownership, including signature(s) of owner(s) on the petition for hearing or on a
statement attached to said form giving owner’s consent of the petition;
g. Plat of survey and legal description of the entire subject property; and
h. Site plan and supporting documents.
i. Final engineering plans, including:
i. Existing conditions
ii. Topography
iii. Utility connections, including the mains and layouts
iv. Grading plan
v. Final detention calculations
j. Soil borings and analysis report;
k. Engineer’s estimate of probable cost of the public and project improvements submitted in
a manner acceptable to the Village Engineer.
l. Depending upon the final components of a planned development amendment, the
Administrator will determine the final information required in support of the application.
(Ord. O-135-17, 12/11/17)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -136
(2) The following materials may be required by the Village, either as part of the application or as a
condition of approval:
a. Final Plat of Subdivision;
b. Tree survey;
c. Tree preservation plan;
d. Soil borings and analysis report;
e. Landscape plan;
f. Architectural plans;
g. Declarations, covenants, grants of easements and other limitations or restrictions;
h. Development schedule;
i. Market analysis;
j. Traffic analysis;
k. Impact analysis to municipal systems;
l. Developer information;
m. List of proposed permitted uses within the development;
n. The following quantitative data:
i. Total number and type of dwelling units
ii. Parcel size
iii. Lot coverage of buildings and structures
iv. Total amount of open, and usable open space
v. Number of parking spaces
o. Lighting plan;
p. Marketing materials;
q. Economic impact analysis;
r. Associated documentation required by any jurisdictional regulatory agency; and
s. Any other information deemed necessary by the Village.
(Ord. 0-60-06, §17, 4/3/06; Ord. O-34-17, 4/3/17)
(c) Compliance with preliminary development plan. The final development plans shall be deemed to
be in substantial compliance with the preliminary development plans provided modification by the applicant
does not result in any of the following:
(1) A change in the character of the development, as determined by the Village.
(2) A change in the maximum permitted floor area ratio for total net site area; provided, however,
the interim stages of a development may exceed the maximum permitted floor area ratio so
long as the final development, considered as a whole, is within such maximum.
(3) An increase in the units per acre of the total net site area.
(4) A reduction in the minimum required distance between structures or in periphery setbacks;
provided, however, that setback or yard requirements may be adjusted where required in the
judgment of the Administrator to permit conformance to the pattern of, or architectural
arrangement related to, existing structures.
(5) An increase in the maximum percent of land covered for total net site area; provided,
however, that interim stages of development may exceed maximum percent of land covered
so long as the final development, considered as a whole, is within such maximum.
(d) Administrative report. Within a maximum of thirty (30) days following the submission of all
required documents, including any required plan revisions, required as part of the Village review of the Final
Planned Development application, the Administrator shall:
(1) Schedule a public hearing for the purpose of reviewing the Final Planned Development and
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -137
Rezoning application.
(2) Provide notification, as required within the Palatine Zoning Ordinance.
(3) Report to the applicant all concerns regarding submission documents.
(Ord.No.072A-98,?11,5/26/98, Ord. O-34-17, 4/3/17)
(e) Meeting and report.
(1) Public hearing. At the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall receive the Administrator's
report and solicit comments from the general public. After due consideration, if the Plan
Commission determines that the Final Planned Development conforms to the Preliminary
Planned Development, the Plan Commission, after holding a public heariang, shall vote,
based on the standards of section 13.03, to take one of three actions:
a. Recommend approval of the final plan and the rezoning;
b. Not recommend approval of the final plan and the rezoning;
c. Recommend approval of the final plan and rezoning, with modifications and
conditions.
(2) Report to Village Council. Within a maximum of forty-five (45) days after rendering a
recommendation, the Plan Commission shall report its findings to the Village Council
together with the Administrator's report, associated plans, and documents.
(f) Actions by Village Council.
(1) The Village Council shall consider recommendations, public record, the standards of section
13.03, and preliminary plan compliance pursuant to section 13.05(c), in determining one of
two (2) actions:
a. Adopt an ordinance with conditions to approve the Final Planned Development and
Rezoning;
b. Not approve the Final Planned Development and Rezoning.
(2) Final Planned Development approval and Rezoning the total site to Planned Development
shall be accomplished by adoption of an ordinance which may contain:
a. Special conditions and restrictions imposed by the Village Council upon the Planned
Development.
b. Any changes and modifications from the Village of Palatine Zoning Ordinance
Regulations, which would otherwise have been applicable.
(g) Review fee. Plan review fee, based 1.5% of total project improvement costs (which shall consist of,
but not exclusively of curb and gutters, sidewalks, pavements, sanitary sewer system, storm sewer system,
water distribution system, stormwater detention facilities, parkway trees, landscaping, street lights, plus soil
erosion control measures) as estimated by the design engineer and approved by the Village Engineer.
(Ord. O-34-17, 4/3/17)
13.06. Preliminary and Final Planned Development application process in one step.
When any applicant chooses to file with the Administrator all supporting documents and other
submittals required for Preliminary Planned Development approval under section 13.04, and all supporting
documents and other submittals required for Final Planned Development approval required under section 13.05
(except the 13.05 (a) (2) requirements), together with a petition for rezoning of the subject property to a
Planned Development classification, if needed, and prior to any hearing of the Plan Commission, the
applicant’s preliminary and final development plans shall be deemed consolidated. The following procedures
shall be followed with respect to the applicant's Preliminary and Final Planned Development and Rezoning
applications.
(a) The Plan Commission shall hold a single public hearing, upon notice as required by this code
ordinance, to:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -138
(1) Consider and act upon the applicant's Preliminary and Final Planned Development application
in the same manner as provided in section 13.04(e) for Preliminary Planned Development;
and
(2) Consider and act upon the applicant's petition for rezoning of the subject property to a
Planned Development classification.
(b) The hearing may be continued from time to time at the discretion of the Plan Commission to permit
the applicant to amend the final development plans to conform to the suggestions or requests of the Plan
Commission members or members of the public.
(c) After the hearing, including any continuances, has been completed, the Plan Commission's written
findings and recommendations shall be submitted to the Village Council, as provided in section 13.04(e).
Within sixty (60) days after receipt of such findings and recommendations, the Village Council shall take final
action on the Preliminary and Final Planned Development applications and on the petition for rezoning to
Planned Development, in the manner provided in section 13.05.
(Ord. O-34-17, 4/3/17)
13.07. Implementation of final plan.
(a) Implementation. Any Planned Development project for which an ordinance has been adopted by
the Village Council shall be developed only in accordance with the final plan with any requested changes made
according to the requirements set forth in this section.
(b) Final Planned Development recorded. Only after all letters of credit, bonds, and all final permits
required by all applicable regulatory agencies and governing bodies are issued and provided to the Village, the
final development plans, and/or plat, together with the ordinance approving the Planned Development, zoning
and all pertinent covenants and restrictions shall be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook
County. If required as part of the Final Planned Development approval, the Village may require recordation
prior to issuing a site development permit.
(1) Said Final Planned Development shall be binding upon the applicants, any successors and
assignees.
(2) Any exhibits which are referenced in any covenants or restrictions shall be maintained on file
with the Village Clerk.
(c) Conditions and terms. Each planned development shall be subject to the following conditions and
terms:
(1) The developer shall be required to appear before the Village Council if, in the opinion of the
Administrator, no substantial effort is being made to comply with the development schedule.
(2) All authorized Project Improvements shall be substantially completed as determined by the
Administrator within three (3) years after the date of adoption of the Final Planned
Development Ordinance.
(3) Public Improvement Security - To insure the completion of Public Improvements, as defined
within the Village Code and Planned Development Ordinance within the specified time, the
Village shall require the developer to submit a letter of credit for 115% of the full amount of
the estimate of probable cost of such Public Improvements, in a manner acceptable to the
Village Engineer, along with a ten (10) percent cash bond for the one year maintenance
period. Such letter of credit shall be in the form specified in the Village’s Subdivision, Site
Development, and Floodplain Regulations [Appendix B].
(4) To insure the removal of any partially complete building(s) and/or removal of any building
materials and debris upon either the Planned Development’s completion or for a failed
project, within the specified time, the Village shall require the developer to submit a Planned
Development letter of credit or other acceptable form of financial assurance that is approved
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -139
by the Village, in an amount equal to the following calculations:
a. Residential developments - $10,000/unit or lot
b. Non-residential developments – building(s) size – 0-5,000 square feet = $25,000;
5,001 to 10,000 square feet = $50,000; 10,001 – 50,000 square feet = $100,000.
c. For all non-residential buildings greater than 50,000 square feet or mixed use
developments – A sum approved by the Village Council as part of the Planned
Development Ordinance. Such letter of credit shall be presented in a manner
acceptable to the Village of substantially the following form:
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT
AMOUNT _________________ DATED: ___________________
NO. ______________________
To: Village of Palatine
a municipal corporation
Cook County
Palatine, Illinois 60067
Attention: Village Clerk
RE: ______________________
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We hereby establish and issue our Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit, in favor of you, the Village of Palatine,
a municipal corporation, (“Beneficiary”) for the account of
_______________________________________________________________________
in the amount of _____________________ dollars available by presentation of your Sight Draft(s) on us at
sight marked “Drawn under Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit # __________ dated ____________20___,
Subject to the provisions of this Letter of Credit, demand for payment may be made by you, the Beneficiary, by
presentation to the Bank at our offices located at ________________________________________________,
a sight draft in the form of Exhibit A, attached hereto, appropriately completed, in the amount specified
therein.
Demand for payment may be made by you under this Letter of Credit any time prior to _____:00 p.m. on the
date of expiration hereof during the Bank’s business hours at the aforesaid address, on a business day, and for
purposes of this Letter of Credit, the term “business day” means a day that is not a Saturday or Sunday, or other
day on which banking institutions in Illinois are authorized by law or executive order to close. Demand for
payment must be accompanied by the following documents:
_________________________________________________________________________
(Name of Bank)
FOR ACCOUNT OF _______________________________________________________
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -140
(1) Your statement signed by the Village Manager or by the Village Engineer or their designee
that payment represents payment or estimate payment required to be made to materialmen,
contractors, or subcontractors for the removal of all debris, rubbish, building materials,
apparatus, tools and equipment, Project Improvements, as well as all excess excavated
materials from the said premises which have not been removed by the developer upon
completion and Village acceptance of the work described in the Final Planned Development
or upon abandonment of the work for a period of more than 6 months; the demolition of any
existing structures in place, which must be removed in order to implement the Final Planned
Development; and work approved by the Village Council of the Village of Palatine on
_________ under Ordinance No. ________ or any duly authorized extension or modification
thereof and the restoration of the premises where said construction and installation work is
performed to the same condition it was in before said work was commenced.
(2) The placement of any uncompleted buildings in a safe and secure condition or demolition of
the same, if not done by the developer, and removal of all debris, rubbish, building materials,
including foundations and partially constructed portions of buildings, and all apparatus, tools
and equipment, as well as all excess excavated materials from the said premises, if not done
by the developer, in the event of the lapse of the planned development as a result of the failure
of the developer to do the work in accordance with the manner and phasing schedule
described in the Final Planned Development Ordinance approved by the Village Council of
the Village of Palatine, or any duly authorized extension or modification thereof;
(3) To hold the funds drawn for one or more of the purposes set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2)
above if the work has not been completed and accepted as provided in paragraph (1) at least
thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of this letter of Credit or any renewal hereof.
All drafts hereunder must be marked drawn under ________, ________, Illinois.
Letter of Credit No.: ________ dated ________.
The amount of each draft drawn under this credit must be endorsed hereon and the presentation of
each draft, if negotiated, shall be a warranty by the negotiating bank that such endorsement has been made and
that documents have been forwarded as herein required; if the draft is not negotiated, this credit must
accompany the draft. Except insofar as otherwise stated herein, this credit is subject to the “Uniform Customs
and Practice for Documentary Credits (as revised), International Chamber of Commerce Publication No. 600.”
We hereby undertake to honor drafts under and in compliance with the terms of this credit, when
accompanied by the documents specified when presented to us.
Notwithstanding anything contained herein, unless the Project Improvements are timely completed by the
Applicant of this Irrevocable Letter of Credit as set forth above, it is a condition of this Letter of Credit and our
right to terminate our obligation hereunder that at least 90 (ninety) days prior to the expiration of this
irrevocable letter of credit, we shall notify in writing the Corporate Authorities of the municipality, by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to: Village Clerk, 200 E. Wood Street, Palatine,
IL 60067 of the impending termination date. This commitment shall not terminate without such notice. If the
work has not been completed then this Letter of Credit shall be automatically renewed on an annual basis until
the work has been completed or the Letter of Credit has been drawn upon, unless the above described ninety
(90) day notice of termination of this Letter of Credit is provided to the Beneficiary.
By: __________________________
Name
Title
Signature: ___________________
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -141
Sight Draft
Drawn Under Irrevocable Standby Letter
of Credit # _____ Dated ____, 20__.
Palatine, Illinois
Date: ________
TO: ___________________________
At sight, pay to the Village of Palatine, an Illinois municipal corporation, pursuant to the electronic
federal wire transfer instructions below, ____ and _____/100 United States Dollars ($____.__ USD).
Drawn under Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit # _____ dated ____, 20__.
Village of Palatine
An Illinois Municipal Corporation
By; _______________________________
Title: Village Manager or Village Engineer
By: _______________________________
Name: ____________________________
Title: Village Clerk
WIRE TRANSFER DIRECTIONS:
Name of Bank: _________________
ABA NO.: _____________________
For the account of: Village of Palatine
Account No.: ___________________
Contact Director of Finance and Operations: 847-359-9018
(d) Authorized changes by Village Manager.
(1) Changes prior to construction. The Village Manager may authorize minor changes in
locations, siting, or character of in the Final Planned Development. No changes can be
authorized that may lead to the following:
a. Increase the size of any building or structure; or
b. Change the location of any building or structure by more than ten (10) feet in any
direction; or
c. Provide for changes beyond the minimum or maximum requirements set forth in the
approved Planned Development ordinance.
(2) Changes in established Planned Developments, with all required project improvements
complete. It is recognized that successful, established Planned Developments may require
minor changes to insure the continued marketability of the development. The Village
Manager may authorize such changes provided that the change shall not significantly alter the
character or intent of the Planned Development.
a. Any proposed change shall be clearly accessory to the Planned Development.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -142
b. Any granted change shall be clearly stated in the Village file of the Planned
Development.
c. At the discretion of the Village Manager, Village Council review may be required for
a Minor Planned Development Amendment. In such instances the Village shall send
a courtesy notice to all property owners and occupants within 250 feet, of the Subject
Property seven (7) days prior to the Village Council meeting advising them of the
request. (Ord. #O-23-09, §1, 3/2/09; Ord. O-34-17, 4/3/17)
(e) Changes to the time schedule.
(1) In the event the developer anticipates a time delay in meeting the completion date for each
phase or segment thereof, the applicant may file a written request to the Village Council prior
to the expiration of said completion date for each phase or segment.
(2) The Mayor, Village Council or Village Manager, with notice and review by the Corporate
Authorities may extend said completion date for any length of time as deemed justifiable by
the Village Council.
(f) Expiration of time schedule. If actions required in any ordinance establishing a use in a planned
development district are not taken within the time schedule set in connection with such ordinance, the planning
staff shall review the circumstances and prepare a written report specifying the circumstances and
recommending either:
(1) The use for the entire area be continued with a revised time schedule; or
(2) The use be continued for part of the area, with or without a revised time schedule, and the
remainder be rezoned to an appropriate category; or
(3) The entire district be rezoned from a planned development district to an appropriate category;
or
(4) That other appropriate measures be made or actions taken.
(g) Reapplication for planned development and rezoning.
(1) In the event the Village Council decides to rezone all or a portion of the planned development
district and has complied with all necessary administrative procedures, the applicant may
apply for approval of a new or former planned development use and for rezoning of the
subject premises within sixty (60) days after formal Village approval.
(2) In the event the applicant does make such an application within the sixty-day period, the
Village Council shall initiate consideration by referring the matter to the Plan Commission for
public hearing and recommendation.
(h) Change in developer or transfer of development.
If the originally entitled developer wants to either transfer the Planned Development or change the
ownership structure from the entity receiving Final Planned Development approval, as determined by
the Village Attorney, prior to the completion of the Project Improvements, the review and approval
by the Village Council shall be required.
13.08. Acceptance of planned developments approved by another municipal or county government.
(a) A planned development approved prior to annexation of the property involved to the Village may
be continued pursuant to the terms and conditions of an annexation agreement between the Village and the
property owner.
(b) Such planned developments shall be governed by and subject to the terms of any planned
development ordinance affecting the property approved by another municipal or county government or by court
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -143
decision except to the extent such planned development is modified by the terms of an annexation agreement
between the village and the property owner.
(c) Except for and to the extent of conflicting provisions in such other planned development ordinance,
court decisions or annexation agreement, all terms and conditions of the village shall be fully applicable to said
premises.
13.09. Applicable zoning designations.
(a) All existing land zoned Planned Development in the Village of Palatine at the date of adoption of
this ordinance shall conform to the rules and regulations of this Article XIII.
(b) All applications approved after the date of adoption of this ordinance shall be zoned Planned
Development.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -144
ARTICLE XIV. ADMINISTRATION
14.01. Office of the Village Manager.
The Village Manager shall enforce this ordinance and in addition thereto and in furtherance of said
authority he shall:
(a) Receive and forward to the appropriate body for review and recommendation all applications
for special uses, variations, or for amendments to this ordinance, which may be filed initially
in the offices of the Village Manager.
(b) Receive from the Village Council amendments which have been proposed by the Village
Council, and transmit copies of same to the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals for
review and recommendation.
(c) Provide such clerical and technical assistance as may be required by the Zoning Board of
Appeals and Plan Commission in the exercise of their duties.
(d) Maintain permanent and current records of the ordinance, including, but not limited to, all
maps, amendments, and special uses, variations, appeals and applications thereof.
(e) Receive from the Plan Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals, recommendations on
all amendments, variations, and special uses, and transmit same to the Village Council.
(f) Cause to be made inspections of buildings, structures, and uses of land, to determine
compliance with the terms of this ordinance.
(g) Issue all certificates of occupancy and make and maintain records thereof.
14.02. Zoning Board of Appeals.
Jurisdiction and authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby vested with the following
jurisdiction and authority:
(a) To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirements, decisions, or determinations made
by the Village Manager under this ordinance.
(b) To hear and make recommendations to the Village Council upon applications for variations
under the terms provided in this ordinance, in the manner and subject to the standards set
forth in this article.
(c) To hold public hearings on petitions for amendments referred to it, and to submit a report to
the Village Council setting forth its findings and recommendations in the manner prescribed
in this article and as provided by statute.
(d) To hear and decide, or make recommendations on, such other matters as may from time to
time be committed to its jurisdiction by other ordinances of the Village.
14.03. Variations/Appeals.
(a) Purpose. Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section or where the variation is requested in
conjunction with a Plat of Subdivision or Planned Development, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear all
petitions for variations, and shall recommend variations of the provisions of this ordinance in harmony with its
general purpose and intent, where the zoning board of appeals shall have made a finding of fact based upon the
standards hereinafter described that there are practical difficulties or particular hardship in the way of carrying
out the strict letter of the regulations of this ordinance. Where a variation is requested in conjunction with a
Plat of Subdivision or Planned Development, it shall be heard by the Plan Commission.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -145
(b) Minor Administrative variations for non-conforming decks in rear and side yards and sheds in
easements. The Village Manager, or his designee shall consider the following variations and may
administratively approve, pursuant to the required application process or may remand the application to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for further action. All applications for minor administrative variations shall submit a
minor administrative variation provided by the Village along with all of the required plans and materials,
within the following categories:
1. Applications for variations involving non-conforming decks in rear and side yards.
2. Applications for variations involving sheds located on easements, subject to the applicable
utility company authorization, in conjunction with the building permit submission, if such a
permit is required.
(Ord.No.0-83-95 ?1, 8-14-95)(Ord. No. 0-83-96 ?3, 5/29/96; Ord.No.0-188-99,?1,11-8-99; Ord. O-36-
17, 4/3/17)
(c) Administrative Variations – The Village Manager or his designee shall consider the following
administrative variations and may either administratively approve or recommend approval to the Village
Council on the Consent Agenda or remand to the Zoning Board of Appeals for further action. Only existing
residential structures constructed and approved by the Village of Palatine for Final Occupancy as of January 1,
2017 are eligible to apply for this relief. Residential structures not meeting this eligibility date may apply for a
standard variation. Any administrative variations involving a residential building or structure addition shall be
recommended for approval to the Village Council on the Consent Agenda. The following types of relief are
eligible for administrative variations:
1. Residential building coverage or lot coverage, which exceeds the maximum allowed coverage
by 15% or less. For example, if the maximum allowable lot coverage is 45%, an
administrative variation could be applied for, provided the lot coverage did not exceed
51.75%. In addition to the required application process, an administrative variation for
residential lot or building coverage is subject to a finding of no significant impact for the
proposed improvement by the Village Engineer or his designee. If the Village Engineer
determines that there may be a significant impact, a standard variation application must be
submitted.
2. Encroachments into residential required yards of 10% or less beyond the minimum required
setback for permitted obstructions.
3. Residential driveway width or setbacks which exceed the maximum allowable requirement by
10% or less or minimum required by 10% or more.
(Ord. O-36-17, 4/3/17)
(d) Application for variation.
1. Said application shall contain the following information:
a. Petition for hearing;
b. Real Estate Interest Disclosure Form;
c. Plat of Survey and legal description of the subject property; and
d. Proof of ownership, including signature(s) of owner(s) on the petition for hearing or on a
statement attached to said form giving owner’s consent of the petition.
2. The following materials may be required by the Village, either as part of the application or as a
condition of approval:
a. Site plan;
b. Floor plans;
c. Building elevations;
d. Preliminary engineering plans;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -146
e. Business plan;
f. Signage information;
g. Traffic analysis; and
h. Any other information deemed necessary by the Village.
(Ord. 0-60-06, §18, 4/3/06)
(3) Proof of ownership, proof of authority on behalf of the owner or current contract to purchase
or lease the subject property shall also be required at the time of filing for a variation.
(4) Application for Administrative Variation
a. Completed application and required fees;
b. Narrative outlining the nature of the request and applicable Variation standards;
c. Proof of ownership or interest in the property;
d. Plat of survey;
e. Site Plan and/or building plans, as appropriate;
f. Support materials - any other relevant information deemed necessary by the
applicant in support of the application;
g. List of the required surrounding property addresses, within a one property radius
(including those across the street and behind the property) of the subject property.
The final required list will be reviewed and confirmed by the Village.
h. Sworn affidavit – Confirming the accuracy of the application and supporting
documentation.
(Ord. O-36-17, 4/3/17)
(e) Standards for variations.
(1) Variations or Administrative Variations shall not be granted except on findings based upon
the evidence in each specific case:
a. That the property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be used
only under the conditions allowed by the regulations governing the district in which it
is located; and
b. That the plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; and
c. That the variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.
d. Additionally, variations of the floodplain regulations must comply with the standards
listed in the Subdivision regulations section 6.08(f). However, no variation may be
granted to any development located in the regulatory floodway.(Ord.No. O-83-96,
5/29/96 ?4)
(2) For the purposes of supplementing the above standards, the Village Council, Zoning Board of
Appeals, or Administrator may take into consideration the extent to which the following facts
favorable to the applicant have been established by the evidence:
a. That the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of the
specific property involved would bring a hardship upon the owner, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulation were to be carried out;
b. That the conditions upon which the petition for variation is based would not be
applicable generally to other property within the same zoning classification;
c. That the purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to make more
money out of the property;
d. That the alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any person presently
having an interest in the property;
e. That the granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood
in which the property is located; or
f. That the proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to
adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of fire or otherwise endanger
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -147
the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the
neighborhood.
(3) Administrative Variations adhering to the application submittal requirements and Ordinance
limitations may be administratively approved as follows:
a. After the administrative variation application is submitted and reviewed by the
various Village Departments, the Village will indicate if the applicant may proceed
forward with seeking approval of the requested relief, as follows:
i. Upon review and confirmation of a submitted application to the Village, the applicant
reviews the requested relief and all associated proposed plans with the required
adjacent property owners. As part of this review, the applicant must obtain and
submit a signed statement, on a Village provided form, along with a set of the
proposed plans, confirming that those property owners have no objection to the
requested administrative variation. Only upon receiving a signed statement along
with a signed set of plans from each required property owner, may the administrative
variation be recommended for approval. If an administrative variation is not granted,
the applicant may file for standard variation.
ii. In conjunction with the submitted approval from all of the required adjacent property
owner, the Village will send a copy of the administrative variation application by
standard mail to all taxpayers of record and occupants within 250 feet of the
boundaries of the subject property. If there are no written objections filed with the
Department of Planning and Zoning within 10 days of receipt of such notice, the
administrative variation may be granted. If an administrative variation is not granted,
the applicant may file for a standard variation.
(Ord. O-36-17, 4/3/17)
(f) Decisions of zoning board of appeals.
(1) Variations. The Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend to the Village Council such
conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary to
comply with the standards set forth in this section.
a. All decisions and findings of the Zoning Board of Appeals on variations arrived at
after the hearing shall, in all instances, be referred to the Village Council with report
and recommendations.
b. The Village Council, upon report of the Zoning Board of Appeals and without further
public hearing, may grant any proposed variation or may refer it back to the Zoning
Board of Appeals for further consideration, and any proposed variation which fails to
receive the approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be passed except by
the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all members of the village board. Variations
from the provisions of this ordinance shall be granted only by the Village Council.
Upon receipt of report and recommendation from the Zoning Board of Appeals the
Village Council may:
i. Refer it back to the zoning board of appeals for further consideration;
ii. Grant the proposed variation.
c. Any variation which fails to receive the approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall not be passed by the Village Council except by the favorable vote of two-thirds
(2/3) of all members.
(g) Appeals.
(1) Scope of Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any decision made with respect to this zoning
ordinance by the Community Development Director (?Officer?) may appeal to the Zoning
Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be taken within forty-five (45) days of the decision
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -148
being appealed, by filing with the Officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Zoning
Board of Appeals, a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The Officer shall
forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
(2) Petition for an Appeal. A petition for an appeal shall contain the following information:
a. Name and address of the petitioner
b. Location of property in question
c. Copy of the Officer’s letter outlining the decision being appealed
d. Identification of the ordinance provision(s) in dispute
e. A description of the proposed use, including plot plan, if applicable
f. State the grounds for the appeal
(3) Notice of Hearing. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing
of the appeal. The appeal hearing shall be subject to the same notice provisions as variations.
At the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. The Zoning Board of
Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end
shall have all the powers of the Officer.
(4) Stay of Proceedings. An appeal stays all official proceedings unless the officer from whom
the appeal is taken provides the Zoning Board of Appeals with a statement stating that a stay
of the proceedings would cause imminent peril to life or property.
(5) Decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall reach its
decision within thirty (30) days from the date of the public hearing on the appeal. The
concurring vote of five (5) members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Officer. The Zoning Board
of Appeals shall maintain complete records of all appeal actions. Decisions shall be
submitted to the applicant and Officer.
(6) Appeals to Courts. All final administrative decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals are
subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the ?Administrative Review Law? and
all amendments and modifications thereof and the rules adopted pursuant thereto. The term
?administrative decision? is defined as in Section 3-101 of the Code of Civil Procedure.]
(7) Fees. Any petition for an appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in the fee
schedule supplement to the Palatine Municipal Code. In addition, the petitioner will be
responsible for the costs of supplying a court reporter and the costs for writing up the
transcript. No decision shall be final until the transcript of the record is filed with the Zoning
Board and until proof that the court reporter’s fees have been paid.
(Ord. No. O-50-90, ?? 1, 2, 5-14-90; Ord. No. 0-171-94 ?1, 11-14-94; Ord. No. 0-171-97; 10/27/97 ?3)
(Ord. O-36-17, 4/3/17)
14.04. Plan commission.
Jurisdiction. The plan commission shall have the following duties under this ordinance:
(a) To hold public hearings on all applications for zoning amendments to this ordinance, except when
another hearing body has been designated by the president and board of trustees, and to submit a report to the
Village Council setting forth its findings and recommendations.
(b) To hold public hearings on all applications for special uses referred to it; and to submit a report to
the Village Council setting forth its findings and recommendations.
(c) To initiate, direct and review, from time to time, studies of the provisions of this ordinance and to
make reports of its recommendations to the Village Council not less frequently than once each year.
(d) To review proposed planned developments and plats of subdivision or resubdivision and any
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -149
variations of the subdivision or zoning regulations requested in conjunction with the proposal, and to submit a
report to the Village Council setting forth its findings and recommendations.(Ord.No. O-83-96, 5/29/96 ?5)
(e) To hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under this appendix.
14.05. Special Uses and Special Use Amendments, Minor Special Use, and Administrative Special Uses.
(Ord. #0-122-10, §1, 10/4/10; Ord O-36-17, 4/3/17)
(a) Purpose and authorization. Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this Section, Special Uses and
Special use amendments shall be heard by either the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Plan Commission. The
development and execution of this ordinance is based upon the division of the Village into districts, within any
which district the use of land and buildings, and the bulk and location of buildings and structures as related to
the land are substantially uniform. (Ord. #0-171-94 ?2 and ?3, 11-14-94; Ord. #0-122-10, §2, 10/4/10)
(1) It is recognized, however, that there are special uses which, because of their unique
characteristics cannot be properly classified in any particular district or districts without
consideration, in each individual case, of the impact of those special uses upon neighboring
land and upon the public need for the particular special use at the particular location.
(2) While specific regulations for specific zoning districts in this ordinance may recognize
particular uses that may be allowable in such zoning district as a special use, all such special
uses fall, nevertheless, into two (2) broad categories:
a. Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with the public interest; and
b. Uses entirely private in character, but of such an unusual nature that the operation
may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring
property or public facilities. Such uses may include planned unit developments
meeting the standards and requirements of this ordinance.
(b) Administrative Special Uses, Minor Special Uses, and Special Use Amendments. All applications
for administrative special uses shall be made on an appropriate application form provided by the Village. (Ord.
#0-122-10, §3, 10/4/10)
(1) The Village Manager or designee may recommend approval of the following applications for
Minor Special Uses, Administrative Special Use, and Special Use Amendments to the Village
Council on the Consent Agenda, or may remand the application to the Zoning Board of
Appeals for further action. Minor Special Uses which comply with the application and
ordinance may be administratively approved, pursuant to the required process in the following
category: (Ord. #0-122-10, §4, 10/4/10; Ord. O-36-17, 4/3/17)
a. Applications for special uses involving sheds encroaching upon the setback
requirements. (Ord. No. O-83-96, 5/29/96 ?6;Ord.No.0-188-99,?2,11-8-99)
b. Changes to existing Special Uses which maintain substantial conformance to the
enabled Special Use. (Ord. #0-122-10, §5, 10/4/10)
(2) Administrative Special Uses – The Village Manager or his designee shall consider the
following Administrative Special Uses and may recommend approval to the Village Council
on the Consent Agenda or may remand the application to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Residential structures constructed and approved by the Village of Palatine for Final
Occupancy as of January 1, 2017 are eligible to apply for this relief. Residential structures
not meeting this eligibility date shall follow the standard Special Use process. Any
administrative special use involving a residential building or structure addition shall be
recommended for approval on the Village Council Consent Agenda. The following types of
relief are eligible for administrative special uses:
a. Residential setback reductions for all yards, for which the proposed setback shall not
exceed the minimum requirement by more than 10%, within each zoning district.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -150
(For example, if the required front yard is 30 feet, an administrative special use could
be applied for, provided that the proposed setback was at least 27 feet).
b. Residential fencing, which requires Special Use review.
c. Replacement of existing accessory structures, with non-conforming setbacks,
which maintain or increase the existing setbacks and are within 10% of the total
square footage of the existing accessory structure. Accessory structures located in
the front yard or side yard abutting a street are not eligible for this type of relief
(c) Application for Administrative Special Uses, Special Use and Special Use Amendments. The
application for Special Use, Special Use Amendments, and Administrative Special Uses shall be filed and
processed in the manner prescribed for applications for amendments and shall be accompanied by the
following information: (Ord. #0-122-10, §6, 10/4/10; Ord. O-36-17, 4/3/17)
1. Said application shall contain the following information:
a. Petition for Hearing;
b. Real Estate Interest Disclosure Form;
c. Site Plan, Elevation, Plat of Survey and legal description of the subject property; and
d. Proof of ownership, including signature(s) of owner(s) on the petition for hearing or on a
statement attached to said form giving owner’s consent of the petition.
2. The following materials may be required by the Village, either as part of the application or as a
condition of approval.
a. Site plan;
b. Floor plans;
c. Building elevations;
d. Preliminary Engineering Plans;
e. Business plan;
f. Signage information;
g. Traffic analysis; and
h. Any other information deemed necessary by the Village.
(Ord. 0-60-06, §19, 4/3/06)
(d) Standards. No special use shall be granted by the Village Council unless the special use or
special use amendment: (Ord. #0-122-10, §7, 10/4/10)
(1) Is deemed necessary for the public convenience at that location if categorized as (2)(a) by
paragraph (a) above.
(2) Is so designed, located, and proposed to be operated that the public health, safety and welfare
will be protected.
(3) Will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood in which it
is located.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -151
(4) With respect to requests for live entertainment, the following additional standards must be
met. Said live entertainment: (Ord. No. 0-3-10, §2, 1/11/10)
a. Shall not produce noise levels so great as to constitute an unreasonable interference
with the rights or wellbeing of persons outside of the confines of such establishment.
b. Shall not impose undue health, sanitation or safety burdens on the village.
c. Shall not create excessive demands on the police department of the village so as to
impair its ability to maintain the peace in the village and provide adequate protection
for its citizens.
d. Shall not be of a nature otherwise prohibited by law or village ordinance.
The entertainment proposed shall be fully described in the ordinance granting any
special use hereunder and shall be subject to such reasonable conditions as the
president and board of trustees may prescribe. Any change from the stated
entertainment shall require another special use or permit.
(5) With respect to front yard fencing and fencing in a rear yard/side yard abutting a street, the
following additional standards must be met:
a. Will meet the following aesthetic criteria:
i. Will not destroy existing vistas in the area;
ii. Will enhance the appearance of the homes and the streets in the area; and
iii. Will not detract from the overall appearance of the community; or
b. The fencing is found to be necessary to protect private property or the safety of the
inhabitants of the property.
(6) After the administrative special use application is submitted and reviewed by the various
Village Departments, the Village will indicate if the applicant may proceed forward with
seeking approval of the requested relief, as follows:
a. Upon review and confirmation of a submitted application to the Village, the applicant
reviews the administrative special use application and all associated plans, with the
required adjacent property owners. As part of this review, the applicant must obtain
and submit a signed statement, on a Village provided form, along with a set of the
proposed plans, confirming that those property owners have no objection to the
requested administrative special use. Only upon receiving a signed statement along
with a signed set of plans from each required property owner, may the administrative
special use be recommended for approval. If an administrative special use is not
granted, the applicant may file for standard special use.
b. In conjunction with the submitted approval from all of the required adjacent property
owners, the Village will send a copy of the administrative special use application and
plans by standard mail to all taxpayers of record and occupants within 250 feet of the
boundaries of the subject property. If there are no written objections filed with the
Department of Planning and Zoning within 10 days of receipt of such notice, the
administrative Special Use may be granted. If an administrative special use is not
granted, the applicant may file for a standard special use.
(Ord. O-36-17, 4-3-17)
(e) Conditions. The Plan Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend, and the
Village Council may provide, such conditions and restrictions upon the construction, location and operation of
a special use, including but not limited to provisions for off-street parking and loading, as may be deemed
necessary to promote the general objectives of this ordinance and to minimize injury to the value of property in
the neighborhood.
(f) Lapse of special use permit. A special use permit hereunder granted shall lapse if:
(1) A building permit has not been issued by the village for such construction, installation, or
relocation within one year after the effective date of the ordinance granting said special use.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -152
(2) A building permit has been issued, but such construction, installation or relocation is not
completed within two (2) years after its issuance.
In the event a special use lapses, nothing herein shall prohibit any person from applying for the same special
use or a new special use on substantially the same terms.
(g) Enforcement, penalties and termination.
(1) The Corporate Authorities of the Village may enforce any of the conditions upon which a
special use has been granted hereunder or one or more of the standards set forth in
subparagraph (d) herein by instituting an appropriate action in the Circuit Court of Cook
County, Illinois to enjoin the violation of such condition, and in addition may institute an
action in said court to impose appropriate fines for such violations.
(2) The Corporate Authorities of the Village may terminate any special use for violation of a
condition upon which such special use has been granted or one or more of the standards set
forth in subparagraph (d) herein in the following manner:
a. Written notice of the alleged violation shall be served either personally or by
registered or certified mail, upon the owner and upon the occupant, if any, of the
premises covered by such special use, allowing thirty (30) days following personal
service or mailing of said notice for the violation to be cured, and setting a date
certain sometime after said thirty-day period for a public hearing thereon before the
Corporate Authorities of the Village.
b. If the alleged violation is cured within the thirty-day period and the village manager
so certifies, the public hearing shall be cancelled.
c. If the village manager does not certify, the public hearing shall be held and the owner
and occupant, if any, given an opportunity to show cause, if any thereby, why the
special use should not be terminated.
d. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Corporate Authorities may:
i. Permit the special use to continue generally;
ii. Permit the special use to continue allowing such additional time to cure the
alleged violation as they deem warranted under the circumstances;
iii. With the consent of the owner, adopt an ordinance modifying the special use
in such manner as they deem appropriate after due notice and public hearing
as required by this section; or
iv. Adopt an ordinance repealing the special use, provided that any such
ordinance shall contain findings of fact upon which such repeal is based.
(3) All remedies and actions provided in this paragraph (g) shall be in addition to and not in place
of those elsewhere provided in this ordinance or available under the laws or statutes of the
State of Illinois; specifically including Article XIII, which applies to planned developments.
(Ord. No. O-192-92, ? 1, 12-14-92; Ord. No. 0-171-94 ?2-5 11-14-94; Ord No. O-111-97, ?1, 7-14-97; Ord.
O-36-17, 4/3/17)
(h) Transfers of Special Uses
(1) In order to transfer an existing Special Use within the Village of Palatine, a Special Use
transfer request shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and Zoning. The transfer
shall apply if there is an ownership change for any new owner, operator, lessee, or changes to
the corporate structure for a given use operating under a specific Special Use ordinance. The
Special Use transfer requirement shall not apply to single-family properties used only for
single-family residential purposes.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -153
(2) The Special Use transfer request will indicate that the specific Special Use Ordinance was
reviewed and that the proposed new owner/operator will comply with both the Special Use
Ordinance and any related conditions therein upon transfer and continue operating the Special
Use in a manner consistent with operative Special Use.
(3) Once the Village receives and reviews the Special Use transfer request, the Village Manager
will schedule the transfer for Village Council review and either:
a. Place the transfer request on the Village Council agenda, for those requests generally
consistent with the underlying Special Use.
b. If the Village Manager deems that the new proprietor contemplates a change in use which is
inconsistent with the Special Use ordinance, the new proprietor shall be required to Petition
for a public hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals for a new Special Use.
(Ord. No.0-69-10, §1, 6/21/10)
(i) Special Use Amendments
(1) It is recognized that existing Special Uses will contemplate building and site additions, floor plan
changes and operational adjustments that may change the underlying approvals granted in the
original Special Use.
(2) If a proposed amendment to a Special Use does not substantially conform with the enabled
Special Use, a Special Use Amendment will be processed as a new Special Use under Section
14.05 of the Village’s Zoning Ordinance. If a proposed change does substantially conform with
the enabled Special Use, then the Special Use Amendment may be processed Section 14.05(b)(1).
Such conformance or lack thereof shall be determined by the Administrator after reviewing the
proposed changes.
(Ord. #0-122-10, §8, 10/4/10)
14.06. Amendments.
(a) The plan commission shall hold public hearings on all proposed zoning amendments to this
ordinance, except in connection with annexation of property involving existing development or pending
application before Cook County for proposed development, in which case the president and board of trustees
shall hold such hearing. The plan commission shall report its findings and recommendation to the village
board.
(b) No request for amendment to this ordinance shall be acted upon, unless it is accompanied by such
fee as may be prescribed by the board of trustees to defray the cost of publication and other expenses incident
to the considering and enacting such amendment, excepting upon direction of the board of trustees.
14.07. Required permits and certificates.
(a) Building permits.
(1) It shall be unlawful to start the construction of a new building, structure, parking lot or sign,
or the enlargement, alteration or removal of a building or structure which involves a change in
use without first filing written application for and obtaining a building, development, or
removal permit from the administrator.
(2) Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plat in duplicate, or
duplicate prints thereof, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built
upon, the size, shape and location of any existing building, and such other information as may
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -154
be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this ordinance. A record of applications and
plats shall be kept in the office of the administrator.
(3) No building, development, removal or erection permit shall be issued unless the administrator
has certified after examination of the plot plan and construction plans that such plans show
compliance with all provisions of this ordinance.
(b) Occupancy permits.
(1) No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected or altered shall be
occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose whatsoever until a certificate is issued by
the village manager stating that the intended use is permitted under the provisions of this
ordinance.
(2) Certificate for occupancy of a building shall be applied for coincident with the application for
building permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or alteration of such
building has been completed. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of
the village manager and shall be furnished, on request, to any person having proprietary or
tenancy interest in the building affected.
No permit for excavation for, or the erection of, any building shall be issued before application has
been made for certificate of occupancy and compliance. No building or premises may be occupied until such
certificate shall have been issued.
14.08 Withdrawal of Application and Repeated Application.
(a) Withdrawal of Application: A Petitioner may withdraw an application at any time prior to a final
decision being rendered by the Village Council. Such withdrawal shall not prohibit the Petitioner from being
able to refile such application, but any such refiling shall be treated as an entirely new filing and shall be
subject to all applicable procedures and fees within the Village Code in the same manner as any other new
application.
(b) Repeated Application: Where an application for an amendment, special use, or variation has been
filed by or on behalf of the owner or owners of property affected, no subsequent application requesting
substantially the same relief, as determined by the Village Manager, shall be filed as to the same property
within a period of one (1) year following final action by the Village Council.
(Ord. 0-254-05, §4, 12/19/05)
14.09. Fees.
Any application for an amendment, special use or administrative special use, variation or
administrative variation filed by or on behalf of the owner or owners of the property affected, shall be
accompanied by a fee as provided in the fee schedule supplement to the Palatine Municipal Code
(Ord. No. O-50-90, ? 3, 5-14-90; Ord. No. O-192-92, ? 2, 12-14-92; Ord. No. 0-171-94, ?6, 11-14-94;
Ord.No.0-83-95 ?3, 8-14-95)
14.10. Violation, penalty and enforcement.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or
who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this ordinance, shall, upon conviction, be fined not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for such offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord.No.0-
72A-98,?12,5/26/98)
-------------------------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-142-04 passed on July 6, 2004 deleted Sec. 14.11 Notification in it’s
entirety and substituted a new Sec. 14.11)
-------------------------
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -155
14.11 Notification
a) Notification procedures for public hearings for Residential Special Uses and Variations
shall be as follows:
1) The Village of Palatine shall cause a legal notice of time, place and nature & purpose
of the public hearing, as to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village of Palatine for
the appropriate hearing.
2) The Village of Palatine shall prepare and post a sign(s) on the subject property,
indicating the pending hearing, at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. Said sign(s) shall be posted on each
lot frontage, clearly legible to the public view. Said sign shall be 2’x3’ in size
3) The Village of Palatine shall prepare the written notification letter to be sent pursuant
to section 14.11 (a) 4. The notification letter shall contain the following information:
a. The common address, if applicable and location of the property in question.
b. The nature and purpose of the hearing as provided by the petitioner in their
application.
c. The time and place of the hearing.
d. The name, address and phone number of the petitioner.
e. The location where information may be obtained concerning the petition.
4) The Village of Palatine shall mail the notification letter by standard mail, to all
taxpayers of record of property and occupants located within 250 feet of the boundaries of the subject property,
provided that the number of feet occupied by all public streets, roads, alleys, and any other public ways shall
not be included in the calculation of the 250 foot requirement, at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. The
taxpayers of record shall be the name(s) of the taxpayer(s) as indicated on the most recent real estate tax
records available from the Cook County Assessor’s Office.
(Ord. O-36-17, 4-3-17)
b) Notification procedures for public hearings for Preliminary Planned Developments, Preliminary
and Final Planned Developments (one-step), rezoning and commercial Special Uses and Variations shall be
as follows:
1) The Village of Palatine shall cause a legal notice of the time, place and nature &
purpose of the public hearing, to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village of
Palatine for the appropriate hearing.
2) The petitioner shall post a sign(s) on the subject property, indicating the pending
public hearing, at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. Said sign(s) shall be posted on each lot frontage,
clearly legible to the public view.
3) The Village of Palatine shall prepare the sign for the petitioner. Said sign shall be
no less than 12 square feet in size and shall significantly conform to figure 1.
FIGURE 1
PUBLIC NOTICE
PENDING ZONING HEARING
FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 847-359-9047
WWW.PALATINE.IL.US
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -156
(Ord. 0-87-09, §3, 7/13/09)
4) The petitioner shall obtain the sign(s) timely so as to comply with Section 14.11 (b)2.
Prior to the Village of Palatine issuing the sign(s), the Petitioner shall post a $125 refundable deposit for each
sign. The refundable deposit shall be refunded to the petitioner upon the return of the sign(s) in acceptable
condition. (Ord. #0-13-07, §8, 2/20/07; Ord. O-135-17, 12/11/17)
5) The petitioner shall police the public notification sign(s). Sign(s) removed or
destroyed for whatever reason, including but not limited to theft, vandalism or inclement weather conditions
during the required posting, must be replaced by the petitioner within 48 hours.
6) The Village of Palatine shall prepare for the petitioner a copy of the written
notification letter to be sent pursuant to section 14.11 (b) 7. The notification letter shall contain the following
information:
a. The common address, if applicable and location of the property in question.
b. The nature and purpose of the hearing as provided by the petitioner in their
application.
c. The time and place of the hearing.
d. The name, address and phone number of the petitioner.
e. The location where information may be obtained concerning the petition.
7) The petitioner shall obtain the written notification letter from the Village of Palatine
and mail the notification letter by certified mail to all taxpayers of record of property located within 250 feet of
the boundaries of the subject property, provided that the number of feet occupied by all public streets, roads,
alleys, and any other public ways shall not be included in the calculation of the 250 foot requirement, at least
15 days prior to the public hearing. The taxpayers of record shall be the name(s) of the taxpayer(s) as indicated
on the most recent real estate tax records available from the Cook County Assessor’s Office. Not withstanding
the forgoing requirement, existing non-conforming businesses requiring a Special Use in order to continue
operating shall be permitted to send the written notification letter via standard mail. (Ord. #0-23-09, §2,
3/2/09; Ord. #0-8-15, §2, 1/10/15; Ord. O-36-17, 4/3/17)
8) The Village of Palatine shall send the notification letter by standard mail to all
occupants within 250 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, at least 15 days prior to the public hearing.
9) The petitioner shall provide an Affidavit of Compliance with Notice Requirements.
The petitioners shall present to the public hearing body an Affidavit swearing that all applicable notice
requirements have been preformed in accordance with this Ordinance.
c) Notification procedures for public hearings for Final Planned Developments shall be as follows:
1) The petitioner shall post a sign(s) on the subject property, indicating the pending
public hearing, at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. Said sign(s) shall be posted on each lot frontage,
clearly legible to the public view.
2) The Village of Palatine shall prepare the sign for the petitioner. Said sign shall be
4’x5’ and shall conform to section 14.11 (b) 3 figure 1.
3) The petitioner shall obtain the sign timely so as to comply with Section 14.11 (b) 2.
Prior to the Village of Palatine issuing the sign(s), the Petitioner shall post a $125 deposit for each sign. The
deposit shall be refunded to the petitioner upon the return of the sign(s). (Ord. O-135-17, 12/11-17)
4) The petitioner shall police the public notification sign(s). Sign(s) removed or
destroyed for whatever reason, including but not limited to theft, vandalism or inclement weather conditions
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -157
during the required posting, must be replaced by the petitioner within 48 hours.
5) The Village of Palatine shall prepare for the petitioner a copy of the written
notification letter to be sent pursuant to section 14.11 (b) 6. The notification letter shall contain the following
information:
a. The common address, if applicable and location of the property in question.
b. The nature and purpose of the hearing as provided by the petitioner in their
application.
c. The time and place of the hearing.
d. The name, address and phone number of the petitioner.
e. The location where information may be obtained concerning the petition.
6) The petitioner shall obtain the written notification letter from the Village of Palatine
and mail the notification letter by certified mail, to all taxpayers of record of property located within 250 feet of
the boundaries of the subject property, provided that the number of feet occupied by all public streets, roads,
alleys, and any other public ways shall not be included in the calculation of the 250 foot requirement, at least
15 days prior to the public hearing. The taxpayers of record shall be the name(s) of the taxpayer(s) as indicated
on the most recent real estate tax records available from the Cook County Assessor’s Office. (Ord. No. 0-82-
11, §1, 7/18/11; Ord. O-36-17, 4/3/17)
7) The Village of Palatine shall send the notification letter by standard mail to all
occupants within 250 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, provided that the number of feet occupied
by all public streets, roads, alleys, and any other public ways shall not be included in the calculation of the 250
foot requirement, at least 15 days prior to the public hearing.
8) The petitioner shall provide an Affidavit of Compliance with Notice Requirements.
The petitioners shall present to the public hearing body an Affidavit swearing that all applicable notice
requirements have been preformed in accordance with this Ordinance.
----------------
[Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-22-02 passed on February 25, 2002 added a new Sec. 14.12 to Article XIV
Administration]
-------------------
14.12 Stop Work Orders
(a) It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, contractor, subcontractor or builder engaged in
developing property pursuant to a permit issued by the Village to make any departure from or violate:
(i) Any ordinance or code of the Village;
(ii) Any conditions attached to a special use ordinance, planned unit development
ordinance, variation, or annexation agreement;
(iii) Any federal, state or other local law or ordinance;
(iv) Commit any fraud or make any misrepresentation or false statement in an application
for a license or permit; or
(v) Cause a nuisance or danger to the public health, safety or welfare.
Any such departure from or violation of such ordinance, code, condition or threat to the public welfare
or law shall operate to void the permit which has been issued for such work.
(b) The Manager, without delay, shall issue a stop work order directing that all persons engaged
in the work permitted under the permit shall cease and desist immediately until such time as
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES - APPENDIX A - ZONING
A -158
the Manager has either received satisfactory evidence that the work to be performed will be
done in accordance with such ordinance, codes, conditions, laws or the public welfare until
the Corporate Authorities have acted on the matter pursuant to either paragraph (c) or (d).
(c) The Manager may refer the matter of continuing the stop work order to the Corporate
Authorities for further proceedings. The Corporate Authorities shall have the authority to:
(i) Continue in effect the stop work order;
(ii) Lift the stop work order;
(iii) Impose additional requirements as conditions to lifting the stop work order; and/or
(iv) Any other relief consistent with the public welfare.
(d) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Manager in regard to the issuance of a stop work
order or refusal to rescind the same shall have the right to appeal to the Corporate Authorities.
Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Manager, within five days after receipt of a stop
work order or after the Manager's refusal to rescind such an order, a written statement under
oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The Corporate Authorities shall appoint
a hearing body to be composed of the Mayor or the Mayor's designee and two Council
Members who shall thereupon set the time and place for a hearing of such appeal and notice
of such hearing shall be given to the appellant. The hearing body shall make a
recommendation to the Corporate Authorities which shall render a decision on such appeal
which shall be final. Any appeal from a decision of the Corporate Authorities shall be made
directly to the Circuit Court of Cook County pursuant to the Administrative Review Act (735
ILCS 5/3-101, et seq.).
(e) All costs and expenses including but not limited to court reporters fees and attorneys' fees
incurred by the Village in connection with any appeal of a stop work order shall be taxed to
the appellant and shall be paid by the appellant as a condition to reinstatement of the permit.
(f) The authority to issue a stop work order shall be in addition to any other relief available to the
Village.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B- 1
Appendix B SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS*
----------
*Editor's note--Ord. No. O-17-88, §1, adopted March 14, 1988, repealed App. B, pertaining to
subdivisions and enacted new provisions pertaining to subdivisions as a new Appendix B to read as
herein set out. Absence of a history note following a particular section indicates that such section derives
unchanged from Ord. No. O-17-88; conversely, a history note enclosed in parentheses following a section
indicates amendment by the ordinance or ordinances shown in such history note. Former Appendix B
derived from Code 1961, §§ 8.401--8.503 and the following legislation:
ORD. NO. DATE ORD. NO. DATE
0-16-66 3-21-66 0-70-78 8-28-78
0-20-66 4-25-66 0-18-79 3-12-79
0-10-67 3-20-67 0-19-79 3-29-79
0-37-68 6-17-68 0-59-79 5-29-79
0-48-68 7-8-68 0-69-79 6-27-79
0-49-68 7-8-68 0-81-79 7-9-79
0-32-69 7-14-69 0-85-79 7-9-79
0-35-71 4-12-71 0-20-80 2-25-80
0-103-74 12-30-74 0-77-80 10-13-80
0-70-75 9-22-75 0-4-81 1-26-81
0-2-76 1-12-76 0-61-81 6-22-81
0-12-76 2-9-76 0-59-82 6-29-82
0-17-76 2-23-76 0-69-82 7-26-82
0-42-76 4-26-76 0-49-83 8-8-83
0-85-77 8-22-77 0-94-86 8-25-86
Cross reference(s)--Department of public works, §2-171 et seq.; department of community
development, §2-191 et seq.; electrical commission, §2-191 et seq.; Palatine Environmental Coordinating
Council, § 2-306 et seq.; director of environmental health, § 2-326 et seq.; board of health, § 2-341 et
seq.; plan commission, §2-421 et seq.; board of zoning appeals, §2-431 et seq.;Ch. 6 Building Codes and
Building Regulations; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 7; garbage and refuse, Ch. 8; health and
sanitation, Ch. 9; Existing structures' maintenance, etc., Ch. 10; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 16; water and
sewer services, Ch. 19; zoning, App. A.
-----------------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-22-02 passed February 25, 2002 added a new Sec. 1.07 Stop Work Orders to
Article I
-----------------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-105-08, passed on August 4, 2008 renamed Appendix “B” from
“Subdivisions” to “Subdivision, Site Development and Floodplain Regulations”
-----------------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-134-14, passed on October 20, 2014 amended Art. I, II, III, VIII & IX –
related to MWRD - Watershed Management
-----------------
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-33-15, passed on April 20, 2015, Effective 8/1/15, added a new Sec. 9.04
Recaptures to Art. IX
-----------------
Art. I. General Provisions, §§1.01--1.07
Art. II. Definitions, §§2.01
Art. III. Preliminary Plat, §3.01
Art. IV. Final Plat, §4.01
Art. V. Dedication of Park Land and School Sites for Payment of Fees in Lieu
Thereof, §§5.01--5.03
Art. VI. Design Standards, §§6.01--6.10
Art. VII. Protection of Existing Trees, §7.01
Art. VIII. Required Land Improvements, §§8.01--8.10
Art. IX. Improvement Procedures, §§9.01--9.04
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B- 2
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.01. Purpose and intent.
(a) The purpose of the Village of Palatine Subdivision Site Development and Floodplain
Regulations is to provide citizens with a safe, healthy, and beneficial environment in which to live. (Ord.
No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
(b) Development of land can have a profound impact upon the cost and efficiency of providing
public services, sewer and water supply, educational and recreational services.
(c) These regulations are intended to provide the minimum requirements that will insure a
wholesome community environment, adequate provision of municipal services, safe streets, and sound
development of the village.
1.02. Separability.
If any part or parts of these regulations are held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts of these regulations.
1.03. Scope.
(a) Jurisdiction. This appendix shall be considered as an implementation of the official
comprehensive plan of the village.
(1) Applicability. The provisions of this article appendix shall apply to land situated within
the corporate limits and except where specifically excluded, to contiguous territory
within one and one-half (1 1/2) miles beyond the corporate limits of the village as now or
hereafter existing which is not included in any other city or village, except as such
jurisdiction is limited by other provisions of statutes of the State of Illinois or amended
by agreement between the village and any other municipality pursuant to statute.
(2) Partial exception. A subdivision or resubdivision of land in which the entire tract is
divided into three (3) lots or less, and involving no dedication of right-of-ways, shall be
exempt from the requirements of this appendix relating to the filing of preliminary plats,
as stated in section 3.01(a)(1)(e).
(b) Interpretation.
(1) Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this appendix are either more
restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision
of this appendix, or of any law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation of any kind, the
regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards of requirements
shall govern.
(2) This appendix is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or other private
agreement; provided that where the regulations of this appendix are more restrictive or
impose higher standards of requirements than such easements, covenants, or other
private agreements, the requirements of this appendix shall govern.
(3) A subdivision of land which was not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this
appendix shall not become or be made lawful solely by reason of adoption of this
appendix; and to the extent that, in any manner that said subdivision of land is in conflict
with the requirements of this appendix, said subdivision of land remains unlawful
hereunder.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B- 3
1.04. Variations.
The plan commission may recommend variations from the requirements of this ordinance in
specific cases which, in its opinion, do not affect the general plan or the intent of this appendix. However,
no variations may be granted to any development located in a regulatory floodway.
(a) Such recommendations shall be communicated to the Village Council in writing
substantiating the recommended variation.
(b) The Village Council may approve variations from the requirements in specific cases
which in its opinion, do not adversely affect the general plan or the spirit of this
appendix.
(c) Variations of the floodplain regulations must comply with the requirements of 6.08 (i).
(Ord. No. 0-83-96, 5/29/96, §7; Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
(d) Variances to any requirements of the Cook County Watershed Management Ordinance
can only be granted by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago
in accordance with Article 11 of the Watershed Management Ordinance. (Ord. No. 0-
134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
1.05. Permits.
(a) Watershed management permit. The provisions of the Cook County Watershed
Management Ordinance approved as amended by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater
Chicago on October 3, 2013, are adopted herein by reference, subject to the modifications, supplements
and exceptions set out in this Appendix B of the Code of Ordinances for the Village of Palatine. (Ord.
No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
(1) In the event of conflict between the provisions of the Cook County Watershed
Management Ordinance and any other provisions of the Code of Ordinances for the
Village of Palatine, the most stringent provisions shall apply. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1,
10/20/14)
(2) The Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago shall review and issue
watershed management permits. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
(b) Building permits. Before issuance of any building permits for improvements of lots within a
subdivision or planned development, the subdivider, builder or developer shall;
(1) File with the administrator, the approved, final recorded plat of subdivision.
(2) Completely and satisfactorily install functioning sanitary sewer systems, storm sewer and
water service to each lot and street paving with the exception of the final surface course.
(c) Occupancy permit. Before issuance of any certificate of occupancies, and in addition to any
other requirements of the village for certification for occupancy the street lighting system shall be
installed and functioning, street identification signs and traffic control signs shall be installed, all
electrical, telephone and gas utility lines shall be installed and public sidewalk installed along the frontage
of the subject lot and the parkway finished grade.
(1) A spotted topographic survey of the lot must be submitted showing the elevation at the
top of the foundations, lot corners and points of change in gradients. These elevations
shall be in compliance with those indicated on the grading plans.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B- 4
1.06. Enforcement.
The village manager is hereby appointed the enforcing officer of this appendix, and it shall be
his/her duty to enforce the provisions hereof. The enforcing officer may call upon any department or
official of the village to furnish such information and assistance as deemed necessary for the observance
or enforcement of this article appendix, and it shall be the duty of such department or officer to furnish
such information and assistance whenever required.
1.07 Stop Work Orders
(a) It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, contractor, subcontractor or builder engaged in
developing property pursuant to a permit issued by the Village to make any departure from or violate:
(i) Any ordinance or code of the Village;
(ii) Any conditions attached to a special use ordinance, planned unit development
ordinance, variation, or annexation agreement;
(iii) Any federal, state or other local law or ordinance;
(iv) Commit any fraud or make any misrepresentation or false statement in and
application for a license or permit;
(v) Construct, alter, install or repair any structure or improvement contrary to the
drawings or plans which the Village approved when issuing the permit; or
(vi) Cause a nuisance or danger to the public health, safety or welfare.
Any such departure from or violation of such ordinance, code, condition or threat to the public
welfare or law shall operate to void the permit which has been issued for such work.
(b) The Manager, without delay, shall issue a stop work order directing that all persons engaged in
the work permitted under the permit shall cease and desist immediately until such time as the Manager has
either received satisfactory evidence that the work to be performed will be done in accordance with such
ordinance, codes, conditions, laws or the public welfare until the Corporate Authorities have acted on the
matter pursuant to either paragraph (c) or (d).
(c) The Manager may refer the matter of continuing the stop work order to the Corporate
Authorities for further proceedings. The Corporate Authorities shall have the authority to:
(i) Continue in effect the stop work order;
(ii) Lift the stop work order;
(iii) Impose additional requirements as conditions to lifting the stop work order;
and/or
(iv) Any other relief consistent with the public welfare.
(d) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Manager in regard to the issuance of a stop work
order or refusal to rescind the same shall have the right to appeal to the Corporate Authorities. Such
appeal shall be taken by filing with the Manager, within five days after receipt of a stop work order or
after the Manager's refusal to rescind such an order, a written statement under oath setting forth
specifically the grounds for appeal. The Corporate Authorities shall appoint a hearing body to be
composed of the Mayor or the Mayor's designee and two Council Members who shall thereupon set the
time and place for a hearing of such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant.
The hearing body shall make a recommendation to the Corporate Authorities which shall render a
decision on such appeal which shall be final. Any appeal from a decision of the Corporate Authorities
shall be made directly to the Circuit Court of Cook County pursuant to the Administrative Review Act
(735 ILCS 5/3-101, et seq.).
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B- 5
(e) All costs and expenses including but not limited to court reporters fees and attorneys' fees
incurred by the Village in connection with any appeal of a stop work order shall be taxed to the appellant
and shall be paid by the appellant as a condition to reinstatement of the permit.
(f) The authority to issue a stop work order shall be in addition to any other relief available to the
Village. (Ord. 0-22-02 §11, 2/25/02)
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
2.01. Definitions.
(a) Other definitions and meanings. Words not defined herein shall be understood by those
definitions in Appendix A Definitions, of the Cook County Watershed Ordinance or by their common
dictionary definition. In the event of conflict between definitions, the most restrictive meaning shall apply.
(b) Interpretation of terms and words. The terms and words used shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Verbs and phrases in the present tense shall be presumed to include the future tense.
(2) Parts of speech used in the singular shall be presumed to include the plural and those used in
the plural shall be presumed to include the singular.
(3) The words “shall,’ “will,” and “must” are understood as mandatory, not permissive.
(4) All distances shall be measured horizontally unless otherwise stated.
(5) A masculine, feminine or neuter pronoun shall not exclude the other genders.
(Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
(c) Specific definitions.
Accessory Structure. A subordinate detached, non-habitable building without plumbing or sanitary
facilities that is 600 square feet or less in area, or as further determined by Article VI of Appendix A of
the Village of Palatine Code of Ordinances, which is located on the same zoning lot as the principal
building, the use of which is incidental and customary to that of the principal building including above
ground utility appurtenances and recreational equipment. When an accessory structure is attached to and
made part of the principal building, such accessory structure shall comply in all respects with the
requirements of the zoning ordinance applicable to the principal building. (Ord. No.0-105-08, §2,
8/14/08; Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14; Ord. No. O-35-19, 04/08/19)
Administrator. The director of community development of the village or a person designated by the
village manager.
Alley. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
Applicant. The owner or contract purchaser of land proposed to be subdivided or his legal
representative. See Subdivider.
Basal clearance. The distance from the center of the tree to the structure or object involved.
Base flood. The flood having a one percent probability of being equalled or exceeded in any given
year. The base flood is also known as the one hundred (100) year frequency flood event. (Ord. #0-105-
08, §2, 8/14/08; Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Base flood elevation (BFE). The highest ground elevation in relation to the North American Vertical
Datum of 1988 which would be inundated by the base flood according to the information provided on the
maps outlined in section 6.08(c). (Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08; Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B- 6
Block. That property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting
streets, or between the nearest such street and a railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, or live
stream; or between any of the foregoing and other barriers to the continuity of the development.
Building. A walled and roofed structure, including prefabricated buildings, that is principally above
ground. The term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers that are stored on a site more than
180 consecutive days. This term does not include accessory structures. (Ord. #0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08;
Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Building code. Shall mean Chapter 6. Building Codes and Regulations of the Code of Ordinances,
Village of Palatine, Illinois.
Building permit. A permit issued by the Village of Palatine, Illinois for the construction, erection or
alteration of a structure, building, parking lot or connection to utility lines.
Building principal. A non-accessory building in which a principal use of the lot, on which it is
located, is conducted. (Ord. No. O-35-19, 04/08/19)
Building service sewer. A building service sewer is the private property owner's sewer that connects a
residential, commercial or industrial building with the sewer main.
Building setback line. A line on the final plat, between which and the adjacent street line, buildings or
structures may not be erected.
Bulletin 70. Huff, F.A., and J.R. Angel, 1989. “Rainfall Distributions and Hydroclimatic
Characteristics of Heavy Rainstorms in Illinois” (Bulletin 70), Illinois State Water Survey. (Ord. No. 0-
134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Certify or certification. The specific inspections and tests where required have been performed and
that such tests comply with the applicable requirements of this appendix.
Channel. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or altered which has a definite bed and
banks, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either permanently or intermittently. Roadside
drainage ditches are not included. (Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08)
Channel Modification. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its
bed or banks. Channel modification includes damming, rip-rapping (or other armoring), widening,
deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bed or
banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying trees or other vegetation,
debris, trash and obstructions from the channel. Channelization is a severe form of channel modification
involving a significant change in the channel cross-section and typically involving relocation of the
existing channel (e.g. straightening). (Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08)
Collector street. See Street.
Compensatory storage. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within a
floodplain used to offset the loss of natural flood storage capacity when fill or structures are placed within
the floodplain. (Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08; Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Control volume. The first inch of runoff from the impervious area of development on the site.
(Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Critical facilities. Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the population and, if
flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact
the delivery of vital services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can put
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B- 7
special populations at risk. Example of critical facilities where addition flood protection should be
provided include: (Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08)
A. Those structures or facilities which produce, use or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive,
toxic and/or water-reactive materials;
B. Hospitals, Nursing Homes and Housing which are likely to contain occupants who may not be
sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during a flood event;
C. Police Stations, Fire Stations, Vehicle and Equipment Storage Facilities and Emergency
Operations Centers which are needed for flood response activities before, during and after a flood
event; and
D. Public and Private Utility Facilities which are vital to maintaining or restoring normal services to
flooded areas before, during and after a flood event."
Cubic yards. The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by the method of "average
end areas".
Cul de sac. See Street.
Cumulative Substantial Improvement. The value of all improvements, modifications, additions, and
reconstruction projects to existing buildings counted cumulatively for ten (10) years.
Demolition. Removal of structures, impervious area, or utilities that return a parcel to a natural or
vacant state. Demolition must not affect the volume, flow rate, or composition of storm water.
Demolition activities that change the use of the site or require any fill within a flood protection area are
considered development. (Ord. No. O-35-19, 04/085/19)
Detention storage. The temporary detaining or storage of storm water in storage basins, on roof tops,
in streets, parking lots, school yards, parks, open spaces or other areas under predetermined and controlled
conditions with the rate of drainage therefrom regulated by appropriately installed devices.
Developer. A person, group of persons, corporation, organizations, or other entity whose concern and
desire is to improve land in accordance with the regulations of the village. See Subdivider.
Development. Finalization of a Plat of Subdivision or man-made induced activity or change to real
estate, including but not limited to construction, reconstruction, repair or placement of a building or
addition, installation of utilities, mining, drilling, construction of roads, levees, dams, culverts, walls,
fences, and bridges, demolition, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, storage of equipment and
materials, clearing or other non-agricultural alterations of the ground surface, and any other activity that
affects the volume, flow-rate, drainage pattern or composition of stormwater or the substantial
improvement of an existing building in a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). (Ord.No.O-83-96, 5/29/96
§8; Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08; Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Drainage area. The land tributary to a given point that contributes runoff from rainfall and/or
snowmelt. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Dry bottom detention basin. A basin designed to be completely dewatered after having provided its
planned detention of runoff during a storm event.
Easement. A grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose.
Engineer. A registered engineer of the State of Illinois, under the Illinois Professional Engineering
Act (225 ILCS 325/1, et seq.) (Ord.No.O-83-96, 5/29/96 §8)
Erosion and sedimentation control plan. A plan of the proposed site development containing all
erosion and sedimentation control measures needed to provide protection throughout all phases of
construction, according to the regulations as specified in section 6.09.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B- 8
Erosion and sediment control practice. A temporary or permanent measure that stabilizes soil by
covering and/or binding soil particles in order to prevent soil particles from becoming detached by the
forces of wind, water or gravity and intercepts sediment in runoff. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Erosion control practice. A temporary or permanent measure that stabilizes soil by covering and/or
binding soil particles in order to prevent soil particles from becoming detached by the forces of wind,
water or gravity. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Excavation. Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or other similar material is cut
into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the
conditions resulting therefrom.
Existing grade. The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency whose primary mission is to
reduce the loss of life and property and protect the nation from all hazards (including natural disasters,
acts of terrorism and other man-made disasters) by leading and supporting the nation in a risk-based,
comprehensive emergency management system of preparedness, protection, response, recovery and
mitigation. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Fill. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is deposited, placed,
replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by man to a new location and shall include the
conditions resulting therefrom.
Final plat. A map or plan of a subdivision, and any accompanying material as described in Article IV.
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry lands from the overflow of inland waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface
waters from any source.
Flood Frequency. A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a stated
magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded. (Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08)
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM). The current versions of a map issued by FEMA that is an official
community map on which FEMA has delineated both the Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) and the
risk premium zones applicable to a community together with any amendments, revisions or substitutions
issued by FEMA at any time. (Ord.No.O-83-96, 5/29/96 §8; Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08; Ord. No. 0-
134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Flood Insurance Study (FIS). The current version of a study of flood discharges and flood profiles for
a community adopted and published by FEMA together with any amendments, additions, revisions or
substitutions issued by FEMA at any time. The FIS also includes its associated FIRMs. (Ord. No. 0-134-
14, §1, 10/20/14)
Floodplain. That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or
below a specific flood elevation. Floodplains also include detached Special Flood Hazard Areas and
isolated depressional ponding areas with a surface area greater than 0.25 acres at the time of inundation.
The floodplain is also known as the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1,
10/20/14)
(a) The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the Village of Palatine that are
subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The SFHA’s of the Village of
Palatine are generally identified as such on map number 17031C, panels 0038J, 0039J, 0043J, 0044J,
0177J, 0179J, 0181J, 0182J and 0183J dated August 19, 2008, respectively, of the county wide Flood
Insurance Rate Map for Cook County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord.
No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B- 9
(b) The SFHA’s for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the one and
one-half mile extra territorial jurisdiction of the Village of Palatine and may be annexed into the Village
are displayed on map number 17013C, panels 0063J and 0178J dated August 19, 2008, respectively, of
the county wide Flood Insurance Rate Map for Cook County prepared for the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. (Ord. 0-137-00 §1, 10-23-00; Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08)
Floodplain maps. Areas within the Village of Palatine which are included in the floodplain, are
designated as such on the maps referenced in section 6.08(c) which are incorporated hereby by reference
to the extent that said maps cover territory within the village. (Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08)
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to
structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage of improved real property, structures and their
contents.
Flood protection areas. Regulatory floodplains, regulatory floodways, riparian environments,
wetlands and wetland buffers. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Flood protection elevation (FPE). The elevation of the Base Flood plus two (2) feet. (Ord. No. 0-
134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Floodway, designated. The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain
adjacent to a stream or water course as designated by the IDNR/OWR, which is needed to store and
convey the existing 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due
to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a 10 percent increase in velocities.
(a) The floodways are designated for Salt Creek and Buffalo Creek its tributaries and branches
within the jurisdiction of the Village of Palatine on map number 17031 C, 0038J, 0039J, 0043J, 0044J,
0177J, 0179J, 0181J, 0182J and 0183J dated August 19, 2008, respectively, of the county wide Flood
Insurance Rate Map for Cook County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord.
No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08)
(b) The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the one and
one-half mile extra territorial jurisdiction of the Village of Palatine and may be annexed into the Village
are displayed on map number 17013C, panels 0063J and 0178J dated August 19, 2008, respectively, of
the county wide Flood Insurance Rate Map for Cook County prepared for the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. (Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08)
(c) To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated boundary should be
scaled off the designated floodway map and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both
maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the designated floodway
boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation. (Ord. 0-137-00 §2, 10-23-00)
Frontage. All the property on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets (intersecting or
terminating) measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead-ended, then all property abutting
on one side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the street.
Gradient or percent of grade. The vertical rise in feet per one hundred (100) feet of horizontal
distance (A-1 percent grade is a rise of one foot in one hundred (100) feet, for example).
Grading. Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting from
any excavation or fill.
Half Street. See Street.
Historic Structure. Any structure that is;
(a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-1 0
National Register;
(b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historic district or district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
(c) Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the Illinois Historic
Preservation Agency;
(d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
(Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08)
Homeowner's association or condominium association. An organization or association established
pursuant to an agreement or declaration of restrictions consisting of persons owning or assuming
responsibility for open spaces, recreational facilities, detention/retention facilities or other commonly
owned areas or property within a planned development or other real estate development.
Impervious area. Surfaces that do not readily allow for the penetration of rain into the ground, and
includes but is not limited to rooftops, paved areas and graveled areas. Areas that are designated to
promote the infiltration of rainfall into the ground at rates at or above the infiltration rate of naturally
vegetated areas (given applicable soil types), such as non-compacted gravel areas, porous/permeable
pavement areas and bioretention areas (rain gardens and bio-swales composed of an engineered soil mix)
shall not be considered impervious. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Improvements. Grading, street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water mains, fire hydrants, sanitary
sewers, storm sewers, culverts, trees and other additions to the natural state of the land which increases its
value, utility or habitability in accordance with the provisions of this Appendix.
(a) Private Improvement. Any installed or constructed improvement for which the responsibility of
maintenance and ownership will be retained by the property owner.
(b) Public improvement. Any improvement for which it is intended that the Village of Palatine or
other municipal body will assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation or which is
constructed for general use or benefit.
Intersection street. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines,
or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at,
or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways
joining at other angles may come in conflict.
Isolated depressional areas. Any area inundated by the base flood that is not a regulatory floodplain
or a channel or drainageway. (Ord.No.O-83-96, 5/29/96 §8)
Isolated waters. All waters including lakes, ponds, streams, intermittent streams and ephemeral pools
that are not under the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers jurisdiction. The limits of the Isolated Waters in
Cook County extend to the Ordinary High Water Mark (OHWM). (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Land surveyor. A registered surveyor of the State of Illinois, under the Illinois Land Surveyors Act
(225 ILCS 330/1, et seq.) (Ord.No.O-83-96, 5/29/96 §8)
Lot. A parcel of land designated as a lot on a recorded plat of subdivision, located within a single
block, and having its principal frontage upon a street. A double frontage lot is one which abuts on two (2)
streets but is not a corner lot. A corner lot is one situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the interior
angle of such intersection not exceeding one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
Maintenance. The action required to preserve the original function and prevent failure of systems,
which include but are not limited to sewerage systems, major stormwater systems, constructed wetlands or
green infrastructure. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-1 1
Maintenance activities. In kind replacement, restoration or repair of existing infrastructure or facilities
including, but not limited to, roadways such that they will perform the same functions for which they were
originally designed, constructed and permitted. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Manufactured Homes. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
the required utilities. The term manufactured homes also includes park trailers, travel trailers,
construction trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
Manufactured Homes for dwelling purposes are not permitted within the corporate limits of the village."
Majors stormwater system. That portion of a stormwater system needed to store and convey flows for
the 100-year storm event. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Marginal access street. See Street.
Minor stormwater system. All infrastructure including curb, gutter, culverts, roadside ditches and
swales, storm sewers, tiles, subsurface drainage systems and other practices intended to convey or capture
stormwater runoff from storm events less than a 100-year storm event. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Minor street. See Street.
Natural. When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by the existing surface
topography of the earth prior to changes by man. (Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08)
Offsite Detention Facility. A manmade structure providing temporary storage of stormwater runoff
intended to mitigate hydrologic impacts of development elsewhere in the subwatershed.
(Ord. No. O-35-19; 04/08/19)
Offsite Volume Control Practices. Permanent practices designed to capture, retain and infiltrate
stormwater runoff from impervious areas of a development located elsewhere in the subwatershed.
(Ord. No. O-35-19, 04/08/19)
Official comprehensive plan. The plan defined in and authorized by the Illinois Municipal Code.
Official map. The map and regulatory ordinances adopted by village ordinances which are authorized
and defined in the Illinois Municipal Code.
One hundred year storm. Rainstorms or rain events of varying durations or intensities having a one
percent probability of occurring in any one year.
One hundred year storm runoff. The storm water runoff from a one hundred (100) year storm.
Ordinary High Water Mark (OHWM). The point on a bank or shore at which the presence and
movement of surface waters is continuous, leaving a distinctive mark. The mark may be caused by
erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, a predominance of hydrophytic vegetation or
other recognized factors. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Open space. Pervious land to be retained as pervious land which is not part of a larger development.
Open space may include sidewalks, bike path, nature or walking trail development less than or equal to
fourteen (14) feet in width. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Owner. The record title holder or beneficiary of a land trust which is the record title holder, and
includes singular and plural; if the owner is other than an individual, the term shall include beneficiaries,
agents, shareholders, officers and directors. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Parcel. Contiguous land area under single ownership or control, under an affidavit of ownership or
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-1 2
under a single legal description on record with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds Office. (Ord. No. 0-
134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Parkway. That part of the public street right-of-way not occupied by the street pavement and located
between the back of the curb and the property line as well as the dividing strip of a roadway.
Paving improvements. Road excavation, base course, binder course, surface course, curb and gutter,
sidewalk, street lights and related appurtenances, excluding those in parking lots, as required in this
ordinance.
Pedestrian way. A public right-of-way across a block or providing access within a block, to be used
by pedestrians and for the installation of utility lines.
Permittee. Any person to whom a site development or other permit is issued by the Village of
Palatine. The term shall also apply to any municipality, municipal corporation, sanitary district, utility
company, township government or any other governmental body required to jointly sign a Watershed
Management Permit application. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, school, district, company, corporation, municipal
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, unit of local government, sanitary district,
special taxing district, school district, public utility, political subdivision, county agency, state agency,
federal agency or any other legal entity, or owner, or any legal representative, agent or assign thereof.
(Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Planned development. A "planned development" shall mean a land development project,
comprehensively planned as an entity via a unitary site plan which permits flexibility in building, mixture
of housing types and land uses, usable open spaces and the preservation of significant natural features.
Plant and landscaping material. Permanent vegetative cover including grass seeding, lime and
fertilizer application, mulching or any other solid stabilization planting.
Plat of subdivision or resubdivision. A plat by which a tract of land is divided into two (2) or more
lots or parcels, any of which resultant parcels is less than five (5) acres in area, for the purpose of transfer
of ownership or building development, or if a new street or easement of access is involved any division of
a parcel of land. It does not include a plat dividing a lot or block of less than one acre where no street or
easements of access are provided or required.
Ponding. The existence of pockets or depressions which have no surface drainage provided, and
which, in the event of failure on the part of inlets or storm sewers, will contain standing water. That
portion of surface waters which are flowing shall not be considered as ponding.
Preliminary plat. A tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision, as described in Article III and
refers to the plat and supporting documents required for preliminary approval of a proposed plat of
subdivision.
Project improvements. The term "Project Improvements" includes all of the private and public
improvements associated with a project or development. (Ord. 0-89-02, 5/28/02; Ord. O-34-17, 4/3/17)
a) Private Improvement. Any installed or constructed improvement for which the responsibility
of maintenance and ownership will be retained by the property owner, developer, or tenant.
(b) Public improvement. Any improvement for which it is intended that the Village of Palatine
or other municipal body could or will assume the responsibility for maintenance and
operation or which is constructed for general use or benefit.
Public agency. Any public board created by authority of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
Recapture fee. A recapture fee is a fee assessed to a parcel, by Village ordinance, which recaptures the
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-1 3
Village’s, developer’s or other party’s investment in the construction of a public improvement that the
Village will ultimately own and maintain and has control over future use and access to and which the
assessed parcel derives a direct benefit from the improvement. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Recreational Vehicle or travel trailer. Shall mean a portable vehicular structure 400 square or less
when measured at the largest horizontal projection , mounted on a single vehicle chassis, designed to be
self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck and is designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08)
Redevelopment. Any human induced activity or change to an existing developed property (including,
but not limited to grading, paving, excavation, dredging, fill or mining; alteration, subdivision, change in
land use or practice; building; or storage of equipment or materials) undertaken by private or public
entities that affect the volume, flow rate, drainage pattern or composition of the site stormwater runoff on
the previously developed land. The term shall not be understood to include maintenance. (Ord. No. 0-
134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Removal. Cutting vegetation to the ground or to stumps, complete extraction, or killing by spraying.
Repair. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for the purpose of its
maintenance and does not result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to
the dimensions of a structure. (Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08)
Repetitive Loss. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-
year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. (Ord.
No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08)
Restrictive covenants. Contracts restricting the manner in which land may be used.
Right-of-way. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a road, sidewalk, railroad,
electric transmission line, oil and gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer, or for other special
uses.
Riparian environment. The vegetated area between aquatic and upland ecosystems adjacent to a
waterway or body of water that provides flood management, habitat and water quality enhancement or
other amenities dependent upon the proximity to water. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries) stream, creek, brook,
etc.
Runoff. The water from melting snow and/or precipitation falling within a watershed that exceeds the
infiltration capacity of the soil of that basin. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Security Instrument. The term "Security Instrument" includes a cash bond, a letter of credit or a surety
bond.
Sediment. The suspended soil particles that are transported after erosion has occurred. (Ord. No. 0-
134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Sedimentation. The process when the velocity of wind or water is slowed sufficiently to allow the
suspended spoil particle to settle. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-1 4
Sidewalk. That portion of a public right-of-way paved or otherwise surfaced which is intended for
pedestrian use only.
Site. Parcel or parcels associated with a development or redevelopment. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1,
10/20/14)
Site Constraint. Conditions on a site that limits the use of retention-based practices, such as
contaminated soils, high groundwater, wetlands, riparian environments or floodway. New development
that is considered a site constraint includes, but is not limited to, gas stations, chemical storage facilities
and conservation areas. Poor soils and proposed utility conflicts are not considered site constraints.
(Ord. No. O-35-19, 04/08/19)
Site development. Altering terrain or vegetation, constructing driveways, or performing any other
construction upon or making any other material changes in a land site.
Special Flood Hazard Area. An area having a special flood, mudslide, mudflow, or flood-related
erosion hazards and which is identified on a FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V!-30,
VE, V, M, or E. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Standards. Specifications for the preparation of plans indicating, among other things, the optimum,
minimum or maximum dimensions of such features as right-of-way and blocks.
Standard specifications. Refers to the "Standard Specification for Road and Bridge Construction,"
State of Illinois, Department of Transportation, current edition, as well as "Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois," current edition, published by the Illinois Society of Professional Engineers.
(Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Start of Construction. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement,
or other improvement was within 90-days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation. (Ord. No.0-
105-08, §2, 8/14/08)
Storm event. The frequency rainfall as published in Bulletin 70. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Storm sewer. A closed conduit intended for the conveyance of only stormwater runoff. (Ord. No. 0-
134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Storm water runoff. The water derived from melting snow or rain falling within a tributary drainage
basin, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or conduits.
Street. A public or private means of vehicular movement providing access to individual lots or
providing for through pavement. A street includes the area within the right-of-way whether improved or
unimproved and includes but is not limited to curb and gutters such improvements as sidewalks, drainage,
street lighting. Streets are designated on the street classification map in accordance with the following
definitions:
(a) Arterial street. A public right-of-way with a high degree of traffic continuity and serving as an
arterial traffic way between the various districts of the village as shown in the official plan.
(b) Collector street. A street which carries traffic from minor streets of residential developments and
the principal circulating streets within such development.
(c) Cul-de-sac. A short local street having one open end and being permanently terminated at the
other end by a vehicular turnaround.
(d) Expressway. A highway designated by the state and federal government for purposes of cross
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-1 5
country traffic.
(e) Half street. A street bordering one or more boundary lines of a tract of land or parcel and which
is but one-half (1/2) of the required right-of-way width.
(f) Marginal access street or frontage road. A street which is parallel to and contiguous with an
arterial street, and which provides access to abutting properties and protection to local traffic
from fast moving, through traffic on the adjoining arterial street.
(g) Minor residential street. A street other than an arterial street or collector street which affords local
access to abutting properties.
Street Classification. A portion of the comprehensive plan wherein the village adopts the planned
alignments or major roads within the village and abutting territories.
Street width. The shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the street.
Structure. A structure is anything that is erected or constructed on or below ground including, but not
limited to, buildings, manufactured homes, accessory structures, fences, sheds, tanks, dams, sewers,
manholes, drop shafts, constructed channels, outfalls, parking lots, driveways, roads, sidewalks and
concrete patios. (Ord. No. 0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08; Ord. No.0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Subdivider. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, corporation, co-partnership, trust or other
legal entity commencing proceedings under this ordinance to effect a subdivision of land.
Subdivision. Any division, excepting a tax division, by plat or otherwise, of a tract of land into two (2)
or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or if a new street
or easement of access is involved in any division of a parcel of land.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cumulative
percentage of damage during a 10-year period equals or exceeds forty (40) percent of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. (Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08)
Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a
building taking place during a 10-year period in which the cumulative percentage of improvements equals
or exceeds forty (40) percent of the market value of the building before the improvement or repair is
started. Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. “Substantial Improvement”
is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. This
term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual
work done. The term does not, however, include either;
(a) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions, or
(b) any alteration of a ‘Historic Structure” listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the
Illinois Register of Historic Places, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
(Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08; Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Subwatershed. Major watershed division of a waterway planning area as identified in the District’s
Detailed Watershed Plan. (Ord. No. O-35-19, 04/08/19)
Transition Section. Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow cross-section
to a wide cross-section or vice versa. (Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-1 6
Tributary area. All land drained by or contributing water to the same stream, lake or stormwater
facility, or which drains to a common point. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Vacant. Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are secondary to the use or
maintenance of the land itself.
Village. Shall mean the Village of Palatine, Illinois.
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the Code of
Ordinances of the Village of Palatine. (Ord. No.0-105-08, §2, 8/14/08)
Volume control practices. Permanent practices designed to capture, retain and infiltrate stormwater
runoff from impervious areas of a development after permanent stabilization is achieved. (Ord. No. 0-
134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Water Dependent Use. Those uses or facilities which can only be conducted on, in, over or adjacent
to a water body because such activity requires direct access to that water body, and which involves as an
integral part of such activity, the use of the water. (Ord. No.0-118-11, §1, 10/10/11)
Watershed. Tributary areas discharging to a common point. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Watershed Management Permit. A permit established by the Cook County Watershed Management
Ordinance that is issued by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago prior to the
approval of a building or construction permit by the Village of Palatine. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1,
10/20/14)
Waterway. Navigable body of water such as a stream, creek, canal channel or river. (Ord. No. 0-134-
14, §1, 10/20/14)
Wet bottom detention basin. A basin designed to retain a permanent pool of water after having
provided its planned detention of runoff during a storm event.
Wetlands. Areas which area inundated or saturated by surface or ground water (hydrology) at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support, under normal circumstances, a prevalence of vegetation
(hydrophytes) typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions (hydric soils). Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
Zoning ordinance. Shall mean Appendix A of the Code of Ordinances, Village of Palatine, Illinois.
(Ord. No. 0-3-94, 1/24/94; Ord. No. O-35-19, 04/08/19)
ARTICLE III. PRELIMINARY PLAT
3.01. General procedure.
(a) Submittal. A proposed plat of subdivision shall contain the following information and be
submitted for preliminary approval by filing copies of the preliminary plat with the Village
(1) Preliminary plat requirements. Each preliminary plat shall contain the following:
i. Proposed name of subdivision (not duplicating name of any plat heretofore recorded in
Cook County).
ii. Location by township, section, town and range, or by other legal description.
iii. Names and addresses of the owners or subdividers having control of tract, and designer
of the plat.
iv. Graphic (engineering scale not smaller than one inch to one hundred (100) feet).
v. North-point (designed as true north).
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-1 7
vi. Date of preparation.
vii.The zoning of all surrounding land indicating whether it is in the Village of Palatine,
Cook County or other municipalities.
viii.Boundary line of proposed subdivision clearly indicated.
ix. Total acreage of subject property.
x. Location, widths and names of all existing or previously platted streets or other public
ways, showing type of improvement, if any, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks and
other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, easements, and section
and corporation lines, within the tract and to a distance of one hundred (100) feet
beyond the tract.
xi. Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, septic systems (including
filter fields) or other underground facilities within the tract and to a distance of one
hundred (100) feet beyond the tract; also indicating such data as grades, invert
elevations, and locations of catchbasins, manholes and hydrants.
xii.Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land-within one hundred (100)
feet-identifying by name and ownership.
xiii.Topographic data including contours at vertical intervals of not more than two (2) feet,
except that contour lines shall be no more than one hundred (100) feet apart, water
courses, marshes, rock outcrops, high water elevation including source of information
and other significant features.
xiv.Floodplain lines are to be delineated according to the applicant's USGS Flood
Quadrangle; or other documents adopted by the village.
xv. Tree Preservation Plan subject to the regulations in Section 7.01 (B) of this appendix.
xvi. Lines of inflow and outflow, if any.
xvii. Farm drains, inlets and outfalls, if any.
xviii. Location of existing corporate boundary lines at or near the proposed subdivision.
(2) Preliminary engineering plans. The application for preliminary approval shall include preliminary
engineering plans which bear the signature and seal of the Illinois Registered Professional Engineer under
whose direction they were prepared and containing the following:
i. The location and width of proposed streets, alleys and public ways.
ii. The proposed location and sizes of sewers and storm drains.
iii. The proposed location of public grounds, if any.
iv. The layout, numbers and typical dimensions of lots to the nearest foot, including
buildings setback lines.
v. Proposed easements for public utilities.
vi. The proposed method of sewage and waste disposal; storm water disposal; and water
supply.
vii. The proposed layout and sizes of water mains, valves, fire hydrants and other
appurtenances.
viii. Traffic and other impact studies if required by the village.
ix. Provide information on the gross area of each land use sub-area, i.e., single-family,
multifamily, commercial, etc. For residential sub-areas, the number of dwelling units
and gross density contained therein based on the ultimate development of the land. The
sub-area boundaries are to be clearly delineated.
x. The proposed grading of the subdivision including contours at vertical intervals of not
more than two (2) feet, except that contour lines shall be no more than one hundred
(100) feet apart.
xi. Preliminary detention calculations including proposed detention areas and emergency
overflow routes.
(3) Supporting documents
i. Petition for subdivision
ii. An outline of the restrictive covenants shall accompany the preliminary plat.
iii. Real Estate Interest Disclosure Form
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-1 8
iv. For subdivisions two (2) acres or greater in area, a copy of the receipt from the North
Cook County Soil and Water Conservation District showing that the subdivider has
submitted a natural resource information request to that agency and has paid the proper
fee.
v. Illinois Department of Natural Resources Endangered Species Consultation Program
Agency Action Report.
vi. For subdivisions proposing work (whether dredging or filling) in wetlands or waters of
the United States, proof that a request has been made to the Army Corps of Engineers
for a determination on jurisdiction.
vii. For subdivisions requiring Variations or Special Uses to this appendix or to the Zoning
Ordinance, preliminary site plan indicating the proposed site design and setbacks.
viii. Proof of ownership, including signature(s) of owner(s) on the petition for hearing or on
a statement attesting to said form giving owner’s consent to the petition.
ix. Any additional information requested by the Village, either as part of the submittal or as
a condition of approval.
(4) Fees.
a. At the time of filing the preliminary plat with the Village, fees (which is are in addition to
any plan review fees) shall be paid to the Village according to the fee schedule supplement
to the municipal code.
b. A plan review fee, based on one hundred fifty (150) percent of the rate per hour of the
present salary schedule adopted by the Village Council of those village personnel
participating in the review process shall be paid to the Village.
(Ord. No. 0-61-06, §1, 4-3-06)
(b) Distribution of preliminary plat. The Village of Palatine shall submit copies to the plan
commission and one copy of the preliminary plat to each of the following:
(1) The appropriate park district in which the area to be platted lies;
(2) Community Consolidated School District No. 15;
(3) High School District No. 211;
(4) Junior College District No. 512;
and shall further notify such districts of the first meeting at which the plan commission will consider the
said preliminary plats. The plan commission shall permit representatives of said districts to present their
views on the proposed plans.
(c) Notification. The Village shall send notice, by standard mail, of the first meeting at which the plan
commission will consider the said preliminary plats to all owners of record and all residents of each lot
and parcel of property located within the same block as the land proposed to be subdivided, or any portion
thereof, as well as all owners of record, and all residents of each lot and parcel of property located within
two hundred fifty (250) feet of the land proposed to be subdivided, or any portion thereof.
Said notice shall contain a description of the land proposed to be subdivided and a general description of
the proposed subdivision. (Ord.No.0-72A-98, §14, 15, & 16, 5/26/98; Od. No. 0-61-06, §3, 4/3/06)
(d) Review process
(1) Actions by the administrator. Upon receipt of the Preliminary Plat, Preliminary Engineering Plans
and the supporting documents, the administrator shall review these items for compliance with the
requirements of the Village of Palatine. Within 45 days from the date of receipt of a complete
submittal, the administrator shall schedule the required meeting before the plan commission. The
administrator shall submit a statement summarizing the proposed subdivision and a recommendation
to the plan commission.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-1 9
(2) Actions by the plan commission.
a. The plan commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of the application for
preliminary approval within thirty (30) days from the date of the date of the plan
commission meeting, unless such time is extended by mutual consent.
b. The plan commission shall submit a written report recommending approval, approval
subject to conditions or disapproval to the Village president and board of trustees within
thirty (30) days from the date of the review.
(3) Actions by president and board of trustees.
a. Upon receipt of the plan commission recommendation, the president and board of trustees
shall accept or reject said plat within sixty (60) days after its next regular stated meeting
following action by the plan commission.
b. If the proposed plat is approved, such approval shall be indicated by the adoption of a
resolution by the corporate authorities. Any proposed preliminary or final plat that has been
so approved shall have attached to it, by the village clerk, a certified copy of such resolution.
The resolution shall be filed in the office of the village clerk.
(e) Qualifications governing approval of preliminary plat.
(1) Qualifications.
a. The plan commission may recommend or the Village Council may require such changes or
revisions as are deemed necessary in the interests and needs of the community.
b. No plan will be approved for a subdivision which is subject to periodic flooding or which
contains poor drainage facilities. However, if the subdivider agrees to make improvements
which will, in the opinion of the village engineer make the area safe for residential
occupancy, and provide adequate street drainage, the preliminary plat of the subdivision may
be approved.
(2) Conditions following preliminary approval of plat.
a. Preliminary approval shall be effective for a maximum period of twelve (12) months
unless, prior to expiration, upon written application of the subdivider the Village
Council grants an extension.
b. If the subdivider has not filed a completed application for final plat approval within the
twelve (12) months (or extended) time limit, the preliminary plat must again be
submitted for preliminary approval.
c. Preliminary approval shall not qualify a plat for recording.
d. Subsequent approval will be required of the engineering proposals pertaining to water
supply storm drainage, sewerage and sewerage disposal, street lighting, fire hydrants,
grading gradients, roadway widths, and the county officials, where concerned, prior to
final approval of the plat by the Village of Palatine.
e. One print of the plat which has received preliminary approval, signed by the president
and the village clerk, shall be retained by the village clerk and two (2) copies in the
office of the subdivider, to proceed with the preparation of plans and specifications for
the minimum improvements required in these regulations and rules and with the
preparation of the final plat.
ARTICLE IV. FINAL PLAT
[Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 0-61-06, replaced Article IV in its entirety]
4.01. General procedure.
(a) Application. Application for final approval of the final plat shall be made to the Village Council
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-2 0
not later than one year after preliminary approval has been granted, unless time is extended by the village
president and board of trustees. The applicant may elect to have final approval of a geographic part or
parts of the plat that received preliminary approval and may delay application for approval of other parts
until a later date or dates beyond one year with the approval of the village president and board of trustees,
provided all facilities required to serve the part or parts for which final approval is sought have been
provided. In such cases only such part or parts of the plat that have received final approval shall be
recorded.
(1) Final plat requirements. The application for approval shall be accompanied by:
a. A final plat shall be prepared on mylar or linen tracing cloth, so as to be suitable for
recording with the county recorder of deeds. All revision dates shall be shown as well as the
following:
i. Proposed name of subdivision and legal description of subdivision.
ii. An identification system for all lots and blocks.
iii. Accurate angular and lineal dimensions for all lines, angles, and curvatures used to
describe boundaries, streets, alleys, easements, areas to be reserved for public use, and
other important features. Lot lines to show dimensions in feet and hundredths.
Dimensions shown on curved lines shall be arc distances and bearings, radii, and points
of tangency and curvature.
iv. The minimum scale shall be one inch equals one hundred (100) feet and the scale must
be clearly indicated.
v. True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines or official monuments
(not less than two (2)), which shall be accurately described in the plat.
vi. North point (designated as true north).
vii. Township, county or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by
distance and angles.
viii. All previously dedicated or vacated rights of way and/or easements included in or
adjacent to the described real estate along with the document number and date of the
recording instrument.
ix. Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for
public use, or for the exclusive use of the property owners within the subdivision with
purposes indicated thereon including scenic or access easements, together with a
statement that dedicates the easements as approved by the Village of Palatine. The
required easement provisions are detailed in Section 6.03 of this appendix.
x. All easements required for the installation of electric, gas, telephone, cable television
etc., together with a statement that dedicates the easements as approved and executed
by the utilities. The required easement provisions are detailed in Section 6.03 of this
appendix.
xi. All easements required for installation and/or maintenance of water mains, sanitary and
storm sewers, drainage, detention basins, street lights and other facilities to be dedicated
to the village together with a statement that dedicates the easements. The required
easement provisions are detailed in Section 6.03 of this appendix.
xii. Restrictive covenants shall be lettered on the final plat or appropriately referenced
thereon.
xiii. Executed Certification by a licensed surveyor, to the effect that the plat represents a
survey made by him/her and that monuments and markers shown thereon exist as
located and that all dimensional details are correct.
xiv. Executed and Notarized certification by owner, and by any mortgage holder of record,
of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and other public areas as
follows:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-2 1
OWNER’S CERTIFICATE
State of Illinois)
County of Cook) S.S.
This is to certify that are the owners of the
property described hereon and that they have caused the said property to be surveyed and
subdivided as shown hereon, for the uses and purposes therein set forth, and do hereby
acknowledge and adopt the same under the title hereon indicated.
Dated this day of , A.D., 2
NOTARY CERTIFICATE
State of Illinois)
County of Cook) S.S.
I, a notary public in and for said county in the state aforesaid,
do hereby certify that are personally known to me to be the same
persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument as such owners, appeared before
me this day in person and acknowledged that they signed and delivered said instrument of their
own free and voluntary act and as the free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes therein set
forth.
Given under my hand and notarial seal this day of , A.D., 2
_________________________________
Notary Public My commission expires on:
MORTGAGOR’S CERTIFICATE (if applicable)
State of )
County of ) S.S.
This is to certify that hereby consents to the plat
shown hereon for the uses and purposes therein set forth, and does hereby acknowledge and
adopt the same under the title hereon indicated.
Dated this day of , A.D., 2
By: Title:
Attest: Title:
NOTARY CERTIFICATE
I, a notary public in and for said county in the state
aforesaid, do hereby certify that and
of are personally known to me to be the same
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-2 2
persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument such officers, appeared before
me this day in person and acknowledged that they signed and delivered said instrument of their
own free and voluntary act and as the free and voluntary act of said corporation for the uses and
purposes therein set forth, and that the said did also then and there
acknowledge that he/she, as custodian of the corporate seal of said corporation, did affix said seal
to said instrument as his/her own free and voluntary act and as the free and voluntary act of said
corporation, for the uses and purposes therein set forth.
Given under my hand and notarial seal this day of , A.D., 2
_________________________________
_________________________________
Notary Public My commission expires on:
xv. Form for approval of the plan commission as follows:
Approved by the Plan Commission of the Village of Palatine, Cook County,
Illinois, this day of ____ 2
Signed:
Chairman
Attest:
Secretary
xvi. Form for approval of the Village Council as follows:
Approved by the Village Council of the Village of Palatine, Cook County, Illinois,
this day of ____ , 2 .
Signed:
Mayor
Attest:
Village Clerk
xvii Form for approval of the Village Engineer as follows:
State of Illinois)
County of Cook) S.S.
This plat has been checked for conformance to the Village of Palatine standards
and requirements, and working drawings and specifications for improvements have
been prepared in conformance with the Village standards and requirements, and
engineering fees due to the Village of Palatine have been paid.
Dated this day of ____ , 2
Signed:
Village Engineer
xviii. Form for approval by the Village Collector as follows:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-2 3
VILLAGE COLLECTOR
I do hereby certify that there are no deferred special assessments or unpaid current
assessments due against the land included in the above plat.
Dated this day of ____ , 2
By:
Village Collector
xix. Form executed by an Illinois Professional Engineer stating that adequate provisions
have been made for surface water drainage as follows:
SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE CERTIFICATE
State of Illinois)
County of Cook) S.S.
We hereby certify to the best of our knowledge and belief that adequate provisions
have been made for the diversion and detention of surface waters into public areas
or drains within the rights of the subdivider and that such surface waters will not
cause damage by erosion or sedimentation to such property because of construction
of the subdivision.
By: Dated:
Owner
By: Dated:
Illinois Professional Engineer
xx. Adequate space, approximately 4" by 2", for approval stamps by Cook County authorities and
the Illinois Department of Transportation as required.
xxi. The square footage of each lot shall be indicated on the plat.
xxii Property Identification Number (PIN number).
xxiii. Completed statement indicating party responsible for the tax bill as follows:
Send next tax bill to (Name, Address)
b. Supporting documents with final plat. The following supporting documents and data, shall be
submitted with said final plat:
i. All covenants such as homeowners association covenants and agreements which are to be applied
to the property. All documents and agreements shall be executed prior to submittal.
ii. A description and justification for any variation from the preliminary plat and a description of
any external factors which have changed since preliminary plat affecting the layout of the final
plat.
iii. Where a flood water retention basin or storm sewer system is to be constructed, the date of
completion of such basin or system, or a phasing schedule for the completion thereof. Such
schedule shall assure the completion of all storm sewers and flood water retention basins
necessary to accommodate all storm water associated with the particular phasing of the
development prior to the issuance of any building permits.
iv. A statement signed by the subdivider, builder or land subdivider setting forth an agreement
executed by such subdivider, builder or land subdivider wherein he/she or they agree to make
and install the improvements provided in Article VII, herewith in accordance with the plans and
specifications approved by the village.
v. For subdivisions two (2) acres or greater in area, a copy of the receipt from the North Cook
County Soil and Water Conservation District showing that the subdivider has submitted a natural
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-2 4
resource information request to that agency and has paid the proper fee.
vi. For subdivisions proposing work (whether dredging or filling) in wetlands or waters of the
United States, proof that a request has been made to the Army Corps of Engineers for a
determination on jurisdiction.
vii. For subdivisions requiring Variations or Special Uses to this appendix or to the Zoning
Ordinance, preliminary site plan indicating the proposed site design and setbacks.
viii. Proof of ownership, including signature(s) of owner(s) on the petition for hearing or on a
statement attesting to said form giving owner’s consent to the petition.
c. Engineering plans and specifications of required land improvements as regulated by Article VI, VII
and IX of this appendix. Said plans and specifications shall bear the seal of an Illinois registered
professional engineer, along with his/her signed statement that such plans and specifications have
been prepared in compliance with this article and with good engineering practices.
d. Tree preservation plans and specifications as regulated by Article VII of this appendix.
e. If the tract of land proposed to be subdivided or any part thereof lies adjacent to a highway over
which the Department of Transportation of the State of Illinois or the County of Cook Highway
Department has jurisdiction with respect to maintenance and upkeep thereof and an entrance or
entrances are desired from such highway to lots, streets, roadway or alleys in such proposed
subdivision, the Illinois Department of Transportation or the Cook County Highway Department,
whichever is applicable, shall sign the plat.
f. Any additional information including, but not limited to, Marketing Materials and an Economic
Impact Analysis, as requested by the Village, either as part of the submittal or as a condition of
approval.
(2) Fees. At the time of filing the application for approval of the final plat, the following fees
shall be paid to the village clerk;
a. Final plat, according to the fee schedule supplement to the municipal code.
b. Plan review fee, based 1.5% of the total project improvement costs (which shall consist of,
but not exclusively of curb and gutters, sidewalks, pavements, sanitary sewer system, storm
sewer system, water distribution system, stormwater detention facilities, parkway trees,
landscaping, street lights, plus soil erosion control measures) as estimated by the design
engineer and approved by the village engineer. (Ord. No. 0-164-97, §1, 10-13-97; Ord. O-
34-17, 4/3//17)
(b) Distribution of final plat. The Village of Palatine shall submit copies to the plan commission and if
the proposed subdivision includes a dedication of land, one copy of the preliminary plat to each of the
following:
(1) The appropriate park district in which the area to be platted lies;
(2) Community Consolidated School District No. 15;
(3) High School District No. 211;
and shall further notify such districts of the first meeting at which the plan commission will consider the
said final plats. The plan commission shall permit representatives of said districts to present their views on
the proposed plans.
(c) Notification. The Village shall send notice, by standard mail, of the first meeting at which the plan
commission will consider the said final plats to all owners of record of each lot and parcel of property
located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the land proposed to be subdivided, or any portion thereof.
Said notice shall contain a description of the land proposed to be subdivided and a general description of
the proposed subdivision. (Ord.No. 0-72A-98, §16 and 17, 5/26/98)
(d) Review process
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-2 5
(1) Actions by the administrator. Upon receipt of the Final Plat, Engineering Plans and the supporting
documents, the administrator shall review these items for compliance with the requirements of the
Village of Palatine. Within 45 days from the date of receipt of a complete submittal, the administrator
shall schedule the required meeting before the plan commission. The administrator shall submit a
statement summarizing the proposed subdivision and a recommendation to the Plan Commission.
(2) Actions by the plan commission.
a. The Plan Commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of the application for
preliminary approval within thirty (30) days from the date of the date of the Plan Commission
meeting, unless such time is extended by mutual consent.
b. The Plan Commission shall submit a written report recommending approval, approval subject to
conditions or disapproval to the Village Council within thirty (30) days from the date of the
review.
(3) Actions by Mayor and Village Council.
a. Upon receipt of the Plan Commission recommendation, the Village Council shall accept or
reject said plat within sixty (60) days after its next regular stated meeting following approval
by of the Plan Commission.
b. If the proposed plat is approved, such approval shall be indicated by the adoption of a
resolution by the corporate authorities. Any proposed preliminary or final plat that has been
so approved shall have attached to it, by the Village Clerk, a certified copy of such
resolution. A copy of the resolution shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
(e) Qualifications governing approval of final plat.
(1) Qualifications.
a. The Plan Commission may recommend or the Village Council may require such changes or
revisions which are consistent with this ordinance.
b. A proposed plat of subdivision or re-subdivision shall not be approved by the corporate authorities
unless it complies with the comprehensive plan of the Village, including the provisions of this article and
all other pertinent provisions of this appendix.(Ord.No. 0-5-97, §1, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 0-61-06, §4, 4-3-
06)
ARTICLE V. DEDICATION OF PARK LAND AND SCHOOL SITES FOR
PAYMENT OF FEES IN LIEU THEREOF
5.01. Dedication of park lands and school sites.
(a) Purpose. As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, or of a final plat of planned
development, each subdivider or developer will be required to dedicate land for park and recreational
purposes and land for school sites, to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the
development, or to make a cash contribution in lieu of actual land dedication, or a combination of both, at
the option of the village, in accordance with the criteria and formulas established in this section.
(b) Criteria for requiring park and recreational land dedication.
(1) Requirement and population ratio. The ultimate density of a proposed development shall bear
directly upon the amount of land required for dedication. The total requirement shall be five and
one-half (5 1/2) acres of land per one thousand (1,000) of ultimate population in accordance with
the following recommended classifications.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-2 6
Types of
Recreation Areas
Size
Range
Minimum Acres Per 1,000
People
1. Play Lot
Minimum 8,000 sq.ft.
Not applicable
2. School-park
(neighborhood playground)
Minimum park of 5 acres
1.25
3. Neighborhood park
Minimum 3 1/2 acres
1.0
4. District-wide park or play field
Minimum 4 acres up to 30
acres
1.25
5. Community-wide recreation park
Minimum 12 acres up to 30
acres
2.0
TOTAL
5.5 acres of land per 1,000
people
(2) Location. The comprehensive park and recreation plan and the "Standards by Types of
Recreation and Park Areas" as adopted by the Palatine Park District shall be used as a guideline
in locating sites.
a. A park site of not less than five (5) acres adjoining all elementary school sites shall be
considered highly desirable.
b. A central location which will serve equally the entire development is most desirable.
c. In large developments these sites can be located throughout the development according to
established sites.
d. While the foregoing criteria shall serve as guidelines in establishing sites, the village
president and board of trustees may authorize such modifications thereof as in their
judgment are warranted.
(3) Credit for private open spaces and recreation areas. When subdividers or developers provide their
own open space for recreation areas and facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand for
local public recreational services. Depending on the size of the development, a portion of the
park and recreation area in subdivisions or planned developments may, at the option of the
village president and board of trustees, be provided in the form of "private" open space in lieu of
dedicated "public" open space.
a. Actions by village president and board of trustees.
i. The extent thereof of "private" open space in lieu of dedicated "public" open space shall
be determined by the village president and board of trustees, based upon the needs of
the projected residents and in conformance with the total park and recreation land for
general use.
ii. When substitution of "private" open space areas is authorized, the village president and
board of trustees shall determine the amount of the credit to be given, which shall not
exceed the total square footage of the "private" open space area.
iii. When such credit has been determined, the total park and recreational land dedication
required shall be computed and the "private" open space credit subtracted therefrom;
provided, however, that in no case shall "private" open space constitute more than
seventy-five (75) percent of the total park and recreational land dedication.
b. Criteria.
i. A substitution of "private" open space for "public" open space will require a
substantially higher degree of improvement and the installation of recreational facilities,
including equipment by the developer as part of his obligation.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-2 7
ii. Detailed plans of such areas, including specifications of facilities to be installed, must
be approved by the village president and board of trustees.
iii. Before any credit is given for "private" open space, the subdivider or developer must
guarantee that the grounds and facilities of such "private" open space areas will be
permanently maintained for such use. Such guarantee, supported by a performance
bond where deemed necessary, shall be in form satisfactory to the village president and
board of trustees.
iv. Private swimming clubs shall qualify as "private" open space hereunder. "Suggested
Criteria for Swimming Pool Development" as adopted by the Palatine Park District,
shall be used for the guidance of the developer.
(c) Criteria for requiring school site dedication.
(1) Requirement and population ratio. The ultimate number of students to be generated by a
subdivision or planned development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required to be
dedicated for school sites.
a. The land dedication requirement shall be determined by obtaining the ratio of:
1. Estimated children to be generated by the subdivision or planned development to be
served in each such school classification;
Over the:
2. Maximum recommended number of students to be served in each such school
classification as stated herein;
And then applying such ratio to the:
3. Said minimum recommended number of acres for a school site of each such school
classification as stated herein.
b. The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed needed to have sufficient land for
school sites to serve the estimated increased children in each such school classification.
(2) School classification and size of school site. School classification and size of school sites within
the village shall be determined in accordance with the following criteria:
School
Classification
by Grades
Minimum Number of
Students for each such School
Classification
Minimum Number of Acres
of Land for each School Site
of such Classification
Elementary schools: Grades—
Kindergarten through 5th (K-5)
600
11
Junior high schools: Grades 6th through
8th (6-8)
900
19
High schools: Grades 9th through 12th
(9-12)
4000
65
(3) Location. The comprehensive school plan, if any, or the standards adopted by the affected school
district shall be used as a guideline in locating sites.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-2 8
5.02. Contribution of fees in lieu of park and school sites.
(a) Criteria for requiring a contribution in lieu of park and school sites. Where, in the judgment of
the Village’s Corporate Authorities, a development is too small (five (5) acres or less) for a land
dedication to be practical, or when the available land is inappropriate for park and recreational purposes
or a school site, or where land for recreational or a school site purposes has already been obtained, the
Village shall require the subdivider or developer to make a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication
required to be used for the purpose of land acquisition or site development or both, within the Village of
Palatine.
(1) The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on the "fair market value" of the acres of
land in the area improved as specified herein, that otherwise would have been dedicated as park
and recreation and school sites.
a. It has been determined that the "fair market value" of such improved land in and
surrounding the Village is set forth in the Village’s current “Fee Schedule Supplement to the
Palatine Code of Ordinances” and that fair market value amount shall be used in making any
calculation herein.
b. If the developer objects to the fair market value as determined herein, the Corporate
Authorities shall select a qualified appraiser to appraise the property at the developer's
expense.
i. If the Corporate Authorities are dissatisfied with the appraisal, it may hire an appraiser,
at its own expense, to appraise the property.
ii. The fair market value shall be based on the average of the two (2) appraisals provided
for herein.
(2) The cash contributions in lieu of park and recreation land dedication or school sites shall be paid
to the Village on a pro rata per residential unit basis as part of the building permit fee at the time
of building permit issuance.
(3) In the event that a residential unit or units, located on land being subdivided, are demolished
within two months of or are planned to be demolished subsequent to the recordation of the Plat of
Subdivision, the cash contribution set forth in this Section 5.02 shall be reduced to reflect those
“existing” residential unit or units. By way of example, if a ten (10) lot residential subdivision is
proposed for property containing two (2) “existing” residential units, then the cash contribution
would be paid in full for eight (8) units and amount paid for the remaining two (2) units would
recognize the “existing” residential units which may result in a reduced impact fee for the
remaining two (2) residential units. The reduction in the applicable fee for the two (2) remaining
units shall be the difference between the population generation as set forth in Section 5.03 of the
“existing” residential units to be demolished and the population generation of the two (2) new
residential units that will be located within the subdivision and most proximate to where the
demolished unit or units previously existed.
(4) The Village shall pay over such contributions to the park district or school district entitled thereto
upon proper certification from such district that the funds so said will be used for land acquisition
or site development purposes, or both.
(Ord. No. 0-29-11, §1, 3/21/11)
5.03. Additional regulations.
(a) Density formula. The following table of population density is generally indicative of current and
short-range projected trends in family size for new construction and shall be used in calculating the
amount of required dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu thereof unless a written
objection is filed thereto by the subdivider or developer:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-2 9
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
Children Per Unit
Type of Unit
Pre-
School
Elementary
Jr. High
Total
High School
0-4 yrs.
Grades K-5
5-10 yrs.
Grades6-8
11-13 yrs.
GradesK-8
5-13 yrs.
Grades9-12
14-17 yrs.
Adults
(18-up)
Total
Per
Unit
Detached Single-family:
2 Bedroom
.125
.120
.026
.146
.018
1.700
1.989
3 Bedroom
.308
.381
.174
.555
.146
1.978
2.996
4 Bedroom
.472
.513
.314
.827
.313
2.195
3.897
5 Bedroom
.402
.620
.420
1.040
.327
2.650
4.419
Attached Single-family:
1 Bedroom
--
--
--
--
--
1.050
1.050
2 Bedroom
.051
.075
.011
.086
.021
1.741
1.899
3 Bedroom
.217
.212
.022
.234
.051
1.775
2.277
4 Bedroom
.333
.316
.166
.482
.180
2.333
3.328
Apartments
Efficiency
--
--
--
--
--
1.000
1.000
1 Bedroom
--
--
--
--
--
1.190
1.190
2 Bedroom
.038
.065
.021
.086
.035
1.500
1.659
3 Bedroom
.208
.157
.037
.194
.082
2.330
2.814
NOTE: There are only three (3) significant categories provided in this chart. Because of the similarity
of yields of all types of attached single-family, only one category is provided. The same is true with
apartments, thus only one category. Because of the short history of some newer types of single units, both
detached and attached, individual evaluations may be necessary.
(1) In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the Table of Estimated Ultimate
Population listed herein, he shall submit his own demographic study showing the estimated
additional population to be generated from the subdivision of or planned development.
(2) and In that event, final determination of the density formula to be used in such calculations shall
be made by the Village President and Board of Trustees based upon such demographic
information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other sources which may be
submitted to the Village President and Board of Trustees by the park districts, school districts or
others.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-3 0
(3) It is recognized that population density, age distribution and local conditions change over the
years, and the specific formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof,
as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and amendment as necessary.
(b) Reservation of additional land. Where the Village Master Plan or the standards of the Village call
for a larger amount of park and recreation land or school sites in a particular subdivision or planned
development that the developer is required to dedicate, the land needed beyond the developer's
contribution shall be reserved for subsequent purchase by the appropriate public body, provided that such
acquisition is made within two (2) years from the date of approval of the final subdivision plat or planned
development.
(c) Combining with adjoining developments. Where the subdivision or planned development is less
than forty (40) acres, public open space or a school site which is to be dedicated should, where possible,
be combined with dedications from adjoining developments in order to produce usable recreation areas or
school sites without hardship on a particular developer.
(d) Topography and grading. The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site as well as its
surroundings must be suitable for the purposes designated by the governmental unit which will ultimately
be responsible for the site. Grading on sites dedicated for park and recreational uses shall not differ
greatly from surrounding land.
(e) Improved sites. All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of electrical, water,
sewer and streets (including enclosed drainage and curb and gutter) as applicable to the location of the
site, or acceptable provision made therefore.
ARTICLE VI. DESIGN STANDARDS
6.01. Street layout and design.
(a) Intent. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to
the provisions of this Appendix B, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets,
to reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographical conditions, to runoff of storm water, to public
convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relations to the proposed uses of the area to be served.
(b) Design criteria. The following general design criteria for streets shall be followed.
(1) Developments planned to be constructed adjacent to existing ones must be designed to accept the
alignment and corresponding widths of existing pavements.
(2) All right-of-way widths shall conform to the following minimum dimensions:
Street Classification
Minimum Right-of-Way (feet)
Arterial or Primary 100
Collector or Secondary 70
Minor residential:
1. Cul-de-sac 60
2. Dedicated (other than #1 above) 60
3. Private (PUD) --
Minor industrial 60
Major business 70
Marginal access streets 50
Frontage road (Dedicated) 50
Half Streets 1/2 the total right-of-way of proposed street.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-3 1
(3) Where a street centerline within a single block deflects more than ten (10) degrees, a curve will
be required. Minimum centerline radius shall be:
a. Arterial and collector streets . . . . 30 feet
b. Local streets and cul-de-sacs . . . . 150 feet
(4) Proposed subdivisions containing more than thirty (30) acres shall have street layouts on a
curvilinear pattern; however, in such subdivisions consideration shall be given to the need for an
interconnecting grid system of thoroughfares or collector streets at approximately one-half (1/2)
mile intervals. Subdivisions containing thirty (30) acres or less may be curvilinear or rectangular.
Where reverse curves occur on collector streets, the distance from the PT (end of one curve) to
the PC (beginning of next curve) shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet.
(5) The maximum length of straight center line or extension of a tangent to a curve shall be one
thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet for collector streets and six hundred sixty (660) feet
for minor streets.
a. In no case shall the deflection angle be less than ten (10) degrees.
b. This shall not apply to straight streets on the boundary of a subdivision.
(6) All center line grades shall be at least 0.333 percent, and not exceed on:
a. Arterial and collector streets . . . . 4 percent
b. Local streets and culs-de-sac . . . . 6 percent
(7) Vertical curves shall be used whenever a change in center line gradient occurs, except where the
algebraic difference in gradients is one percent or less.
a. The length of vertical curve on minor streets shall be forty (40) feet for each one percent of
algebraic differences of grade but in no case shall such length be less than one hundred
(100) feet.
b. The length of vertical curve on collector streets shall be fifty (50) feet for each one percent
of algebraic difference of grade but in no case shall such length be less than two hundred
(200) feet.
(8) Minor residential streets shall be so aligned that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
(9) Street jogs with centerline offset of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be avoided.
(10 )It must be evidenced that all street intersections and confluences encourage safe and efficient
traffic flows.
(11) Alleys are not permitted.
(12) The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be five hundred (500) feet measured along the
centerline from the intersection at origin to end of right-of-way, unless there are fewer than
sixteen (16) lots abutting the cul-de-sac. Each cul-de-sac shall have a terminus of nearly circular
shape with a minimum right-of-way diameter of one hundred twenty (120) feet.
(13) Half streets dedication or construction shall be prohibited, except in the cases of completing an
existing half street. Wherever an existing or dedicated half street is adjacent to a tract to be
subdivided, the other half of the street shall be delineated within such tract. A half street, where
included, shall be graded at one level and the regrading or new construction shall conform to the
grade of the adjacent half street.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-3 2
(14) Reserved strips of land, designed to block the extension of platted or existing streets or direct
street
access are prohibited.
(15) No street names may be used which will duplicate or be confused with names of existing streets
in
the Palatine Postal District.
a. Existing street names must be projected wherever possible.
b. Streets within a development cannot be named after the subdivider or the name of the
project unless said street is within said development and cannot be extended into other
developments.
6.02. Pedestrian ways.
(a) Pedestrian ways. Pedestrian ways shall be at least ten (10) feet wide.
6.03. Easements.
(a) General requirements.
(1) Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities and street
lighting and drainage or other public use, where necessary and shall be at least ten (10) feet wide.
(2) The easements shall be so laid out so that a proper continuity may be had from lot to lot and
block to block.
(3) Provisions for extension of easements to adjacent areas shall be made.
(4) Approval of the utility easement layout for public utility companies shall be required on the final
plat.
(b) Utility, sewer and design easements. Easements for utilities, sewer and/or drainage shall be
provided by clearly indicating on the face of the plat the following language or as specified by the
administrator:
Easement provisions.
Whenever the words "public utilities" or "public utilities easement" shall appear on this plat, the
Village of Palatine, a municipal corporation, Cook County, Illinois, and its successors or assigns, jointly
and severally shall hold a perpetual easement under, over and across the surface of the property shown
within the lines on the plat marked as such for the installation, construction, use, repair and maintenance
of all public utility equipment, including but not limited to, facilities used in connection with the
transmission and distribution of electricity and sounds and signals, water and sewage mains and piping,
the right to cut, trim or remove trees, bushes and roots, as may be reasonably required incident to the
rights herein given, and the right to enter upon the subdivided property for all such purposes. Obstructions
shall not be placed over grantees facilities or in, upon or over the property within the lines marked
"easement" without the prior written consent of the grantees. After installation of any such facilities, the
grade of the subdivided property shall not be altered in a manner so as to unreasonably interfere with the
proper operation and maintenance thereof.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-3 3
(c) Cable communications easements. Easements for cable communications shall be provided by
clearly indicating on the face of the plat the following language or as specified by the administrator:
Easement Provision.
An easement for serving the subdivision and other property with electric sounds and signals and
communications service is hereby reserved and granted to
ANY CABLE COMMUNICATIONS FIRM OR COMPANY GRANTED A CABLE
COMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE BY THE VILLAGE OF PALATINE
their successors and assigns, to install, operate, maintain and remove, from time to time facilities used in
connection with the transmission and distribution of electricity, sounds and signals including but not
limited to television, data and radio signals and communications in, over, under, across, along and upon
the surface of the property shown within the dotted lines on the plat and marked "Easement", and the
property designated on the plat for streets and alleys, together with the right to install required service
connections over or under the surface of each lot, within the boundaries of said easement, to serve
improvements thereon, the right to install required service connections over or under the surface of each
lot, within the boundaries of said easement, to serve improvements thereon, the right to cut, trim or
remove trees, bushes and roots as may be reasonably required incident to the rights herein given, and the
right to enter upon the subdivided property, within the boundaries of said easement, for all such purposes.
Obstructions shall not be placed over the Village of Palatine's facilities or in, upon or over the property
within the dotted lines marked "Easement" without the prior written consent of the Village of Palatine.
After installation of any such facilities, the grade of the subdivided property shall not be altered in a
manner so as to interfere with the proper operation and maintenance thereof. Provided that any
resubdivision of land having existing overhead transmission facilities shall include an easement for the
easement for the construction of facilities.
(d) Easement provisions for Single Family Developments or Multiple Family Developments with
common areas shall be provided by clearly indicating on the plat the following language or as specified
by the administrator.
Blanket Easements for Single Family Developments or
Multi-Family Developments with Common Areas
An easement for serving the subdivision and other property with electrical and communications services,
gas, cable television, storm water drainage and sanitary sewers is hereby reserved for and granted to
Commonwealth Edison Company
and
Ameritech
and
Northern Illinois Gas Company
and
Any Cable Communications Firm or Company Granted
a Cable Communications Franchise by the Village of Palatine
and
The Village of Palatine, Grantees
their respective successors and assigns, jointly and severally, for the placement, installation, use,
operation, maintenance, repair, relocation, replacement and removal of watermains, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage ditches and swales, retention ponds, gas mains, electrical lines, telephone lines, facilities
used in connection with underground transmission and distribution of electricity and sounds and signals,
including but not limited to television, data and radio signals, together with all braces, guys, anchors,
manholes, valves and all other equipment and appurtenances necessary in connection upon and under the
subdivision in, under, across, along and upon the surface of the property shown within the dotted lines on
the plat and marked easement, and the property designated on the Plat as a common area or areas, and the
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-3 4
property designated on the plat for streets and alleys, whether public or private, together with the right to
install required service connections over or under the surface of each lot and common area or areas to
serve improvements thereon or on adjacent lots, common area or areas, the right to cut, trim, or remove
trees, bushes and roots as may be reasonably required incident to the rights herein given, and the right to
enter upon the subdivided property for all such purposed. Obstructions shall not be placed over the
grantees’ facilities or in, upon or over the property within the dotted lines marked “easement” without the
prior written consent of grantees, except garden, shrubs and landscaping may be placed over any sub
surface facilities that do not unreasonably interfere with the safety, usefulness of unreasonably restrict to,
or prevent the prompt maintenance of repair of any such sub surface facilities. After installation of any
such facilities, the grade of the subdivided property shall not be altered in a manner so as to interfere with
the proper operation and maintenance thereof.
The term “common area or areas” is defined as a lot, parcel or area of real property, the beneficial use and
enjoyment of which is reserved in whole as an appurtenance to the separately owned lots, parcels or areas
within the planned development, even though such may be otherwise designated on the plat by terms such
as “out lots”, “open space”, “open area”, “common ground”, “parking and common area”. The term
“common area or areas” includes real property surfaced with interior driveways and walkways, but
excludes real property physically occupied by a building, Service Business District or structures such as a
pool or retention pond, or mechanical equipment.
Relocation of facilities will be done by Grantees at cost of Grantor/Lot Owner, upon written request.
The granting of the foregoing easement confers no obligation on the Village of Palatine to maintain,
repair, replace, relocate or remove any of the foregoing utilities. The easement provision is subject to the
terms and conditions of the Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions recorded herewith as Document
Number .
(e) Blanket easement provisions for Single Family Developments without common areas shall be
provided by clearly indicating on the plat the following language or as approved by the administrator.
Blanket Easements for Single Family Developments,
Without Common Areas
An easement for serving the subdivision and other property with electrical and communications services,
gas, cable television, storm water drainage and sanitary sewers is hereby reserved for and granted to
Commonwealth Edison Company
and
Ameritech
and
Northern Illinois Gas Company
and
Any Cable Communications Firm or Company Granted
a Cable Communications Franchise by the Village of Palatine
and
The Village of Palatine, Grantees
their respective successors and assigns, jointly and severally, for the placement, installation, use,
operation, maintenance, repair, relocation, replacement and removal of watermains, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage ditches and swales, retention ponds, gas mains, electrical lines, telephone lines, facilities
used in connection with underground transmission and distribution of electricity and sounds and signals,
including but not limited to television, data and radio signals, together with all braces, guys, anchors,
manholes, valves and all other equipment and appurtenances necessary in connection upon and under the
subdivision in, under, across, along and upon the surface of the property shown within the dotted lines on
the plat and marked “easement”, and the property designated on the plat for streets and alleys, whether
public or private, together with the right to install required service connections over or under the surface
of each lot to serve improvements thereon or on adjacent lots, the right to cut, trim, or remove trees,
bushes and roots as may be reasonably required incident to the rights herein given, and the right to enter
upon the subdivided property for all such purposed. Obstructions shall not be placed over the grantees’
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-3 5
facilities or in, upon or over the property within the doted lines marked “easement” without the prior
written consent of grantees, except garden, shrubs and landscaping may be placed over any sub surface
facilities that do not unreasonably interfere with the safety, usefulness of unreasonably restrict to, or
prevent the prompt maintenance of repair of any such sub surface facilities. After installation of any such
facilities, the grade of the subdivided property shall not be altered in a manner so as to interfere with the
proper operation and maintenance thereof.
Relocation of facilities will be done by Grantees at cost of Grantor/Lot Owner, upon written request.
The granting of the foregoing easement confers no obligation on the Village of Palatine to maintain,
repair, replace, relocate or remove any of the foregoing utilities. The easement provision is subject to the
terms and conditions of the Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions recorded herewith as Document
Number .
(f) Easements for Condominium Developments shall be provided by clearly indicating on the plat the
following language or as approved by the administrator.
Blanket Easements for Condominium Developments
An easement for serving the subdivision and other property with electrical and communications services,
gas, cable television, storm water drainage and sanitary sewers is hereby reserved for and granted to
Commonwealth Edison Company
and
Ameritech
and
Northern Illinois Gas Company
and
Any Cable Communications Firm or Company Granted
a Cable Communications Franchise by the Village of Palatine
and
The Village of Palatine, Grantees
their respective successors and assigns, jointly and severally, for the placement, installation, use,
operation, maintenance, repair, relocation, replacement and removal of watermains, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage ditches and swales, retention ponds, gas mains, electrical lines, telephone lines, facilities
used in connection with underground transmission and distribution of electricity and sounds and signals,
including but not limited to television, data and radio signals, together with all braces, guys, anchors,
manholes, valves and all other equipment and appurtenances necessary in connection upon and under the
subdivision in, under, across, along and upon the surface of the property shown within the dotted lines on
the plat and marked “easement”, the property designated in the Declaration of Condominium and/or on
this plat as “Common Elements”, and the property designated on the plat for streets and alleys, whether
public or private, together with the right to install required service connections over or under the surface
of each lot and Common Elements or areas to serve improvements thereon or on adjacent lots, or
Common Elements, the right to cut, trim, or remove trees, bushes and roots as may be reasonably required
incident to the rights herein given, and the right to enter upon the subdivided property for all such
purposed. Obstructions shall not be placed over the grantees’ facilities or in, upon or over the property
within the dotted lines marked “easement” without the prior written consent of grantees, except garden,
shrubs and landscaping may be placed over any sub surface facilities that do not unreasonably interfere
with the safety, usefulness of unreasonably restrict to, or prevent the prompt maintenance of repair of any
such sub surface facilities. After installation of any such facilities, the grade of the subdivided property
shall not be altered in a manner so as to interfere with the proper operation and maintenance thereof.
The term “Common Elements” shall have the meaning set forth in the “Condominium Property Act”,
Chapter 765 ILCS 605/2(c) as amended from time to time.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-3 6
“Common elements” also includes real property surfaced with interior driveways and walkways, but
excludes real property physically occupied by a building, Service Business District or structures such as a
pool or retention pond, or mechanical equipment.
Relocation of facilities will be done by Grantees at cost of Grantor/Lot Owner, upon written request.
The granting of the foregoing easement confers no obligation on the Village of Palatine to maintain,
repair, replace, relocate or remove any of the foregoing utilities. The easement provision is subject to the
terms and conditions of the Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions for the
Condominiums recorded herewith as Document Number ______________________.
(g) Any resubdivision of land having existing overhead transmission facilities shall include an
easement for the continuation of such facilities.
(h) Consent. Any person who submits the final plat to the Village Council for final approval shall be
deemed to have given consent to the terms of the declaration of easements set forth in this section 6.03.
6.04. Drainage Easement.
(a) Where subdivisions abut Salt Creek, Buffalo Creek or tributaries thereto, an easement shall be
dedicated to the village for drainage and future maintenance of such watercourse.
(b) Easement shall [have a] width of not less than fifty (50) feet on each side, as measured from the
centerline of the creek.
(c) The width of easement along tributaries may be reduced from the aforementioned width with the
consent of the village president and board of trustees. (Ord.No. 0-5-97, §2, 1-13-97)
6.05. Block standards.
(a) Length. The maximum lengths of blocks shall be one thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet.
(1) Blocks over nine hundred (900) feet long shall have pedestrian ways at their approximate centers.
(2) The use of additional access ways to schools, parks or other destinations may be specified by the
plan commission.
(b) Shape. No specific rule concerning the shape of blocks is made, but blocks must fit readily into the
overall plan of subdivision and their design must evidence consideration of lot planning, traffic flow and
public open space areas.
6.06. Lot standards.
(a) Design criteria. The following general design criteria for lots shall be followed.
(1) Minimum lot dimensions in subdivisions designed for single-family detached dwelling
developments shall be:
a. Seventy-five (75) feet wide, (eighty-five (85) feet for corner lots) at the established building
setback line, and at the front lot line along outside street curvatures.
b. Not less than fifty (50) feet at the front line along inside street curvatures.
c. Not less than one hundred ten (110) feet in average depth, and not less than nine thousand
(9,000) square feet (ten thousand (10,000) square feet for corner lots) in area where
permitted under the provisions of the zoning ordinance.
d. All lots shall be in full compliance with the zoning ordinance of the Village of Palatine.
e. This lot area may be reduced to nine thousand (9,000) square feet (ten thousand (10,000)
square for corner lots) if the president and board of trustees determines that adequate land
has been provided within or near the subdivision for park, recreation or other public
purposes.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-3 7
(2) Acute-angled lot corners shall be avoided. In general, lots should be as nearly rectangular in
shape as practicable, with minimum rear lot lines of thirty (30) feet.
(3) All lots, except those in planned developments, shall abut on a publicly dedicated street.
(4) Side lines of lot shall be at right angles or radial to the street line, or substantially so.
(5) Double-frontage lots are not permitted except:
a. Where lots back upon a major thoroughfare.
b. Where topographic or other conditions render subdividing otherwise unreasonable.
c. That such double-frontage lots shall have an additional depth of at least twenty (20) feet in
order to allow space for a protective screen along the back lot line.
(6) Lots abutting upon a water course, drainage way, channel, or stream shall have an additional
depth or width as required, to assure house sites of nine thousand (9,000) square feet that are not
subject to flooding.
(7) In the subdividing of any land within the village or within one and one-half (1 1/2) miles of the
corporate limits, due regard shall be shown for all existing contours and all natural features, such
as tree growth, water courses, historic spots, or similar conditions which, if preserved, will add
attractiveness and value to the proposed development and to the village.
(b) Lot grading.
(1) Grading of lots and roadways within the Village of Palatine shall be accomplished in such a
manner as to prevent ponding in excess of eighteen (18) inches in the event of complete failure of
the storm sewer system and shall not result in the flooding of any primary structures. The only
exceptions to allowing the maximum of eighteen (18) inches are for storm water
detention/retention basins.
(2) Except in special cases, longitudinal grading on all grassed areas of lots will be kept within the
range of one-half (0.50) percent and five (5.00) percent.
(3) Driveway grades on all lots, as measured from the top of curb to finished garage floor, shall be
kept within the range of two (2.00) percent and ten (10.00) percent.
(4) Drainage easements will be provided along the rear and/or sides where surface waters from more
than one lot are conveyed down a property line.
(5) Where the slope between adjacent properties is one foot horizontal to one foot vertical or greater,
retaining walls or other improvements approved by village engineer shall be required.
(6) A minimum of six (6) inches of top soil must be provided on all lots and parkways in lot grading
for required land improvements.
(7) Parkways are to be sodded or seeded with Class I seed at rate and method as indicated in Section
642 of the Standard Specifications.
(c) Addressing of lots, buildings or structures.
(1) Numbering system. All lots, buildings, and structures in the village shall be numbered as follows:
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-3 8
a. Palatine Road shall be the dividing line for streets running north and south; and
b. Plum Grove Road shall be the dividing line for streets running east and west.
c. The odd numbers shall be on the east and south sides of the streets.
d. The even numbers shall be on the west and north sides of streets.
e. One number or unit shall be allowed for each thirteen (13) feet of frontage commencing with
number one at the dividing lines.
f. The village clerk shall keep a chart, showing the proper street number of every lot in the
village, which shall be open to inspection by anyone interested.
(2) Location. It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant of every house building in the village to
have placed thereon numerals showing the number of the building.
a. These numerals shall be clearly visible from the street.
b. These numerals shall be placed at a location near the main entrance of the principal
structure.
c. If a portion of the principal structure projects out towards the street line a distance further
than that of the main entrance, the numerals shall be placed at a location on this projection
which is clearly visible from the street.
d. On corner lots, numerals shall be visible from the street on which the main entrance is
located.
e. If the main entrance does not face the street name which the building is addressed to, then
the numerals shall be displayed on the side of the building that parallels the street name.
(Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
(3) Additional regulations.
a. Structures set back to a distance of fifty (50) feet shall have numerals a minimum of four (4)
inches high.
b. Structures set back a distance greater than fifty (50) feet shall have numerals a minimum of
six (6) inches high.
c. Numerals shall not be placed far apart so as to make reading the address difficult. (Ord. No.
0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
d. Script lettering shall not be permitted as the principal means of addressing.
e. Numerals shall be clearly visible from the street and shall contrast with the background they
are placed on.
f. The principle address shall be in Arabic numerals. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
g. The provisions of this section 6.06(c) may be adjusted, at the discretion of the administrator,
to insure adequate addressing standards are met.
(4) Administration.
a. The Fire Prevention Division will assign a number, direction, street name and suffix to each
building requiring an address.
b. Once an address has been assigned, it will be entered into a database and maintained by the
Information Services Department.
c. Each home, business, building or property which may require village services shall have an
address.
d. No vanity address will be permitted.
e. Prohibited street names;
1. Duplicate names.
2. Similar sounding names.
3. Racial, suggestive, obscene or otherwise offensive names.
4. Confusing names such as phonetically misspelled names.
5. No more than three (3) streets with the same “base name”. Main St, Main
Ave, Main Ct, Main Terr.
6. For the delivery of essential services, the requirements of Section 6.06(c) shall
be applicable to all existing buildings and businesses.
(Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-3 9
(5) Penalty.
a. Any person, firm or corporation, failing to so number any house owned or occupied by him
or it, within ten (10) calendar days after receiving notice to do so from the village manager,
shall be fined ten dollars ($10.00) for each day on which the failure to number continues.
6.07. Monuments.
(a) Permanent monuments shall be placed at all corners of the subdivision and as otherwise required
in the state statutes.
(1) Permanent monuments shall be of concrete with minimum dimensions of four (4) inches by four
(4) inches at top, six (6) inches by six (6) inches at bottom and thirty-six (36) inches long with a
copper dowel three-eighths (3/8) inches in diameter, at least two and one-half (2 1/2) inches in
length, imbedded so that the top of the dowel shall be flush with the surface and at the top center
of the monuments.
(2) All lot corners not marked by concrete monuments shall be marked by galvanized or wrought
iron pipe or iron or steel bars at least eighteen (18) inches in length and not less than one-half
(1/2) inch in diameter. The top of the pipe or bar is to be set level with the established grade of
the ground after finish grading.
(b) In addition, a minimum of one permanent third (3rd) order level bench mark shall be required for
each subdivision of ten (10) acres or more and at a location designated by the village engineer.
(1) The monument shall be of concrete with a minimum dimension of four (4) inches by four (4)
inches at top, six (6) inches by six (6) inches at bottom and forty-eight (48) inches long with a
brass plate securely fastened to the surface.
(2) On the brass plate shall be inscribed the number and the U.S.G.S. datum elevation of the bench
mark.
[Editor’s Note: Sec. 6.08 Floodplain Regulations was replaced in its entirety by Ord. No.0-105-08,
passed on August 14, 2008]
6.08 Floodplain Regulations
Development of land in and adjacent to floodplains or containing watercourses or drainage ways shall
be in accordance with following floodplain regulations of the Village of Palatine:
(a) Purpose and Intent
(1) Purpose. The purpose of these floodplain regulations is:
a. To assure that new development does not increase the flood elevations or damage hazard or
reduce flood conveyance to others upstream or downstream, or create unstable conditions
susceptible to erosion; (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
b. To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
c. To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
d. To lessen the burden on the taxpayers for flood control projects, repairs to flood damaged
public facilities and utilities and flood rescue and relief operations;
e. To assure that new development does not result in any new or additional expense other than
for the developer of the property for flood protection or for lost environmental stream uses
and functions; (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
f. To assure that new development does not result in any increase in flood velocity or
impairment of the hydrologic and hydraulic functions of streams and floodplains unless a
water resource benefit is realized; (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-4 0
g. To assure that new development does not unreasonably or unnecessarily degrade surface or
ground water quality; (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
h. To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the village by
fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program;
i. To protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and water resources; and
j. To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order
to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion,
protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic
benefits and enhance community and economic development.
k. To assure that new development does not violate any provision of the ordinance either
during or after construction. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
(2) Intent. This Section 6.08 is intended to comply with the Rules and Regulations of the National
Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended and promulgated by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration as
provided in the Rules and Regulations of the Federal Register, Volume 41, No. 207, Tuesday,
October 26, 1976, as amended, and which are hereby adopted by reference, and filed in the office
of the Village Clerk, pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS) 5/1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-30-
2, 11-30-8, and 11-31-2. However, to the extent the provisions of this Section 6.08 are more
restrictive than those required by the Federal Insurance Administration, or the Cook County
Watershed Management Ordinance, this Section 6.08 shall take precedence. This section is also
intended to comply with Public Act 85-905 and the Rules and Regulations promulgated by the
Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Water Resources as well as meet the requirements
of 615 ILCS 5/18(g), "An Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and
Streams of the State of Illinois" approved June 10, 1911, as amended. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1,
10/20/14)
(b) Floodplain Administrator
(1) The Village Engineer is hereby designated as the Floodplain Administrator of the village’s
floodplain regulations and ordinances as it pertains to this section 6.08.
(2) No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by law shall commence any
development in the SFHA without have being first reviewed and approved by the Floodplain
Administrator. Such approval shall not exempt compliance with any other sections of the Palatine
Code of Ordinances.
(3) The Floodplain Administrator shall not grant approval unless all other applicable federal, state and
local permits or waivers have been obtained.
(4) The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect or cause to be inspected before, during and after
construction of all development within the SFHAs. The Floodplain Administrator can request of
the permittee any supporting documents such as hydraulic studies, calculations, surveys,
elevation and floodproofing certificates or other data or documentation necessary to assure that
the development has been constructed in compliance with the approved permit.
(c) Base Flood Elevation.
(1) The corporate authorities shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize base flood elevation data
available from Federal, State, or other sources, as criteria for requiring that substantial
improvements or other development conform with the provisions of Section 6.08(C), until such
time as such data has been received from the Federal Insurance Administration. Base flood data
received from the Federal Insurance Administration shall take precedence over data from other
sources.
(2) The Village shall use the following data listed below in descending order of overall accuracy,
completeness and currentness. When data of a higher order become available, data of a lower
order will not be used.
a. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHA‘s of Salt Creek and
Buffalo Creek and their tributaries branches shall be delineated on the 100-year flood
profiles in the county wide Flood Insurance Study for Cook County prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and generally identified as such on map
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-4 1
number 17031J, panels 0038J, 0039J, 0043J, 0044J, 0177J, 0179J, 0181J, 0182J and
0183J, dated August 19, 2008 and such amendments to such study and maps as may be
prepared from time to time. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations for
the SFHA‘s of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the one and
one-half mile extra territorial jurisdiction of the Village of Palatine and may be annexed
into the Village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study of Cook County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency FEMA and generally identified as such on map number 17031J, panels 0063J,
0178J, dated August 19, 2008 and such amendments to such study and maps as may be
prepared from time to time.
b. Other detailed 100-year flood studies, if certified by IDNR/OWR.
c. USGS Maps of flood prone areas.
d. USGS-NIPC Hydrologic Investigation Atlases (Floods of Record).
e. Illinois State Water Survey Floodplain Information Repository.
(Ord. 0-137-00 §3 10-23-00)
(3) When no base flood information exists, the base flood elevation shall be determined by a licensed
Professional Engineer registered in the State of Illinois: (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
a. For a riverine SFHA, the BFE shall be determined from a backwater model, such as
HEC-II, HEC-RAS, or a dynamic model such as HIP. The flood flows used in the
hydraulic models shall be obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-HMS, HEC-I
TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques presented in various publications prepared by the
United States Geological Survey for estimating peak flood discharges. Flood flows
should be based on anticipated
future land use conditions in the watershed as determined from adopted local and
regional land use plans. Along any watercourse draining more than one (1) square
mile, the above analysis must be submitted to the Illinois State Water Survey
Floodplain Information Repository for filing.
b. For an isolated depressional SFHA, the Base Flood Elevation shall be the historic Flood
of Record plus one (1) foot, unless calculated by a detailed engineering study and
approved by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources
(IDNR-OWR).
c. For an isolated depressional area which is not a SFHA, the BFE shall be the flood of
record as determined by the Floodplain Administrator, unless calculated by a detailed
engineering study.
(4) The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated flood study, referenced in Section
6.08 (c)(2 a. of this ordinance, must be used for analysis of base conditions. If the study data
appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR-OWR shall be contacted for
concurrence on the appropriate base conditions to use. The study shall be submitted to FEMA
and IDNR-OWR for review. No development activity shall take place until formal acceptance is
received from FEMA and IDNR-OWR amending the regulatory data.
(d) Regulations of the Floodplain Areas. All lands deemed to be in the floodplain including the floodway
unless specifically noted, shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the floodplain where compensatory
storage has been provided for any required fill unless specifically exempted:
a. Recreation; such as, but not limited to, day camps, golf courses, parks, or picnic
groves;
b. Arboreta, Wildlife Sanctuaries, or Woodland Preserves;
c. Nurseries, Orchards or other Agricultural Uses; provided that any such vegetation
will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or
velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare or impair the natural
hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or permanently
impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat.
d. Hiking Trails, Bike Paths and Bridle Paths;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-4 2
e. Outdoor Transient Amusement Enterprises such as Circuses, Carnivals and
Similar; provided they are on the site less than 30 days and are not located in the
floodway or other areas essential to the conveyance of flood waters and are
permitted by the underlying zoning. Parking lots for outdoor transient amusement
enterprises can be located within the floodplain but not in a floodway or other
areas essential for the conveyance of flood waters, provided access is restricted
during times of flooding and the owner agrees to accept liability for all damages
caused during flood events. Signs shall be posted to clearly identify the flood
hazard. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
f. Storm Sewer Outlets that;
i. Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural
bank.
ii. Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, and
iii. Are designed so as not to cause stream bank erosion at the outfall
location.
g. Drain Tiles and Drainage Systems;
h. Overhead Utility Transmission Lines; provided such facilities will not create a
damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be a
threat to public health and safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and
hydraulic functions of the flood way or channel, or permanently impair existing
water quality or aquatic habitat, such structures shall not be located in the
floodway and shall be designed in such a way as to not catch debris. No above
ground facilities or structures other than those necessary to support the overhead
utility may be placed in the floodplain.
i. Underground Utility Lines; including those crossing a lake or stream and where the
final grade after the installation of the utility lines has not changed from the grade
prior to installation, and will not create a damaging or a potentially damaging
increase in flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and
welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or
channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. In the
case of stream crossing the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of
three (3) feet below the existing stream bed. Any utility crossing carrying material
which may cause water pollution as defined by the Environmental Protection Act,
415 ILCS 5 (1996 State Bar Edition) shall be provided with shut-off valves on
each side of the body of water to be crossed. New and replacement public sanitary
sewer systems and water supply systems shall be located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges
from the systems into the flood waters. All sanitary manhole rims shall be placed
above the Flood Protection Elevation, or in the alternative, such manholes shall be
provided with watertight, lock-type covers. Other public utilities such as gas,
electric communications, etc shall be located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage. No above ground facilities related to the underground
utility shall be placed in the floodplain. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
j. Fencing of any Type; in any yard, provided that any such fencing shall not be
located in the floodway, in a floodplain without a detailed study, or other areas
essential to the conveyance of flood waters;
k. Sidewalks, Driveways, Patios and Similar Structures; provided they are
constructed at grade. In Instances of an Existing Depressed Driveway for an
attached garage; the relocation of said driveway by filling in the depressed area to
grade level and construction of a new driveway on the premises. Compensatory
storage shall not be required in these cases;
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-4 3
l. Roadways and Parking Lots where required by regulations for zoning districts
other than residential and any modifications thereto and do not result in the filling
in of any floodplain areas and where the depth of flooding at the 100-year
frequency flood event will not exceed 1 foot. New parking lots built below the
Base Flood Elevation shall clearly post the potential flood hazard. Applications
involving filling require a special use for said fill and compensatory storage must
be provided. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
m. Lighting Standards and Similar Structures provided that they will not create a
damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be a
threat to public health and safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and
hydraulic functions of the flood way or channel, or permanently impair existing
water quality or aquatic habitat.
n. Open Structures such as Playground Equipment and Pavilions; provided that they
are properly anchored and without washrooms or other sanitary sewage facilities
and are not located in the floodway or other areas essential to the conveyance of
flood waters.
o. Floodproofing; of existing non-residential structures.
i. A Professional Structural Engineer, registered in the State of Illinois,
shall develop and/or review the structural design, specifications and plans
for construction, and shall certify that the building or floodproofing
alterations have been designed so that below the flood protection
elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are water-tight and
capable of resisting the effects of the base flood. The building design or
floodproofing alterations shall take into account flood velocities,
duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of
buoyancy and impacts from debris or ice.
ii. Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention
and without an outside source of electricity.
iii The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the engineer's certificate
and a record of the specific "as built" elevation to which the building was
floodproofed.
iv. A building permit must be secured for any flood-proofing work.
p. Elevation of existing structures, residential or non-residential buildings, by fill
shall be in accordance with the following:
i. The fill must extend at least ten (10) feet beyond the foundation before
the grade slopes below the Base Flood Elevation for buildings, unless it
is demonstrated that the building is and the building site are reasonably
safe from flooding per design standard requirements in Technical
Bulletin 10-01 issued by FEMA.
ii. Be placed in layers no greater than six-inches deep before compaction;
and
iii. No compensatory storage is required for the floodplain volume displaced
by the building however compensatory storage is required for this fill.
(Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14; Ord. No. O-35-19, 04/08/19)
q. Elevation of existing Structures, residential or non-residential buildings, by means
other than filling shall be in accordance with the following:
i. The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space, stilts,
piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood waters
and is resistant to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or
100-year frequency flood. The permanent openings shall be no more
than one foot above grade, and consist of a minimum of two openings.
The openings must have a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the
Base Flood Elevation. Such openings shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with the Federal Insurance Administration Technical
Bulletin 1-93.
ii. An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters
from the area internal to the structure foundation within a reasonable
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-4 4
period after the flood waters recede.
iii. The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in
relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize
exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and
floating debris.
iv. All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of
materials resistant to flood damage in accordance with the Federal
Insurance Administration Technical Bulletin 2-93. The lowest floor
(including basement) and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing,
and air conditioning equipment, ductwork, service equipment and utility
meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation. Water
and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and
other water proofed service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
v. No area below the flood protection elevation shall be used for storage of
items or materials or modified or occupied at a later date for habitable
space.
vi. Designs for meeting these requirements shall be prepared, signed and
sealed by a licensed Professional Structural Engineer or a licensed
architect registered in the State of Illinois.
(Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
r. Reconstruction of a building or structure destroyed or damaged by fire, or
other act of nature where:
i. Any building or structure so destroyed may be restored in its entirety if
such building or structure and the use thereof conformed to all the
regulations of the district in which such building or structure was located
before such damage or destruction, and shall continue to so conform
after restoration of such building or structure.
ii. If all or substantially all of such building or structure is designed or
intended for a use which is not permitted in the district in which it is
located, said building or structure may be restored unless the damage
exceeds 40% of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it
shall conform to this ordinance.
iii. The replacement structure shall not exceed the outside dimension of the
building or structure destroyed or damaged and shall be designed to
include floodproofing measures included in Section 6.08(C)(1)(o), in
the case of non-residential buildings or elevated to two (2) feet above the
base floodplain elevation in case of residential structures in accordance
with Section 6.08(C)(1)(p). (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
s. Improvements or Additions to existing Buildings or Structures; provided that
any such improvement shall be located wholly at or above the flood protection
elevation and outside of the floodway, and shall meet the requirements specified in
Section 6.08 (d)(1) p or q of this ordinance and all of the National Flood Insurance
Program requirements for substantial improvements. Improvements shall not
exceed 40% of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair
is started and shall be counted cumulatively for a ten (10) year period beginning at
the start of the first improvement. (Ord. No. O-35-19, 04/08/19)
t. Removal of Topsoil; in accordance with Section 6.09 of the Subdivision
Regulations.
u. Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where:
i. The affected length of stream is less than 1000 feet.
ii. The work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural stream channels,
or
iii. The cross sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to that of the
natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
v. Construction of shore line and stream bed protection that;
i. Does not exceed 1000 feet in length or 2 cubic yards per lineal foot of
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-4 5
stream bed.
ii. Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
iii. All materials utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to resist
anticipated forces of current and wave action.
iv. Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion or the
accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the project.
v. Materials shall be placed so that the modified cross-sectional area of the
channel will conform to that of the natural channel upstream and
downstream of the site. In no case shall cross-sectional area of the natural
channel be reduced. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter slope and
to lessen the quantity of material required.
vi Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the preferred
mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel
velocity sharpens or wave action necessitates the use of alternate
stabilization measures, natural rock, rip-rap or natural rock filled gabions
are preferred material. Artificial materials such as concrete, construction
rubble, and sheet piles should be avoided, unless there are no possible
alternatives.
w. Structures or facilities related to the use of or requiring access to, the water or
shoreline such as pumping facilities, piers, boat ramps and other functionally
water dependent uses, provided that any such structure or facility shall not be
located in the floodway, in a floodplain without a detailed study, or other
areas essential to the conveyance of flood waters and the proposed structure or
facility is the minimum necessary to meet current or future needs as a water
dependent use. (Ord. No.0-118-11, §2, 10/10/11)
x. Specific construction approved by IDNR-OWR.
(Ord. O-35-19, 04/08/19)
(2) Special Uses. The following may be permitted in the floodplain upon approval of the Mayor and
Village Council of the Village of Palatine and subject to the procedures and provisions of Section
14.05 of the Zoning Ordinance. Special uses in the floodplain requested in conjunction with an
application for a Plat of Subdivision or a Planned Development shall be processed as a part of
that application.
a. Residential Front, Side or Rear Yards for new or substantially improved construction;
except that no principle structures or fill shall be permitted thereon;
b. Fencing of Any Type; in any yard, not located in the floodway, in a floodplain without
a detailed study, or other areas that are essential to the conveyance of flood water.
Before an application for any permit may be approved, the applicant must file with the
Floodplain Administrator, copies of all permits, duly issued, which are required by
Federal and State agencies to construct the proposed fence in the floodplain. (Ord. No.
0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
c. Structures or facilities related to the use of or requiring access to, the water or shoreline
such as pumping facilities, piers, boat ramps and other functionally water dependent
uses to be located within a floodway provided;
i. The proposed structure or facility is the minimum necessary to meet
current or future needs as a water dependent use.
ii. The proposed structure or facility will not create a damaging or
potentially damaging increase in flood heights or relocations or be a
threat to public health and safety and welfare or impair the natural
hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel.
iii. The proposed structure or facility will not permanently impair or
degrade the aquatic habitat nor will prevent the migration of indigenous
fish species that require access to upstream areas as part of their life
cycle, such as for spawning.
iv. A permit or a letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-4 6
from IDNR-OWR.
(Ord. 0-118-11, §3, 10/10/11)
d. Filling in of Land where,
i. Compensatory storage is provided by and through the removal of 110% of the
volume of existing material from opposite to or adjacent to the areas filled and
occupied, or it shall be demonstrated by the applicant’s engineer that through a
determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the location
selected is hydraulically equivalent and is capable of storing flood waters. All
such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10 year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10 year flood elevation: All
floodplain storage lost above the existing 10 year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10 year flood elevation. There shall be no
reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification, unless
such modification is necessary to reduce flooding at an existing structure.
ii. All applicable Federal, State and Local permits must be obtained. (Ord. No. 0-
134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
iii. New structures may be permitted on such filled land provided that the elevation
of the filled land is at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation and all
applicable Local, State and Federal requirements regarding the construction of
the structure are met. New buildings must be constructed on properly designed
and compacted (ASTM D-698 or equivalent) that encompass the entire lot for
single family residential or extends beyond the building walls for multi-family,
commercial or industrial development at least ten (10) feet for buildings without
basements and at least twenty (20) feet before dropping below the Base Flood
Elevation and has appropriate protection from erosion and scour. Any
structures built on fill in or near the floodplain shall meet the requirements of
Federal Insurance Administration Technical Bulletin 10-01 and shall be
certified as meeting such requirements by a qualified design professional. (Ord.
No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
iv. The design of the fill or the fill standard must be approved by a registered
engineer. Land so filled shall not be considered floodplain provided upon
completion of the filling activity, sufficient data is submitted to FEMA in order
to amend the regulatory flood data. This certification from FEMA that the filled
land is no longer within the regulatory floodplain must be received before a
building permit for a new structure can be issued. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1,
10/20/14)
e Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or private improvements
for the purpose of backing up water provided:
i. The project is determined to be in the public interest by providing flood
control, public recreation or regional stormwater detention.
ii. The proposed project will not create a damaging or potentially damaging
increase in flood heights or relocations or be a threat to public health and safety
and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the
floodway or channel.
iii. The project will not permanently impair or degrade the aquatic habitat nor will
prevent the migration of indigenous fish species that require access to upstream
areas as part of their life cycle, such as for spawning.
iv. The project will not cause or contribute to degraded water quality. The design
of the project should include gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank
stabilization measures and a pre-sedimentation basin.
v. A non-point source control plan shall be implemented in the upstream
watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimize the
input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals and other pollutants.
vi. Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot when compared to
the existing conditions, for all events up to and including the 100-year
frequency event shall be contained within the channel banks (or within existing
vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-4 7
grade of existing levees or floodwalls or within recorded flood easements.
vii. A permit or a letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from
IDNR-OWR, Dam Safety Section for a Dam Safety Permit or waiver for any
structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during
normal or flood flow. All dams and impoundment structures shall meet the
permitting requirements of 17 Adm. Code 3702 (Construction and
Maintenance of Dams).
f. Facilities for Volume Control Practices and for the Storage and Detention/Retention of
Storm Water:
i. Volume Control practices and Stormwater detention facilities shall not be
located in the floodway or other areas essential for the conveyance of
floodwaters. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14; Ord. No. O-35-19, 04/08/19)
ii. The plans and specifications for the facility shall be approved by the
Floodplain Administrator and shall provide all storage capacity for the 100
year storm event above the base flood elevation,
iii. All berming or other raised earthen structures are subject to the required
amount of compensatory storage and shall not affect the flow of water,
iv. The facility shall demonstrate adequate engineering and design features so as
to prevent stagnant water or other adverse environmental effects;
g. Signs; according to the rules and regulations as stated in Article VIII of the Zoning
Ordinance and provided they are not located in the floodway or other areas essential to
the conveyance of flood waters.
h. Detached Garages or Storage Sheds Without Toilets or Other Sanitary Sewerage
Facilities, provided they are properly anchored and made flood resistant, in accordance
with the Federal Insurance Administration Technical Bulletin 2-93, are less than 700
square feet total for all accessory structures in size, are not located in a floodway or
other area essential to the conveyance of flood waters and meet all applicable State and
Federal regulations. The maximum square footage for any one replacement detached
garage structure, which is necessary to comply with the required parking, identified in
Appendix A of the Village of Palatine Code of Ordinances, cannot exceed 600 square
feet, or as further determined by Article VI of Appendix A of the Village of Palatine
Code of Ordinances. The maximum square footage for any one replacement storage
shed is 100 square feet. For all replacement detached garages, which are necessary to
comply with required parking identified in Appendix A of the Village of Palatine Code
of Ordinances or storage sheds, which are replacing existing structures in a similar
location and like encroachment into the floodplain as the existing detached garage or
storage shed on the Subject Property, the proposed replacement structure shall comply
with the following:
1): the proposed new replacement structure shall not adversely impact the subject
or surrounding properties or encroach any further into the floodplain, as determined
by the Village Engineer,
2): pursuant to the Village review of the submitted topographical survey or other
required engineering plans in support of the proposed new replacement structure, a
determination of no further adverse impact to the subject or surrounding properties
or further encroachment into the floodplain must be made by the Village Engineer,
in review of the submitted plans, in order to continue the Special Use process,
3): if the Village determines that the proposed new structure would have an
adverse impact or further encroachment into the floodplain, a standard Variation
process would be required in order to continue forward with the Special Use
process.
(Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14; Ord. No. O-35-19, 04/08/19)
i. Retaining Walls; provided that they are not located in the floodway or other areas
essential to the conveyance of flood waters.
j. Bridges and Culverts; provided:
i. Construction shall not result in an increase of upstream flood stages greater
than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing conditions for all flood events up
to and including the 100-year frequency event; or the upstream flood stage
increases will be contained within the channel banks (or within the vertical
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-4 8
extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of
existing levees or flood walls or within recorded flood easements.
ii. If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood stages greater than
0.1 feet, the applicant must contact IDNR-OWR, to obtain a permit for a dam
or waiver.
iii. The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated using
the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for tailwater
conditions for the required flood study. Culverts must be analyzed using the
US DOT, FHWA Hydraulic Chart for the selection of Highway Culverts.
Bridges must be analyzed using the US DOT/FHA Hydraulics of Bridge
Waterways calculation procedures.
iv. The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the
existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be submitted to
IDNR-OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required.
v. Lost floodplain storage shall be compensated for per Section 6.08 (d) (2) d. of
this ordinance.
vi. Velocity increases must be mitigated per Section 6.08 (d) (4) d. of this code of
ordinances.
vii. All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be designed per
Section 6.08 (d) (4)e. of this code of ordinances.
k. Modification or Reconstruction of Existing Bridges, Culverts and Approach Roads;
provided:
i. The proposed reconstruction or modification shall be constructed with no
more than 0.1 foot increase in backwater over the existing flood profile for all
flood frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing
structure is not a source of flood damage.
ii. Where the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of
flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain, the
applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the structure
to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the effects on flood
stages on upstream and downstream properties.
iii. The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a source of
flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in accordance with
the Department of Transportation Rules 92 17 Ill. Adm. Code 708 3708
(Floodway Construction in Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNROWR
for review and concurrence before a permit is issued.
l. Above Ground Swimming Pools and Spas; provided they are not located in the
floodway or other areas essential to the conveyance of flood waters. Compensatory
storage must be provided for lost storage volume.
m. Raised Patios or Decks, provided they are not located in the floodway or other areas
essential to the conveyance of flood waters.
n. Activities incidental to and customarily associated with any of the foregoing.
o. Dredging of a stream channel that does not meet the criteria of Section 6.08 (d) (1) t. of
this ordinance.
p. Construction of shore line or stream bank stream bank protection that does not meet the
criteria of Section 6.08 (d) (1) u. of this ordinance.
(3) Restrictions on Usage. No provision of this Section 6.08 shall be construed to permit any of the
following in the floodplain.
a. New Structures and Buildings; with the exception of those listed in Section 6.08(d)(1) and
(2). New Structures and Buildings cannot be elevated by any means other than by fill.
(Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
b. Sanitary Landfills, Dumps, Junkyards, and Outdoor Storage of Inoperable Vehicles within
the 500-year floodplain.
c. Outside storage of recreational vehicles, even if in compliance with section 7.03 (d) (1) ii
of Appendix B of the Palatine Code of Ordinances, in excess of 180 consecutive days
unless they are fully licensed and ready for highway use.
d. On-site Sewage Disposal Systems or Water Treatment Facilities; -within the 500 Year
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-4 9
Floodplain.
e. Those structures or facilities which produce, use or store highly volatile, flammable,
explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials within the 500-year floodplain.
f. Hospitals, Nursing Homes and Housing which are likely to contain occupants who may
not be sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during a flood event within the 500-year
floodplain.
g. Police Stations, Fire Stations, Vehicle and Equipment Storage Facilities and Emergency
Operations Centers which are needed for flood response activities before, during, and after
the flood event within the 500-year floodplain.
h. Public or Private Utility Facilities such as wells, pumping stations and other facilities
which are vital to maintaining or restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during,
and after a flood event within the 500-year floodplain. New sanitary lift stations shall also
be located above the Flood Protection Elevation and shall be located to ensure access for
maintenance during the Base Flood Event. Existing sanitary lift stations to be repaired or
rehabilitated shall have all above ground equipment elevated above the Flood Protection
Elevation. Where possible, ground openings and vents shall be adjusted above the Flood
Protection Elevation or be constructed with lock-type, watertight structure lids to protect
against the Base Flood. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
(4) Standards for Regulatory Floodway Construction. The only development in the floodway or
SFHA where a floodway has not been determined, which will be allowed are uses included as
permitted uses, 6.08 (c) (1); or special uses, 6.08 (c) (2); which will not cause a rise in the base
flood elevation, and which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood
heights or velocity or be a threat to public health safety and welfare or impair the natural
hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing
water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate
mitigation methods as called for in the ordinance.
a. Carrying Capacity and notification. For all projects involving channel modification, fill,
or stream maintenance (including levees), the carrying capacity of the channel shall be
maintained. In addition, the Village shall notify adjacent communities in writing 30
days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the channel.
b. Preservation of flood conveyance so as not to increase flood stages upstream. For
appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, on-stream structures or dams, all
effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all
flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective
regulatory floodway conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:
i. Regulatory floodway conveyance, 'K'=(1.486/n) ARe0.67, where "n" is
Manning’s roughness factor, "A" is the effective area of the cross-section, and
"R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (see Open Channel
Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York)
ii. The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and proposed
conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal, state, or
local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be
maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a non-vegetative
land cover.
iii. Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of effective
regulatory floodway conveyance. The following expansion and contraction
ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR-OWR
through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions
may be used with the same efficiency:
(a) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the
water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot
horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream's length.
(b) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water
should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream's length.
(c) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum
of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of stream length shall be
used.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-5 0
(d) Transition sections shall be provided between cross-sections with rapid
expansions and contractions and when meeting the regulatory floodway
delineation on adjacent properties.
(e) All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be located perpendicular
to flood flows.
(f) Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and
downstream of the transition sections.
c. Preservation of Floodway Storage so as not to increase downstream flooding.
Compensatory storage provided by and through the removal of 110% of the volume of
existing material from opposite to or adjacent to the areas filled and occupied, and is
capable of storing flood waters. Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in
head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced. The compensatory
storage shall be placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed
100-year flood elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost above the existing 10-
year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
There shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as result of a floodway
modification, unless such modification is necessary to reduce flooding at the existing
structure.
d. Preservation of Floodway Velocities so as not to increase stream erosion or flood
heights. For all permitted and special uses, except bridges or culverts or on stream
structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the average channel or
regulatory floodway velocities or stage, for all flood events up to and including the 100-
year frequency event. However, in the case of bridges or culverts or on stream
structures built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or
flood flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and
sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip-rap or other design measures.
e. Excavation in the floodway. When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and
culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing bridge and
culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance for any permitted or special
uses in the floodway, transition sections shall be provided for the excavation.
Expansion and contraction ratios meeting the criteria of Section 6.08 (d) (4) b. iii. shall
be used unless the applicants engineer can demonstrate through engineering
calculations or model tests to the satisfaction of IDNR-OWR that more abrupt
transitions can be used with the same efficiency.
f. Conditional Letter of Map Revision. If the proposed development would result in a
change in the regulatory floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) must be obtained prior to any filling,
grading, dredging or excavating in the floodway. No further development activities
shall take place until a final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA with
concurrence from IDNR-OWR.
g. Professional Engineer's Supervision. All engineering analyses shall be performed by or
under the supervision of a Registered Professional Engineer.
h. Analysis Criteria; The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in section 6.08 (b) shall
be used for analysis. If the 100-year floodway elevation at the site of the construction is
affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area,
the proposed construction shall be shown to meet the requirements of this section for
the 100-year frequency flood elevations of the regulatory conditions and conditions
with the receiving stream at normal water elevations. If the applicant learns from
IDNR-OWR, the Village of Palatine, or a private owner that a downstream restrictive
bridge or culvert is scheduled to be removed, reconstructed, or modified, or a regional
flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within
the next five years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected flood
profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is built.
(5) Regulation of Riverine SFHAs where the Floodway has not been Determined; Where no
floodway has been designated within a riverine floodplain, the entire floodplain shall be
regulated as floodway unless the developer has an engineering study performed to determine the
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-5 1
floodway that is submitted to FEMA and IDNR-OWR for acceptance as the designated
floodway. No development activity shall take place until formal acceptance is received from
FEMA and IDNR-OWR.
(6) Density Calculations. The floodplain areas may be utilized in calculating the floor area or lot size
density for an entire tract of land (hereinafter referred to as "density transfer") in accordance with
the following conditions and restrictions except that no structures shall be permitted thereon:
a. Density transfers shall not be permitted for tracts of land less than five (5) acres in size;
provided that owners of two (2) or more tracts of contiguous land may agree to have
such tracts considered as a single unit in order to qualify for density transfers hereunder.
b. A plat of survey shall be submitted with each application for density transfer, together
with a certification by a registered professional engineer in the State of Illinois,
certifying as to that portion of floodplain which covers the subject tract or tracts of land.
Precise location of the floodplain shall be shown on a topographic map at a contour
interval of not greater than two (2) feet.
c. The maximum allowable density which may be transferred shall be computed in
accordance with the following table:
Percentage of
Total Tract
In Floodplain
Portion of Tract in
Floodplain Which May Be Used
In Calculating Density for
the Entire Tract
Less than 25%
100%
25% to 50%
75%
50% to 75%
50%
75% or More
25%
d. Other Restrictions. The Mayor and Village Council of the Village of Palatine may
prescribe such other reasonable limitations, conditions and restrictions upon transfer of
density in each case as are in the interest of preserving the public safety, health, comfort
and welfare.
(e) Regulations of the Areas Less than One (1) Foot above the Base Flood Elevation.
(1) Conditions of Use. Because certain meteorological events can produce flood elevations
greater than the established base flood elevation or conditions may occur downstream that
create higher flood elevations all lands adjacent to the floodplain and less than one (1) foot
above the level of the base flood elevation, are subject to the regulations of Section 6.08 (d),
unless said lands are filled and elevation thereof raised to an elevation of one (1) foot or
more above the base flood elevation.
(2) Construction Within Adjacent Areas. In the event said lands are filled and elevation thereof
raised to an elevation of one (1) foot or more above the base flood elevation, or shall be not
less than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, no building or structure shall be
constructed or moved within said area unless all of the following conditions are met:
a. The proposed site of the building or structure shall be filled so that the elevation of
the lowest ground elevation measured at a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet
from the foundation of the building or structure is at least one (1) foot above the
base flood elevation.
b. Any structures built on fill placed in areas one(1) foot or less above the base flood
elevation shall meet the requirements of Federal Insurance Administration
Technical Bulletin 10-01 and shall be certified as meeting such requirements by a
qualified design professional.
c. Compensatory storage is not required for fill placed above the base flood elevation.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-5 2
d. All construction shall be in accordance with the Code of Ordinances of the Village
of Palatine.
(f) Regulations of Isolated Depressional Areas. Isolated depressional areas are areas inundated by the
base floods which are not regulatory floodplain. All new structures and improvements on a parcel
containing an isolated depressional area shall require an administrative special use and must comply with
the following:
(1) The lowest opening for all new structures and substantial improvements shall be at or above
the flood protection elevation.
(2) A development plan prepared by an Engineer shall be submitted which details
improvements necessary to drain the depressional area into an established sewer or channel
with sufficient downstream capacity to carry the 100 year flow. No compensatory storage is
required.
(3) The overland flow route must be shown on the plat and easements sufficient to carry the 100
year flow must be provided.
(g) Seeding and Stabilization Plan;
For all activities located in the floodplain, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by
the applicant.
(h) Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Measures;
For all activities in the floodplain in which there is the potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil
erosion and sedimentation control measure meeting the criteria of Section 6.09, Appendix B of
the Palatine Code of Ordinance shall be implemented.
(i) Variations of Floodplain Regulations.
No variances shall be granted to any development located in a regulatory floodway. However,
when a development proposal is located outside of a regulatory floodway, and whenever the
standards of this section place undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant
may apply to the Floodplain Administrator for a variance. The Floodplain Administrator shall
advise the Mayor and Village Council of the Village of Palatine of any such variations.
(1) No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
a. The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
b. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted;
c. The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
d. There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, beneficial stream uses
and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation of a nuisance;
e. There will be no additional public expenses for flood protection, lost environmental
stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to
stream beds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public facilities;
f. The development will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in
flood heights or velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the
natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or change or impair
existing water quality or aquatic habitat.
g. The activity is not in a regulatory floodway;
h. The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a general problem,
and
i. The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the area
involved including existing stream uses.
(2) The Floodplain Administrator shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the
requirements of this Section that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
a. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for
$100 of insurance coverage;
b. Increase the risks to life and property; and
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-5 3
c. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that he will
acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and liability.
(3) Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site or historic building as
defined as “Historic Structure” in this section may be granted using criteria more permissive than
the requirements of Sections 6.08 (f)a and b, subject to the conditions that;
a. The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure; and
b. The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being removed as a certified
historic structure.
(j) Disclaimer of Liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this Section is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of
study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This Section does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the SFHA, will be free from
flooding or damage. This Section does not create liability on the part of the Village or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this Section or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder.
(k) Penalty
Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance resolution shall be
deemed to be a violation of this Section. Upon due investigation, the Floodplain Administrator may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this Section exist. The Floodplain
Administrator shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
(1) If such owner fails after ten (10) days notice to correct the violation:
a. The Village may make application to the Circuit Court for an injunction requiring
conformance with this Section or make such other order as the Court deems necessary to
secure compliance with this Section.
b. Any person who violates this Section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than one-thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
c. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
d. The Village may record a notice of violation on the title to the property.
(2) The Floodplain Administrator shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a
willful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause coverage by a Standard
Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
(3) The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of the
subject development. The stop-work order shall be in written, clearly posted on the subject
property, shall indicated the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary,
to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order constitutes
a suspension of the permit.
(4) No development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held
by the Administrative Hearing Officer. Notification and procedures for the hearing shall be
in conformance with Chapter 2 Article XXX (Administrative Hearing Division) of the
Palatine Code of Ordinances.
(5) Nothing herein shall prevent the Village from taking such other lawful action to prevent or
remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons
responsible.
(l) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. Where this section and other ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-5 4
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. The section
intended to repeal the original ordinance or resolution which was adopted to meet the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the Village passed in
order to establish initial eligibility for the program.
(m) Separability
The provisions and sections of this section shall be deemed separable and the invalidity of any portion
of this section shall not affect the validity of the remainder.
(n) Procedure.
(1) Permits and appeals. The procedure for issuance of building permits, special use permits, and
appeals shall be those provided for in Article XIV of the zoning ordinance. Before an application
for any permit may be approved under this Section 6.08, the applicant must file with the
Floodplain Administrator copies of all permits, duly issued, which are required by federal and
state agencies to construct the proposed project in the floodplain."
(2) Professional Engineer Review. If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain on
which a detailed study has not been conducted which drains more than one square mile, then the
permit shall be reviewed by a Registered Professional Engineer under the employ or contract of
the Village of Palatine to ensure that the development meets the requirements of section 6.08. In
the case of an appropriate use, the Professional Engineer shall state in writing that the
development meets the requirement of section 6.08.
(3) The Floodplain Administrator shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all
other local, state and federal permits, approvals or permit not required letters that may be
required for this type of activity. No permits shall be issued unless all required local, state and
federal permits or waivers have been obtained. (Ord.No. 0-83-96, 5-29-96, §9)
(Editor's Note: Ordinance 0-83-96 replaces portions of Sec. 6.08 previously amended by Ordinances 0-2-
94 and 0-83-95.)
6.08.1 Wetlands and Riparian Environment Protection Regulations.
Any development or redevelopment within, adjacent to or will impact a Wetland or a Riparian
Environment shall meet the requirements of Sections 6.03 through 6.08 of the Cook County Watershed
Management Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
6.09. Erosion and sedimentation control.
(a) Any development or redevelopment requiring a watershed management permit as specified in
Section 201 of the Cook County Watershed Management Ordinance shall comply with the
requirements of Article 4 of the Cook County Watershed Management Ordinance. (Ord. No. 0-
134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
6.10. Resubdivision of land and upgrading of existing improvements.
(a) Resubdivision. In case of resubdivision or areas to be resubdivided where any of such
improvements are already installed which meet the requirements of this appendix, no further provisions to
duplicate such installation shall be required; provided, however, that where such installations have
become worn or broken, defective or do not meet village standards, the subdivider shall be required to
repair and correct such defects or deficiencies.
(b) Upgrading existing improvements.
(1) If property for which an application to subdivide has been presented abuts on or contains an
existing public street which has width of pavement less than required by this appendix, the
subdivider shall be required to dedicate additional land sufficient and to provide additional
pavement to bring roadway widths up to the minimum standards of this appendix before the
approval of the property for subdivision or resubdivision.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-5 5
(2) The village engineer shall determine that proper adjustment is made where the widenings merge
with the existing narrow pavement at the boundary of the property and to require that the lanes
are painted to designate driving and parking lanes.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-5 6
ARTICLE VII. PROTECTION OF EXISTING TREES
7.01. Procedure for the protection of existing trees.
(a) Protection of existing trees. When determining the location of improvements within a development
and the location of structures on lots, the developer shall make every reasonable effort to save healthy
trees having a diameter of four (4) inches or greater (measured at twelve (12) inches above ground level).
(b) Preliminary plat procedure. As part of the preliminary plat procedure, the developer shall submit a
plat certifying the location, size and species of all healthy trees having a diameter of four (4) inches or
greater (measured at twelve (12) inches above the ground level) for areas within twenty-five (25) feet of
any proposed improvement. For remaining areas covered by the preliminary plat, only the general
locations of the trees is required.
(1) The developer shall indicate on such plat which trees are proposed to be saved in accordance
with this section 7.01.
(2) The trees to be saved in accordance with this section 7.01 shall be agreed upon as part of the
preliminary plat of approval.
(c) Final plat procedure. As part of the final plat procedure contained herein, the developer shall
submit:
(1) A proposed grading plan for the site indicating the location, size and species of the trees to be
saved in accordance with the preliminary plat approval.
(2) A plan establishing the methods to be used for preserving the trees that are to be saved. Such plan
shall include the following provisions:
a. All grading and construction equipment shall be forbidden from encroaching within the
tree's drip line.
b. Crushed limestone or other materials detrimental to the tree shall not be dumped within the
tree's drip lines or at any higher location where drainage toward the tree could affect the
health of the tree.
c. Installation of tree protection fencing shall be based on the following formula:
i. For less than twelve inches (12”) diameter, fencing shall be installed at the dripline of
the tree to be preserved.
ii. For trees greater than twelve inches (12”) diameter, fencing shall be installed at one
foot (1’) diameter distance from the tree trunk in every direction for every one inch
(1”) of DBH of the tree to be preserved.
iii. Location of the fencing shall be shown around each tree proposed to be preserved on
the tree preservation plan (0-154-01 §1, 11-12-01)
d. The developer's proposed methodology for saving existing trees in accordance with
preliminary plat approval shall be reviewed by the administrator. If, in the reasonable
opinion of the administrator, the developer has not taken the necessary precaution in
preserving such existing trees, no building permit will be issued until such time as the
developer satisfactorily amends the plans for the preservation of such existing trees.
(d) Destroyed or razed trees. In the event that a tree designated on the approved plan for saving
should be damaged, destroyed or razed by the developer during the construction process, the developer
shall replace such tree with a tree of a species approved by the village and having a diameter not less than
the tree so destroyed or razed (no one replacement tree shall exceed six inches (6”) in diameter measured
at twelve inches (12”) above the ground, however several smaller diameter trees having a combined
iameter equal to the tree damaged, razed or destroyed shall be planted for trees larger than six inches (6”)
in the approximate location of the tree so damaged, destroyed or razed. In addition to planting the
required replacement trees, the developer shall pay an amount equal to $100 per one inch (1”) in diameter
measured twelve inches (12”) above the ground for each tree so damaged, destroyed or razed. The
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-5 7
developer shall post an improvement security in accordance with section 9.02 of this appendix to
guarantee the planting of the replacement trees. Such guarantee shall be held one year after planting to
guarantee the tree is in a healthy acceptable condition. (0-154-01 §2, 11-12-01)
(e) Statement of intent. The developer of residential subdivisions of three (3) lots or less shall not be
required to submit a plat certifying the location, size and species of all healthy trees having a diameter of
four (4) inches or greater measured twelve (12) inches above grade level but shall instead submit a
statement of intent regarding the removal and or preservation of all existing healthy trees on the property.
(Ord. No. O-159-91, § 1, 11-11-91)
ARTICLE VIII. REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
8.01. General requirements.
(a) [Standards.] The owner or subdivider shall install storm and sanitary sewers, water supply system,
street grading and pavement, sidewalk, pedestrian ways, public utilities and street lighting in accordance
with applicable ordinances of the village and with the 1964 Report and Master Plan for Sanitary Sewer
Extensions, the 1964 Report and Master Plan for Storm Drainage, and the 1975 and 1981 Report and
Master Plan for Water Supply and Distribution.
(b) Soils investigations and physical tests.
(1) If the proposed subdivision contains questionable soil, and in the opinion of the village engineer,
soil investigators borings or other soil tests are necessary to determine the nature and extent of
such questionable material, the subdivider, builder or land developer shall retain the services of a
competent testing laboratory to perform the needed investigations. Such testing laboratory shall
be subject to the approval of the village.
(2) Copies of the completed reports compiled by the testing laboratory shall be filed with the village
engineer.
(c) Supervision. The design engineer engaged by the subdivider, builder or land developer shall be
represented by his agent at the site of construction at all times when construction or required land
improvements is in progress; failure to comply with this requirement shall constitute grounds for
immediate stoppage of said construction by the administrator.
(d) Inspection.
(1) All required improvements, public and private, shall be inspected by the village engineer during
the course of construction and at completion for compliance with this appendix and the approved
plans and specifications.
(2) Builders and developers are required to notify the department of engineering a minimum of fortyeight
(48) hours prior to beginning any underground or surface improvements (sewer, water,
paving, including parking lots, etc.) to arrange for the appropriate inspections.
8.02. Public utilities.
(a) Location. All public utility lines for telephone, electric service and cable TV shall be placed in
easements and entirely underground in all new subdivisions. (Ord. No. 0-38-94 4/11/94)
(1) Where telephone and electric service and cable TV lines are placed underground entirely
throughout a subdivided area, said conduits or cable shall be placed within easements or
dedicated public ways in a manner which will not conflict with other underground services.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-5 8
(2) All above ground public utility appurtenances shall be located in public utility easements in rear
or interior side yards.
(3) All gas mains shall be placed within street right-of-ways or within easements.
(b) Notification. Underground work, either the installation of or the repair of existing sewer and water
systems cannot commence until the appropriate public utilities are staked and the village engineer has
been notified to arrange for inspections.
(c) Conveyance of improvements. Title to all public improvements required in this Article VIII shall,
at the time same are accepted by the president and board of trustees, be conveyed and transferred to the
Village of Palatine by sufficient documents of transfer. (Ord.No.0-5-97, §3, 1-13-97)
8.03. Street pavement standards.
(a) General.
(1) All street pavements within the village shall be constructed in accordance with:
a. Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, State of Illinois, Department of
Transportation, Current Edition.
b. Manual for structural Design of Portland Cement, concrete Pavement, Illinois Department of
Transportation, Current Edition.
c. Manual of Instructions for the Structural Design of bituminous pavement on projects
involving MFT and FAUS Funds, Illinois Department of Transportation, Current Edition.
(2) Design requirements for the pavement will be related to the classification of the street based on
the zoning classification of the area adjacent to the subject street and/or the street classification as
set forth in the street classification map. The classification of new streets as well as variations to
street classifications shown on Table 1 for a given street, must be submitted to the village
engineer for his review prior to submittal of the preliminary plat to the plan commission.
(3) At the request of the village engineer, a copy of all design assumptions and computations on
which the proposed design is based shall be submitted.
(4) The Pavement Design and Right-of-Way Chart (Table 1) is intended to show minimum right-ofway
widths, and the minimum design standards for a particular street classification. If, in the
opinion of the village engineer, traffic use or geometric considerations for a road or part of a road
warrants a greater right-of-way width, a wider pavement width and/or a greater structural number
than listed on the chart may be required.
(5) The village engineer shall submit his written reasons to the plan commission prior to the approval
of the preliminary plat. Variations to the requirements of Table I shall be considered only as a
variation.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-5 9
TABLE 1
Pavement Design and Right-of-Way Width Chart
Street
Classification
Minimum Rightof-
way width
(feet)
Width face of curb
to face of curb
Minimum
Crown
(inches)
Minimum
Structural
Number
Arterial or primary
100
48 ft. or 2--24 ft.
w/median strip
7 4.50
4.0 4.0
Collector or Secondary
70
36 ft.
6
3.5
Minor residential
1. Cul-de-sac*
60
27 ft.
5
3.0
2. Dedicated (other than
#1 above)
60
27 ft.
5
3.0
3. Private (PUD)
--
27 ft.
5
3.0
Minor industrial
70
36 ft.
6
4.0
Minor business
70
36 ft.
6
3.5
Marginal access streets
50
24 ft.
5
3.0
Frontage road (dedicated)
50
24 ft.
5
3.0
NOTE:*The pavement diameter (back-to-back) of circular ended cul-de-sac shall be a minimum of
ninety (90) feet.
(6) Private streets in planned developments shall, at a minimum, meet the minimum requirement for
street width and structural number for minor residential streets, shall have curb and gutter on both
sides of the street, and shall have a minimum centerline radius of curvature of one hundred fifty
(150) feet.
(b) Pavement design.
(1) All pavement shall be designed in accordance with the previously referenced standards and
manuals.
a. The design thickness shall be dependent on the soil support value and the projected traffic
factor, however, in no case shall structural numbers be less than those shown in Table 1.
b. Actual or projected traffic counts along with sufficient soil boring data will be required for
the structural design.
(2) Subgrade. All subgrade material shall have a minimum Illinois bearing ratio (IBR) of three (3.0).
a. Subgrade material having an IBR less than three (3.0) shall be removed and replaced with a
suitable fill material, or the pavement must be designed to compensate for soil conditions.
b. The soil support IBR values selected for use by the designer shall represent a minimum
value for the soil to be used.
c. The results of all IBR tests are to be submitted to the village engineer review.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-6 0
(c) Flexible pavements. The design of all flexible pavement shall be based on the minimum structural
design number for the type of street in question.
(1) A minimum of two and one-half (2 1/2) inches of compacted asphalt is required on all pavements
with a structural number of 3.00--3.99. This surface shall consist of one inch Class I surface
course and one and one-half (1 1/2) inch Class I binder course.
(2) Pavements with a structural number of 4.00--4.99 will require three (3) inches of asphalt. This
surface shall consist of one inch Class I surface course and two (2) inches of Class I binder
course.
(3) The final surface course is to be applied when all other improvements, public and private, have
been completed in their entirety and prior to start of the twelve-month maintenance period.
a. Prior to laying of the surface course any defects or damage to the curb and gutter or
pavement base must be corrected to the satisfaction of the village engineer.
b. The streets shall then be thoroughly cleaned and a bituminous tack coat shall be applied at a
rate of 0.05 to 0.10 gallons/sq. yard to assure uniform and complete adherence of the surface
course.
(4) To facilitate plowing of snow during the winter months, all manholes, valve vaults, catchbasins,
inlets, etc., located within the pavement area are to be ramped with compacted temporary asphalt
patch material for the period between the time the road is opened for general traffic and the time
the final surface course is applied. This ramp is to be maintained for the duration of the above
specified period.
(d) Rigid pavements. The design of all rigid pavement shall be based on the minimum structural
design number for the type of street in question.
(1) Concrete pavement shall be reinforced with rigid wire mesh (six (6) inch by six (6) inch #6 rigid
fabric).
(2) Portland cement concrete shall be proportional according to the applicable sections of the state
specifications and shall be designed for a minimum twenty-eight (28) day compressive strength
of thirty-five hundred (3,500) psi.
(3) Air entrainment shall be four (4) through seven (7) percent and slump between two (2) and four
(4) inches.
(4) Concrete pavement shall be constructed on a minimum four (4) inch crushed aggregate subbase
having a gradation of CA-06.
(e) Sight distances. The design engineer shall show at the points of intersection of proposed roads
with existing roads that the minimum stopping sight distance indicated below for the legal speed limits as
provided on existing roads.
Legal Speed Limit
Minimum Stopping Distance
25—30 mph
200 ft.
31—40 mph
275 ft.
41—50
350 ft.
51—55
475 ft.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-6 1
(f) Sub grade preparation.
(1) The subgrade of all roads shall be graded and rolled in accordance with Section 212 of the
"Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", State of Illinois Department of
Transportation.
a. Particular attention is directed to the requirements for the replacement of soft and unstable
material as contained in Article 202.03.
b. Embankment shall be placed and compacted in accordance with Section 207 of said
specifications.
(2) Compaction tests, (performed by the sand cone method ASSHTO T-191 or with an approved
nuclear density-moisture meter) shall be taken in each fill section, with the maximum distance
between tests of three hundred (300) feet. Density shall be ninety-five (95) percent of the
maximum density.
(3) Proctor tests performed in accordance with ASSHTO T-99 shall be taken on each different type
of borrow material.
(4) The proctor and density tests must be submitted for review and approval by the village engineer.
(5) Upon approval of these tests, an inspection of the subgrade will be made by the Village Engineer,
and the subgrade must be approved prior to placing any curb and gutter or base material.
(g) Allowable pavement construction material. Table 2 indicates the approved materials which can be
used for roadway construction within the Village of Palatine listed with these materials are the coefficients
to be used for approved pavement structural number. The coefficients, when multiplied by the thickness
of the materials, will yield the structural number. In no case shall pozzolanic base course material be used.
Porous pavement shall not be used for any dedicated public street. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
TABLE 2
Allowable Pavement Construction Materials
Strength Requirements
Structural
Materials
M.S.* I.B.R. P.S.I. Coefficient
Bituminous
surface
Class I 1700 0.40
Base course:
Aggregate. Type B
Crushed (100%) 80 0.13
Aggregate, Type A 80 0.13
Waterbound
Macadam 110 0.14
Bituminous
aggregate, mixture
900--1700 0.24--0.33
Bituminous
mixture, Class I
1700
0.40
Portland cement
concrete (new)
3500** 0.50
*Marshall stability.
**Twenty-eight-day design compressive strength.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-6 2
(h) Curb and gutter.
(1) Curb and gutter shall be provided on all streets and shall be portland cement concrete not less
than overall width and having a thickness at the gutterflag of not less than eleven (11) inches.
Barrier curbs shall be used on all arterial, collector, industrial, and commercial streets and Type
A curb on all residential streets unless otherwise specified by the village engineer. Concrete shall
have a minimum twenty-eight (28) day compressive strength of three thousand five hundred
(3,500) pounds, shall contain not less than six (6) bags of cement per cubic yard of concrete and
shall contain not less than three (3) percent nor more than six (6) percent entrained air. Slump
shall not be less than two (2) inches, nor more than four (4) inches.
(i) Subsurface pavement drains.
(1) Subsurface pavement drains may be required at any location where water may collect in the
structural elements of the pavement and other engineering solutions may not adequately remove
or prevent the entrance of water. Subdrains may be required because of:
a. A high water table;
b. Active springs or seeps beneath the pavement; or
c. Excessive amount of surface water entering or collecting in the structural section.
(2) The location of these areas requiring subdrains may be determined prior to the preparation of the
engineering plans. However, the final determination shall be made during the construction phase.
(3) Subdrains shall meet the following requirements:
a. It shall have adequate capacity to quickly carry away any water that enters the pavement
structural section.
b. It must maintain this capacity through the life of the pavement.
(4) The subdrain shall be of the two (2) layer system unless it can be shown to the satisfaction of the
village engineer that another design can satisfy requirements in (4)(a)1 above.
(5) Collector pipes shall be minimum six (6) inches in diameter and shall be of the following
materials:
a. Perforated concrete pipe confirming to A.S.T.M. C-444.
b. Extra quality concrete drain tile conforming to A.S.T.M. C-412.
c. Extra strength perforated clay pipe conforming to A.S.T.M. C-444.
d. Heavy duty drain tile conforming to AAHSTO M-179.
(6) Subdrains are to discharge into the storm sewer system.
(7) An option to use of subsurface pavement drains and subject to the approval by the village
engineer, non-woven fabric material suitable for this type of application may be used.
8.04. Sidewalks and pedestrian ways.
(a) No sidewalk or pedestrian way within the village shall be constructed on soil which is unstable, or
which in the opinion of the village engineer is unsuitable for sidewalk construction. Wherever unstable
ground is encountered either before the preparation of detailed plans or during the construction phase of
the proposed improvements, said unstable materials shall be removed in their entirety and shall be
replaced with satisfactory material which shall be adequately compacted to the satisfaction of the
engineer.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-6 3
(b) Sidewalks and pedestrianways shall be constructed of portland cement concrete to a width of not
less than four and one-half (4 1/2) feet and a thickness of five (5) inches. Sidewalks shall be offset one
foot from the abutting lot line and shall be constructed on both sides of the street. Concrete shall have a
minimum twenty-eight (28) day compressive strength of three thousand five hundred (3,500) pounds,
shall contain not less than six (6) bags of cement per cubic yard of concrete and shall contain not less than
three (3) percent nor more than six (6) percent entrained air. Slump shall not be less than two (2) inches
nor more than four (4) inches.
8.05. Trench construction for utilities.
Trench construction for the installation of utilities in new subdivisions, planned developments, and the
replacement of existing utilities is specified in the Supplement to these subdivision regulations. These
regulations shall also apply to public utility companies, in regard to the installation, replacement or repair
of their facilities.
8.06. Water distribution system.
(a) General.
(1) No residential, commercial or industrial subdivision shall be approved unless it is served by the
village's water supply system.
(2) In the case of any buildings, be they residential, commercial or industrial, constructed prior to the
adoption of this ordinance and served by a private well system, the following shall apply:
a. As soon as a village water main is contiguous to and available to serve a building or an area
on a private well system, the owner must properly abandon the private well system and
connect to the village's public water supply system within one year of the availability of the
public water supply system.
b. All water supply systems which are installed in the public ways or easements serving a
central system shall be deemed to be dedicated to the Village of Palatine upon acceptance of
the subdivision.
c. In all cases where a central water supply system is installed pursuant to the provisions of this
section 8.05, said water supply system shall be deemed dedicated to the Village of Palatine
upon acceptance of the subdivision.
(b) Design. Water distribution mains shall be of adequate size and shall serve the entire development.
(1) Design. Water mains shall be designed according to the "Standard Specifications for Water and
Sewer Main Construction in Illinois" or according to the "Recommended Standards for Water
Works". The more stringent requirements of either shall apply.
(2) Installation.
a. Said mains shall, in general, be installed in the street right-of-way, but in no case shall mains
be installed within fifteen (15) feet of a building.
b. All water mains shall be installed with a minimum depth of cover of five and one-half (5
1/2) feet, measured from final grade to the top of the pipe.
c. Mains shall be extended to the property line of the development along public rights-of-way
and at any other location indicated by the village engineer.
d. All excavation, backfilling, restoration of surfaces and all related work shall be completed in
accordance with the supplement to these subdivision regulations.
(3) Size. The minimum size shall be six (6) inches, internal diameter, in residential areas and eight
(8) inches, internal diameter in all other areas.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-6 4
(4) Gridiron or looping of mains.
a. Each six (6) inch water main shall be looped (except culs-de-sac or stubbed streets unless
deemed necessary by the village engineer) so that runs between connections to six (6) inch
or larger size mains shall not be greater than one block, not to exceed eighteen hundred
(1,800) feet.
b. Each eight (8) inch water main shall be looped so that runs between connections to mains
eight (8) inches or larger shall not be greater than fourteen hundred (1,400) feet in a
commercial area or eighteen hundred (1,800) feet in residential areas.
c. Each ten (10) inch water main shall be looped so that runs between connections to mains ten
(10) inches or larger shall not be greater than twenty-two hundred (2,200) feet.
d. Each twelve (12) inch and larger water main shall be looped so that runs between
connection to mains twelve (12) inches or larger shall not be greater than three thousand
(3,000) feet.
e. If the design engineer's report shows spacing greater than the above for the required residual
pressure, that spacing shall supersede the above requirements.
(c) Allowable materials. Allowable materials shall be those specified in the supplement to these
subdivision regulations.
(1) Valves. Valves shall be located on water mains so as to effectively isolate the sections from the
system with minimum disruption.
a. Valves shall be installed so that not over nine hundred (900) feet of main will be shut off at
any given time.
b. If a tee is installed, two (2) valves may be used.
c. The design engineer shall, by diagrams and/or written reports, set forth his/her basis for
location of water main valves.
d. No more than thirty (30) single family dwelling units shall be without water with the
shutting off of any three (3) valve locations.
(2) Gate valves. Resilient seat gate valves are to be used on mains up to and including twelve (12)
inches. Butterfly valves. Butterfly valves may be used on mains larger than twelve (12) inches.
(3) Valves shall meet the requirements as specified in the supplement to these subdivision
regulations.
(4) Valve vaults. Valve vaults are required on all valves.
(5) Valve boxes. Valve boxes shall be used on hydrant auxiliary valves only.
a. Valve boxes shall have a base compatible with the size and type of valve to be operated and
shall extend to finished grade ground level.
b. Valve box covers shall be marked "water".
(6) Thrust blocks. Thrust blocks are required at all valves, hydrants, tees and bends.
a. Engineering drawings shall indicate the location of each concrete thrust block to be
installed.
b. Where undisturbed earth is not available or not likely to be available to back up pressure
type concrete thrust blocks, the village engineer shall specify tie rods with or without anchor
type concrete thrust blocks and submit design data for such specifications.
(7) Air release valves. Air release valves shall be placed on the water main at high point as deemed
necessary by the village engineer to serve as air vents preventing air locking of the water main.
Air relief valves shall meet the requirements specified in the supplement to these subdivision
regulations.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-6 5
(d) Fire hydrants. Whenever a water main is to be installed, the village fire prevention bureau must
approve the hydrant spacing plan prior to commencement of work.
(1) Design.
a. Fire hydrants shall match the hydrants generally installed in the village's water system, and
shall be furnished by a manufacturer considered standard by the village, and specified in the
supplement to these subdivision regulations.
b. Only breakaway hydrants shall be used.
c. Each fire hydrant shall be the compression type with a five and one-fourth (5 1/4) inch
minimum size main valve assembly, O-ring seals, two (2) two and one-half (2 1/2) inch hose
nozzles and a four and one-half (4 1/2) inch pumper nozzle with National Standard threads,
a National Standard operation nut, and a breakaway ground level flange, and conforming to
the latest revised requirements of AWWA Specification C 502.
d. Each hydrant shall be provided with a six (6) inch auxiliary gate valve and a two (2) foot
length of six (6) inch pipe between the hydrant and valve.
i. Two (2) three-fourth (3/4) inch threaded steel rods with hex nuts shall be installed to tie
the auxiliary gate valve to the water main and connecting tee.
ii. Auxiliary valves shall be provided with valve boxes with covers marked "water".
(2) Location.
a. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than three hundred (300) feet from any point on the
exterior of a building.
b. If the location or configuration of the building requires it, then private fire hydrants shall be
installed.
c. The fire hydrant servicing a fire department connection (standpipe or sprinkler) shall be no
more than one hundred and fifty (150) feet from that connection.
d. Dead-end six (6) inch main extension serving hydrants in cul-de-sacs shall not be more than
five hundred (500) feet long, except that six (6) inch extensions in commercial and industrial
areas shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet.
e. Where water transmission lines or off-site water lines are installed in existing rights-of-way
(or in easements to existing rights-of-way), hydrants must be installed in at three hundred
foot intervals.
f. In other locations, six hundred (600) foot intervals are required with tees for future hydrants
being provided within three hundred (300) feet of fire hydrants.
(e) Fire protection system.
(1) Fire flows. The design engineer shall show in a separate report that at several locations and at any
other location that may be selected by the proposed water main system, together with that
proposed in the master plan for the village, will supply the fire flows required below in excess of
domestic consumption demands, using a "C" factor of one hundred (100) for cast iron or ductile
iron, ignoring fittings, and with a minimum residual pressure of twenty (20) psi.
a. Residence;
i. Dwellings, detached and semi-detached--one thousand to one thousand five hundred
(1,000--1,500) GPM.
ii. Dwellings, attached (townhouses); each unit separated by an approved firewall--three
thousand to four thousand (3,000--4,000) GPM.
b. Business:
i. Business and office uses--two thousand five hundred to three thousand (2,500--3,000)
GPM.
ii. Commercial and mercantile buildings, including warehouses--three thousand to six
thousand (3,000--6,000) GPM.
c. Manufacturing: Three thousand to six thousand (3,000--6,000) GPM.
d. Institutional: Three thousand (3,000) GPM.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-6 6
(2) Private booster pumps for fire protection.
a. No pump shall be installed without specific approval of the village fire prevention bureau.
b. Pumps shall be designed in conjunction with an inside standpipe system as to not require an
excessive amount of water to be drawn from the village water supply.
c. If calculations show that the resulting residual pressure in the public water main at the point
of connection to the private system is less than twenty-five (25) psi., then pressure tanks or
gravity tanks must be provided with the capacity to supply not less than two hundred and
fifty (250) gallons per minute in buildings for one standpipe and not less than five hundred
(500) gallons per minute in buildings where two (2) or more standpipes are required, for a
period of at least thirty (30) minutes.
d. The pressure at the base outlet shall not be less than fifty (50) pounds per square inch.
(f) Water services.
(1) The plans, except for residential developments with individual services for each unit, shall show
the calculated static water pressure at the lowest and highest ground elevations on the site.
Calculations shall be presented showing that the proposed water service are of a large enough
size to supply an adequate flow of water at the outlet of the meter, assuming the service is "fairly
rough pipe", as specified in the "Illinois State Plumbing Codes", current edition.
(2) The developer shall provide and have installed service saddles, corporation stops, curb stops,
service boxes and water service tubing as required in section 19.20 of the municipal code.
(3) Water service lines shall be laid at a minimum depth of five (5) feet below the finished grade
ground level.
(4) All service line shutoffs shall be located in parkways, or in appropriate easement areas.
(5) A "W" shall be marked in the curbing when poured opposite to the water service as a permanent
record of location.
8.07. Sanitary sewer system.
(a) General.
(1) Except as otherwise provided herein, no residential, commercial or industrial subdivision or
development shall be approved unless it is served by sanitary sewers connected to the village's
sewer system.
(2) In the case of any existing buildings, be they residential, commercial or industrial, constructed
prior to the adoption of this appendix and served by a septic system, the building can remain on
the septic system so long as it is operating properly. If the system fails or requires repairs,
renovations or maintenance beyond normal pumping of the tank, and a public sanitary sewer
main is available to the property on which the building is located, in accordance with Section
905.20 (e) of the Private Sewage Disposal Code of the State of Illinois then said owner or owners
must properly abandon the septic system and connect to the village's public sanitary sewer
system. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
(3) All sanitary sewer mains which are installed in the public ways or in easements serving a central
system shall be deemed to be dedicated to the village upon the acceptance of the public
improvements within the subdivision by the village. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-6 7
(b) Design. Sewer mains shall be of adequate size and shall serve the entire development.
(1) General requirements.
a. Sewer mains shall be designed according to the latest edition of the "Standard Specifications
for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois" or according to "Recommended
Standards for Sewage Works". The more stringent requirements of either shall apply.
b. Before commencing the sewer layout, the developer shall confer with the village to
determine the required size and grades for any trunk sewers traversing and subdivision to fit
the village's available capacities of off-site downstream existing facilities to the Metropolitan
Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago interceptor together with the estimated
increment of flow caused by the subdivision or development on such facilities. Construction
required to accommodate said increment shall be submitted as part of engineering plans.
(Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
c. All sanitary sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of Division II and
Division III of the latest edition of the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois and Article 7 of the Cook County Watershed Management
Ordinance, as modified and/or more specifically defined in these paragraphs and sections. In
case of conflict, the provisions of the following paragraphs shall apply. (Ord. No. 0-134-14,
§1, 10/20/14)
(2) Installation.
a. Said mains shall, in general, be installed in the street right-of-way or in an easement adjacent
thereto. In no case shall mains be installed within ten (10) feet of a building.
b. Sanitary sewers shall be extended to the edge of the development along public rights-of-way
and at other points indicated by the village engineer.
(3) Size. The minimum size of mains shall be eight (8) inch internal diameter.
(4) Sewer services. Sanitary sewer service laterals of a minimum of six (6) inch internal diameter
shall be provided for each lot, parcel or tract prior to the construction of street pavements.
Services shall extend to the property line.
a. Service connection shall consist of a one-eighth (1/8) sewer pipe bend set in the bell of the
wye or tee and the necessary lengths of the pipe.
b. Service sewers shall have a minimum cover of thirty (30) inches on private property, and
forty-eight (48) inches in public rights-of-way.
c. Two (2) or more structures are not permitted to use a joint building service sewer.
d. A minimum velocity of two and one-half (2.5) Ft/Sec. shall be maintained.
(5) Sewer alignment. Alignment shall follow the general layout of the street.
a. Curvilinear sewer alignment for sewers twenty-four (24) inches in diameter or less shall be
limited to curved street areas and only simple curves shall be used.
b. The minimum radius shall be no less than three hundred (300) feet provided that the
allowable deflection of the pipe joints is not exceeded.
c. A minimum velocity of two (2.00) ft/sec. shall be maintained in curvilinear sewers and the
hydraulics of the curvilinear alignment shall be taken into account and if necessary
minimum slopes indicated in section 8.07(8) may have to be increased. (Ord. No. 0-134-14,
§1, 10/20/14)
(6) Manholes. Manholes shall be installed not more than four hundred (400) feet apart for sewers
fifteen (15) inches in diameter or less, and five hundred (500) feet for sewers eighteen (18)
inches to thirty (30) inches in diameter.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-6 8
a. Manhole diameter. Manhole diameter shall be four (4) feet for sewer diameter twenty-four
(24) inches, and five (5) feet for sewer diameter twenty-seven (27) inches to forty-two (42)
inches, inclusive.
b. Inspection manholes. An inspection manhole having a minimum diameter of forty-eight (48)
inches is required for all commercial and industrial buildings.
i. The manhole shall be constructed on the building service sewer before it connects to the
sewer main, and preferably shall not be closer than five (5) feet to the building.
ii. There shall be no flow into the inspection except the flow from the building or
buildings for which the inspection manhole is intended.
c. Exterior drop pipes. An exterior drop pipe should be provided for a sewer entering a
manhole at an elevation of twenty-four (24) inches or more above the manhole invert.
i. The minimum diameter of the drop pipe shall be forty-eight (48) inches.
ii. The diameter of the drop pipe shall preferably be larger than, or the same diameter as,
the entering sewer and in no case shall be smaller than two (2) nominal diameters.
iii. For sewer mains thirty-six (36) inches or larger, the requirements for a drop pipe do not
apply if the spring line of the incoming pipe is at or below the spring line of the main
sewer.
(7) Lift stations. If a lift station is part of the engineering design, it shall be shown in the plan
elevation and the specifications for such lift station shall be submitted with engineering plans.
a. Lift stations shall be of the dry well or wet well type, and shall conform in all respects to the
standards established by the State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1,
10/20/14)
b. A separate source of power shall be furnished to each sewerage lift station. This shall be
from another electrical source or provided by a separately powered engine.
c. Engine, enclosure and mounting shall be subject to approval by the village engineer.
d. The lift station shall be connected to the village’s SCADA system and shall allow for remote
operation of the lift station from the village’s control room and shall provide alarms of
various system failures and relay such operational information as deemed necessary by the
village engineer. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
e. Lift stations and force mains are not desirable nor recommended and shall be resorted to
only after all engineering studies have been exhausted.
(8) Slopes. Minimum and maximum slopes are tabulated below. The slopes are those that produce
minimum and maximum velocities of two (2.0) ft/sec. and fifteen (15) ft/sec. based on Kutter's
formula with n=0.013 and the pipe flowing full, as provided in the rules and regulations of the
Illinois Sanitary Water Board.
Sewer Size
(inches)
Minimum Slope
Percent
Maximum Slope
Percent
6 0.63 33.0
8 0.40 22.0
10 0.28 15.0
12 0.22 11.0
14 0.17 9.0
15 0.15 8.3
16 0.14 7.8
18 0.12 6.5
21 0.10 5.1
24 0.08 4.2
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-6 9
(c) Allowable materials. Allowable materials shall be those specified in the supplement to these
subdivision regulations.
(d) Construction requirements. General requirements shall be those specified in the supplement to
these subdivision regulations.
(e) Wyes or tees. Wyes or tees for existing or future lateral connections shall be inserted in the sewer
at the appropriate location as required by the village engineer, and shall be constructed so as to be an
integral part of the main sewer pipe.
(f) Inspection and tests. Inspections and tests shall be those specified in the supplement to these
subdivision regulations.
8.08. Storm water drainage and management.
(a) All developments and redevelopments that meet the requirements for Site Stormwater
Management as defined in Table 2, Section 501 of the Cook County Watershed Management Ordinance
shall meet all requirements of Article 5 of the Cook County Watershed Management Ordinance. (Ord.
No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
(1) When the area of the development or redevelopment is less than the minimum required for
stormwater detention, the village engineer, at his/her option, may exempt the developer from the
foregoing live detention storage requirements when, in his/her opinion, immediate downstream
flooding conditions will not be aggravated. In such cases, however, the developer shall substitute
a cash payment according to the fee schedule supplement to the municipal code. (Ord. No. 0-
134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
(2) If it is not technically feasible and is documented as infeasible, to provide volume control storage
onsite, offsite volume control practices may be constructed provided;
a. it meets all the requirements of Section 503 of the Cook County Watershed
Management Ordinance, and;
b. it is approved by the Mayor and Village Council of the Village of Palatine.
(3) If it is not practical to provide a detention facility onsite, an offsite detention facility may be
constructed provided;
a. it meets all the requirements of Section 504 of the Cook County Watershed
Management Ordinance, and;
b. it is approved by the Mayor and Village Council of the Village of Palatine.
(Ord No. O-35-19, 04/08/19)
(b) Design. The following shall govern the design of any improvement with respect to the drainage
and detention of storm water runoff.
(1) Layout. Streets, blocks, depths of lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid
out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams, channels and detention basins,
including wherever possible the larger stream and floodplains within parks or other public
grounds.
(2) Backyard swales. Backyard swales are permitted in residential areas subject to the following
regulations:
a. No continuous swale shall have a length exceeding one hundred and 50 (150).
b. Minimum grade of the flowline shall be one percent.
c. No change in alignment of a backyard swale shall exceed forty-five (45) degrees.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-7 0
8.09. Street lighting.
(a) Installation. Street lighting shall be installed according to:
(1) The National Electric Code, village adopted edition; and
(2) The American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting, current edition.
(b) Street lighting system.
(1) The street lighting system consists of the poles, arms, luminaires, wire and other material and
work necessary to complete the street lighting installation.
(2) The street lighting system is to be constructed within the right-of-way or easements for public
improvements to be accepted by the village and in locations shown on the approved plan for planned
developments or other private developments.
(c) Street lighting spacing. Street lights are to be located at all intersections, as well as along street
blocks as indicated in Table 1.
(d) Location. Street lights shall be located on alternate sides of the street unless, in the judgement of
the village engineer, it is impractical to do so.
(1) All street light poles shall be set two (2) feet (three (3) feet, six (6) inches along state and county
highways) back from the curb line.
(2) At intersections with only one standard, the bracket, if applicable, shall be pointed toward the
center of the intersection.
(3) Where two (2) standards are located at an intersection, the bracket of each shall be perpendicular
to a street, as determined by the village engineer.
(e) Design requirements and approval. The complete lighting system shall be designed by a registered
engineer of the State of Illinois and shall be submitted to the village engineer for approval. In special
cases, the village engineer may designate higher poles, two (2) masted poles, festoon outlet boxes,
breakaway supports or vary the spacing as he/she deems necessary to meet special conditions. (Ord. No.
0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
TABLE 1
Street Lighting Requirements
Street
Type
Mounting
Ht.
Pole
Ht.
Bracket
Span
Foundation
Depth
Spacing
Along
Center Line
Luminaire
LED
lumens**
Primary
Or
Major
35'-0"
or
30'- 0"
32'-2"
or
28'-0"
15' truss
or
8' elip.
2' diameter by
6' deep
2' diameter by
5' deep
150'
''
8,000
horizontal
mounted.
''
Collector
Or
secondary
14'
or
30'-0"
14'
or
28'-0"
N/A
or
8' elip.
1.5' diameter
by 4'deep
2' diameter by
5' deep
100'
or
150
6,000 vertical
mounted or
8,000
horizontal
mounted.
Minor
residential
cul-de-sac*
14'
14'
N/A
1.5' diameter
by 4' deep
300'
5,000 vertical
mounted.
Private
PUD
14' 14' N/A 1.5' diameter
by 4' deep
300' 5,000 vertical
mounted.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-7 1
Minor
industrial
30'-0" 28'-0" 8' elip. 2' diameter by
5' deep
150' 8,000
horizontal
mounted.
Minor
business
14' 14' N/A 1.5' diameter
by 4' deep
100' 6,000 vertical
mounted.
Frontage
road
14' 14' N/A 1.5' diameter
by 4' deep
100' 6,000 vertical
mounted
Dedicated
(other than
above)
As determined by the village engineer.
*A street light shall be required at the turn-around of all cul-de-sacs.
**The luminaire size shall be 8,000 lumens at all intersections with state or county highways.
(Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
(f) Materials and workmanship. Materials and workmanship shall [be] in accordance with the
requirements specified in the supplement to these subdivision regulations.
8.10. Parkways.
(a) Grading of parkways. All parkways within a dedicated street shall be covered with a minimum of
four (4) inches of topsoil, fine graded and seeded or sodded to the satisfaction of the village
engineer.
(b) Planting of trees. Trees shall be planted along all streets unless suitable trees are in existence.
(1) Requirements for trees.
a. All new trees shall be balled and bagged and shall have a trunk diameter of not less than two
and one-half (2 1/2) inches (measured twelve (12) inches above grade.)
b. Requirements 8.10(b) and (c) will be satisfied if an equivalent number of trees of the same
size or larger are planted in a horticulturalistic manner in the front yards of adjacent lots.
(Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
c. Specified varieties shall be specimen type trees and shall be first class representatives of
their normal species and varieties.
(2) Allowable tree types. Allowable tree types are those that are specified in the supplement to these
subdivision regulations.
(3) Prohibited tree types. Chinese elms, box elder, willow, silver maple, poplar, ash and similar fast
growing brittle wood species which are usually subject to attack by insects and diseases are
prohibited. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
(4) Number of species per block. No fewer than four (4) species of approved trees shall be planted
with no more than twenty-five (25) percent of any one species allowed on any one block.
(c) Planting locations for trees. Trees shall be planted along all streets at a maximum interval of forty
(40) feet unless suitable trees are in existence.
(1) Lateral location of trees within parkways, medians and right-of-way areas.
a. The lateral location of trees being planted in parkways shall reflect the ultimate pavement
width of the roadway.
b. Where possible, trees planted in parkways shall be planted in the lateral center of the
parkway or as close to it as possible, unless specifically approved otherwise.
(d) Use of the parkway. Facilities used for the purpose of stormwater volume control, stormwater
storage or water quality control with the exception of pipe storage or manufactured structures
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-7 2
specifically designed to trap oil, sediment and other debris shall not be located within a public
parkway. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1, 10/20/14)
ARTICLE IX. IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES
9.01. Procedure for approval of improvements design.
(a) Approval of improvements design. Before submitting the final plat for approval and before
commencing work on the construction and installation of any improvements required by this appendix,
the developer or owner shall submit necessary documentation for the construction and installation of the
required improvements to the village engineer for review and approval.
(1) Necessary documents. The following documents are required at the time engineering plans are
submitted to the village engineer for review and approval:
a. Two (2) sets of engineering drawings.
b. Two (2) sets of specifications.
c. Two (2) copies of the plat of survey.
d. Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago watershed management permit
applications and E.P.A. sewer permit applications, where required. (Ord. No. 0-134-14, §1,
10/20/14)
e. E.P.A. water permit application.
f. Two (2) copies of the storm sewer calculations.
g. Two (2) copies of the storm drainage plan.
h. Two (2) copies of the retention facility calculations.
i. Two (2) copies of the hydraulic gradient profiles of the storm sewer design, if the design is
based on the hydraulic gradient.
j. Two (2) copies of the engineer's estimate of cost.
k. Two (2) copies of the water main calculations for consumption and fire flow demand when
the design is less than the minimum design required by this ordinance.
l. Two (2) copies of the pavement thickness design calculations.
m. One copy of county and state highway department permit applications if applicable.
(2) Engineering designs. The engineering drawings which are submitted must include the following
information:
a. A title sheet showing the name of the project, section, township and range, an index of
sheets, a tabulation of symbols, location of benchmarks, and a graphic location with respect
to nearest traveled streets and roads.
b. General plan layout of the project indicating all requirements.
c. A detailed grading plan indicating the elevations of all house foundations, lot corner, and
points of change in gradient.
i. Direction of flow of surface waters will be delineated with arrows and the gradient of
the land indicated above the arrows.
ii. Curb elevation will be indicated opposite each lot corner and all changes in gradient.
d. A detailed plan of street improvements showing horizontal and vertical locations of all street
and sidewalk improvements and including horizontal and vertical locations of all points of
tangency points of vertical curvature, points of vertical intersection, and points of vertical
tangency. Radii of intersection of streets will be shown on this plan.
e. A detailed plan of storm sewer improvements showing horizontal and vertical locations of
all manholes, catch basins, inlets, headwalls, and the like and indicating lengths, types and
grades and gradients of all storm sewers and swales. Manholes will be dimensioned from lot
corners.
f. A detailed plan of sanitary sewer improvements showing horizontal and vertical locations of
all manholes and indicating lengths, type and grade and gradients of all sanitary sewers.
Manholes will be dimensioned from lot corners.
g. A detailed plan of water system improvements indicating horizontal and vertical location of
all fire hydrants and valve vaults and showing lengths, sizes and locations of all water mains.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-7 3
h. Plans and profiles drawn at a scale not to exceed one inch equals one hundred (100) feet
horizontally and one inch to ten (10) feet vertically indicating additional horizontal and
vertical locations of streets, sewers, appurtenances, and the existing grade.
i. Such additional details as are necessary to clarify the extent or manner of construction.
j. Summary of all quantities.
k. Engineer's cost estimate of all improvements.
l. An erosion and sedimentation control plan as further defined by section 6.09 of the appendix
and in accordance with the current edition of the "procedures and standards for Urban Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois". Also included on the soil and erosion plans
should be the locations and species of existing trees greater than four (4) inches in diameter
that are to be saved.
m. General detail sheet showing:
i. Pavement cross section.
ii. Curb, gutter and sidewalk details.
iii. Cross section of detention facilities including sedimentation basins.
iv. Street lights.
v. Manholes, vaults, inlets and castings.
vi. Hydrants.
vii. Typical trench cross sections for sanitary sewer, storm sewer and watermains.
(b) Requirements for installation of improvements.
(1) Upon approval of the final plat of the proposed subdivision or planned development by the
Village Council, and prior to the recording of the plat, appropriate bonds, escrow monies,
recapture fees, fees in lieu of park and school land dedication, irrevocable letters of credit for
public improvements and any other related fees must be deposited with the village clerk.
(2) When the appropriate subdivision improvement security is posted and all permit fees paid to the
village and the supporting permits issued by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of
Greater Chicago, Environmental Protection Agency, Highway Departments, or other public
agencies, are issued, the installation of the required improvements can begin. (Ord. No. 0-134-
14, §1, 10/20/14)
(c) Preliminary inspections. All improvements constructed under the terms of this appendix shall be
subject to periodic inspections by the village engineer.
(1) Fees for these inspections shall be at the rate of one-half (1/2) a percent of the cost of such
improvements, paid by the owner or developer.
(2) The minimum fee for any inspection shall be fifty dollars ($50)
9.02. Subdivision Improvement Security.
(a) Agreements and guarantees. Prior to the recording of the final plat:
(1) Project Improvement Agreement. The Subdivider shall execute a written agreement
approved by the village to construct and install the Project Improvements required in Article VIII
hereof in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the village.
(2) Improvement security. The Subdivider or Site Developer shall submit to the village
manager a good and sufficient security for the completion of the Public Improvements as defined herein
together with the cost of reasonable inspection fees. The security shall take the form of either a cash bond,
a letter of credit or a surety bond (herein, "Security Instrument"). The amount of the Security Instrument
shall be one hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the project engineer's estimate of the cost of such
improvements. The estimate is subject to the review and approval of such amount by the village engineer.
As a condition of approval of all final plats of subdivision or planned development ordinances, the
Subdivider or Site Developer shall be responsible to pay the village attorneys fees, outside consultants and
staff expenses, and costs in the event the village must seek to collect monies from a surety company or
lender issuing the letter of credit. To accomplish this, the Subdivider or Site Developer shall place with
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-7 4
the Village the sum of ten thousand ($10,000) dollars in an escrow fund. The unspent balance of the
escrow shall be returned to the Subdivider upon completion and acceptance of the Public Improvements
pursuant to Section 9.03. (Ord. O-34-17, 4/3/17)
a. Said Security Instrument shall provide that monies in such estimated amounts are on
deposit with a bank, other financial institution or bond company and restricted for the
purpose of the installation and satisfactory completion of said improvements.
b. The village treasurer and village attorney shall within 30 days of submittal of a Security
Instrument other than a Letter of Credit or cash bond, review and make a
recommendation to the village council as to whether to accept the Security Instrument
and thereafter the village council shall approve the Security Instrument prior to
acceptance of the same and said approval shall be a condition of the recordation of any
final plat.
c. The acceptable form of an irrevocable letter of credit in said amount issued by a
financially secure and reputable financial institution shall be in substantially the
following form:
AMOUNT DATED
NO.
To: Village of Palatine,
a municipal corporation,
Cook County,
Palatine, Illinois 60067
WE HEREBY AUTHORIZE YOU TO DRAW ON
(Name of Bank)
DRAFTS AT SIGHT FOR ANY SUM OR SUMS NOT EXCEEDING A TOTAL
OF (amount)
FOR ACCOUNT OF
Drafts shall be signed by the Village of Palatine Finance and Operations Director and must be
accompanied by his/her written certification that the funds drawn are to be used to pay for the
construction and installation of the public improvements and soil erosion control measures set
forth on the Plans and Specification for public improvements for _____________, dated
, submitted by , and approved by the village engineer and
identified as No.: , which have not been completed in accordance with the
following schedule:
together with the cost of removal of all debris, rubbish, materials, apparatus, tools and equipment
as well as excess excavated materials, and the restoration of the premises where said construction
and installation work is performed to the same condition it was in before said work was
commenced; and such certification shall be binding and conclusive, and _ shall
honor such drafts and pay such funds without further inquiry.
All drafts hereunder must be marked drawn under _ , _ , Illinois. Letter
of Credit No.: _ , dated _ .
The amount of each draft drawn under this credit must be endorsed hereon and the presentation
of each draft, if negotiated, shall be a warranty by the negotiating bank that such endorsement has
been made and that documents have been forwarded as herein required; if the draft is not
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-7 5
negotiated, this credit must accompany the draft. This credit is subject to Uniform Customs and
Practice for Documentary Credits (as revised), International Chamber of Commerce.
We hereby engage with the drawers, endorsers and bonafide holders of drafts drawn under and in
compliance with the terms of this credit that the same shall be duly honored on due presentation
and delivery of documents as specified if negotiated or presented on or before _ .
Name of Bank:
Address:
City-State:
By:
Name Title
Signature:
The Corporate Authorities may enter into such supporting agreement by and among the village,
the Subdivider and the mortgage house or savings and loan association as the Corporate
Authorities shall deem necessary or desirable to further secure the proper and satisfactory
completion of said Project Improvements.
(3) Performance Guarantee. In addition to the Security Instrument described in section
9.02(a) (2), the Subdivider or Site Developer shall maintain at least (10) percent of the amount required in
paragraph (2) as a Performance Guarantee. The Corporate Authorities may accept either a certificate of
deposit or other United States government security in lieu of cash or may receive a cash deposit or a
surety bond in such amount. Such cash or other Security Instrument shall be retained by the village for a
period of one year following the final acceptance of all the Project Improvements to insure and protect
against defects or faults discovered during such one year period.
(b) Reduction of improvement security. A letter of credit or cash bond shall be the only
security, that may be reduced from time to time (maximum of once per month) upon a resolution of the
Corporate Authorities approving such reductions and concurrently granting their preliminary approval to
corresponding portions of the improvements.
(1) Consistent with Section 9.02(a)(3) there shall be withheld and reserved from each
reduction an amount which in total amounts to not more than ten (10) percent of the
original estimate of the Project Improvements as certified by the village engineer.
(2) Upon satisfactory completion of all Project Improvements, and satisfaction of the
requirements of section 9.03 of this Appendix and the deposit with the village of
adequate security for a Performance Guarantee as set forth in Section 9.02(a)(3), the
Corporate Authorities, upon resolution, may release the Security Instrument and initiate
the one year Performance Guarantee period.
(3) If all Project Improvements are acceptable after the one-year Performance Guarantee
period, the Performance Guarantee shall be refunded to the Subdivider, without interest.
(4) The village may use all or any portion of the Performance Guarantee to cure or correct
any damage, defects or faults discovered during the one-year period should the
Subdivider or Site Developer not promptly or properly correct said damage, defects or
faults. In the event that the village uses all or any portion of the Performance Guarantee
to cure or correct any damage, the village shall notify the Subdivider or Site Developer
of the deficiency and within fourteen (14) days the Performance Guarantee shall be
replenished to its original amount which Performance Guarantee shall remain in effect
for the remainder of the one year period.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-7 6
(5) Surety bonds shall remain in the original amount through the one (1) year performance
period.
(c) Outside corporate limits. Subdividers of land outside the village limits shall be subject to
the requirements of this Section 9.02.
(d) Provisions applicable to all subdividers and site developers. If the Subdivider or Site
Developer deposits a cash bond or letter of credit as security, then the final plat of subdivision may be
recorded in units or phases. Project Improvements for such unit or phase shall be adequate as deemed
necessary by the village engineer, to serve each and every lot within the unit or phase so recorded and
such improvements shall be consistent with the Project Improvements plans for the entire subdivision.
Building permits may be issued for lots contained in each unit or phase upon recordation of the final plat
of subdivision for such unit or phase. Upon deposit of sufficient security for the Project Improvements
necessary to serve the land for which a final plat of subdivision has been recorded, including sufficient
security for the construction of any improvements located outside the land for which the final plat of
subdivision has been recorded, the Subdivider shall be issued building permits. In the event the
Subdivider elects to place a security, other than a cash bond or letter of credit, then the Subdivider must
record all of the property in one final plat of subdivision without the option of recording the development
in phases.
9.03. Acceptance and approval of required Project Improvements.
(a) Acceptance. Each development is required by this ordinance to contain the necessary
Project Improvements as set forth in this Appendix. The village shall determine which Project
Improvements the village will accept dedication of in connection with the following types of
developments:
(1) Planned Developments: All improvements in a planned development that are
specifically designated and authorized by the Corporate Authorities.
(2) Residential Subdivisions: The underground and surface improvements
within the rights-of-way of public streets, easements or outlots in a residential subdivision.
(3) Office Research or Industrial Parks: All improvements with office, research
or industrial parks.
(4) Other Types of Developments: Only those Project Improvements specifically
designated and authorized by the Corporate Authorities for acceptance.
(b) Approval. When all required Project Improvements are completed in their entirety, the
Subdivider shall request the village, in writing, to accept or approve said Project Improvements and the
Subdivider must, in such written request, guarantee them for a period of one year from the date of
acceptance or approval.
(1) Prior to request for approval, the village engineer must be in receipt of:
a. Video tapes of all sanitary sewer eight (8) inches or greater in diameter. Tapes
shall be of type and size compatible to be used by the village.
b. As built engineering plans showing:
i. Actual location and size of storm sewers, sanitary sewer and
water mains showing actual locations of all inlets, manholes, valve vaults,
hydrants and other appurtenance. Actual invert and rim elevations are to be
given for all inlets and manholes.
ii. Locations and dimensions of roadways, sidewalks and
easements.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-7 7
iii. Locations and sizes of all water and sanitary sewer services.
iv. Actual location of street lights and underground cables.
v. Contour lines of any detention facilities along with calculations
indicating actual storage capacity.
vi. Elevations of the tops of all foundations and the corners of all
lots.
vii. Location points of all sanitary service connections to the sewer
main.
viii. Request for Final Inspection and Approval. Approved by the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District for all applicable permits.
ix. An Illinois Environmental Protection Agency operating permit
for all water main construction.
x. Letter of acceptance from the township, county, and/or state
highway department when applicable.
(2) Upon receipt of the written request, the village engineer will authorize and
schedule a final inspection to take place as soon as reasonably possible after receipt of the written
request.
a. Final inspections shall not be scheduled between November 15 and
April 1 unless, in the opinion of the village engineer, weather conditions permit.
b. All deficient improvements which do not totally conform to this
appendix (either incomplete, damaged, or poor workmanship of improvements) will be
inventoried.
c. The inventory of deficiencies will be forwarded to the Subdivider for
processing within 60 days of written request.
d. When the deficiencies are corrected, the Subdivider shall request a
second inspection. Scheduling of the second inspection shall be the same as for the first
inspection.
e. If the length of time between the first and second inspection is greater
than four (4) months, or if the noted deficiencies are not correct at the time the second
inspection is made, the request for acceptance will be cancelled.
f. If cancelled, a second request letter will be required. The second request
for acceptance is subject to the following conditions:
i. The Subdivider will be required to pay the cost incurred by the
person conducting the inspection.
ii. The punch-list of deficiencies recorded during the previous
inspections will be voided and a complete reinspection is required.
g. The Project Improvements shall be deemed to be “complete” when the
village engineer submits, in writing, evidence that all Project Improvements have been
completed pursuant to all applicable codes and ordinances and that the Subdivider or
Site Developer has satisfied the one-year Performance Guarantee period requirement.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-7 8
(c) Surface maintenance. During the period between the installation of the final surface
course on the roadways and the termination of the one year Performance Guarantee period, the village
engineer may request the Subdivider to seal all cracks that appear in the pavement section with an
approved hot poured rubber asphalt sealing compound.
(1) This crack sealing is limited to those cracks that normally occur due to volume
and thermal shrinkage.
(2) All other type of pavement distress will have to be properly repaired to the
satisfaction of the village engineer.
(3) All cracks shall be properly routed and air-blown clean in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations and to the satisfaction of the village engineer.
(d) Final acceptance and approval. No Project Improvements, public or private, shall be
accepted or approved by the Corporate Authorities nor shall the Project Improvements be deemed to
be “complete” prior to receipt of the village engineer's report specifying that the Project Improvements
comply with this appendix, approved plans and specifications and any applicable planned
development ordinance requirements and that all required as-builts have been received.
[Editor’s Note: Ordinance 0-33-15, passed on April 20, 2015, Effective 8/1/15, added a new Sec. 9.04
Recaptures]
9.04 Recaptures.
(a) Purpose - The Village, developers, or builders that expend funds for public improvements that the
Village will ultimately own and maintain and have control over future use and access to, may seek a
recapture of a portion of those funds from other properties that derive a direct benefit from the public
improvement.
(b) Costs and Apportionment - The basic premise in determining whether a property receives benefit from
a public improvement is that all property owners are responsible for the cost of the public improvements
across the frontage of the property. Recaptures against properties not directly abutting the public
improvement are permissible in the case of extraordinary construction costs such as the boring under a
major highway or oversizing the public improvement over the minimum requirements necessary to service
the property for which the public improvement is being constructed for.
(1) The apportionment of costs may be based on lineal footage, an area measurement or other
method so long as the division is intended to fairly reflect the benefit received from the public
improvement. The Village shall be the sole decider on the method of apportionment.
(2) The cost subject for recapture shall include all labor and materials for the construction of the
public improvement, engineering design charges directly associated with the design of the public
improvement, regulatory agency review and permit fees, as well as any testing and inspection
charges involved in the construction and acceptance of the public improvement. All costs
included in the recapture must be actual costs and must be substantiated as paid either by
contract, invoices, cancelled checks or other documents deemed acceptable by the Village. Legal
fees, building permit fees, application fees for subdivision or planned development approval, and
plat recording fees cannot be included. Expenses incurred to finance the public improvement or
lost potential in earnings or interest cannot be recaptured.
(3) To cover expenses incurred by the party to finance the public improvement, lost potential of
earnings or interest and/or other soft costs, there shall be a one and one-half percent (1.5%) per
annum interest rate calculated simply or other rate as recommended by the Village Manager and
approved by the Village Council at the time the recapture is established, of said apportioned cost
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-7 9
from the date of passage of the recapture ordinance until ten (10) years from the date of passage
of the recapture ordinance. No additional interest shall be computed after the ten (10) year period.
(4) There shall be no right to collect any recapture for any connection made by the Village of
Palatine to the public improvement.
(c) Certification of Eligibility for a Recapture – Any person or entity, including the Village, that has
installed public improvements in the Village at their own cost (“Installers”) and that feels that other
properties will also benefit from the public improvement (“Benefitted Properties”), may request the
privilege to recapture costs incurred for installing said public improvement (the “Request”). In that
event, the Installer shall submit, in accordance with this Section 9.04, a written notice to the Village
and the Benefited Properties notifying same of the Installer’s intent to seek recapture of a portion of
said costs from the Benefitted Properties. The Request shall identify the public improvement, the
Benefitted Properties, and the estimated apportionment of cost against each Benefitted Property. The
Request will be reviewed to determine that it meets the requirements set forth in this Section, and
serve as an advanced, but not a binding notice to the Benefitted Properties. The Benefited Property
owner shall pay its allocated recapture amount so long as a recapture ordinance is adopted by the
Village in accordance with Section 9.04 (d).
Applications for final subdivision approval in accordance with Article IV of this Appendix B, final
planned development approval in accordance with Section 13.05 or 13.06 of Appendix B, or a
building permit in accordance with Chapter 6 all of the Palatine Code of Ordinances shall submit a
preliminary request for recapture prior to construction of the improvement. This preliminary request
shall identify the public improvement, the properties the future recapture would be against, and the
estimated apportionment of cost against each future benefitting property. Any applicant that fails to
submit the Request at the time of said applications or permits shall not be eligible to seek recapture
unless otherwise authorized by the Village Manager.
(Ord. No. 0-12-16, §1, 2/1/16)
(d) Preparation of Ordinance Documents - It is required that the party requesting a recapture prepare
the ordinance and supporting documents such that the Village Council can adopt the ordinance. A
formal request for and a completed draft ordinance along with all supporting documents shall be
submitted for review and certification within ninety (90) days after preliminary acceptance by the
Village of the public improvement in accordance with article 9.03 of this Appendix B. Preliminary
acceptance will be the commencement of the one year maintenance period or final payment. (Ord. No.
0-12-16, §1, 2/1/16)
(e) Administrative Fee - The Village shall be entitled to deduct from each and every reimbursement or
recapture three percent (3%) for administrative services rendered in the calculating, collecting monitoring
and disbursing reimbursements and recaptures in addition to any actual direct costs incurred for these
services.
(f) Payment of Recapture - Recaptures are due at the time the Village issues a permit for the right to
connect to said public improvement or in the case of a Planned Unit Development or a subdivision of a
parcel of land upon which there is a recapture recorded against, the full amount is due prior to the
recording of the plat unless authorized by the Village Manager.
(g) Life of Recapture - The maximum period of time of a recapture ordinance shall be fifteen (15) years
from the date of passage.
PALATINE CODE OF ORDINANCES – APPENDIX B –
SUBDIVISION, SITE DEVELOPMENT AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
B-8 0
(h) Notification - The Village of Palatine shall cause a legal notice of the time, place and that a recapture
ordinance is pending to be considered by the Village Council, to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the Village of Palatine at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. The Village
shall also send notice, by standard mail, of the meeting at which the Village Council will consider passage
of the recapture ordinance to all owners of record of each parcel of property that will be affected by the
recapture at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing.
(i) Recording - The Village will record with the Cook County Recorder’s Office the recapture ordinance
against all affected parcels.
(j) Indemnification - The party for whose benefit the recapture provision shall apply, shall bear any and all
costs for the defense of any legal action which might be brought by any subsequent person, entity or user
challenging the Village’s right to recover or seek recovery of such recapture or questioning the method of
calculation for such recapture, including any related costs incurred by the Village. Further, in the event
that any person refuses to make payment of such recapture, the party for whose benefit such recapture is
sought shall bear any and all costs involved in pursuing said party’s right to recapture against such person.
The Village shall use its best efforts to collect the recapture, but it shall not be obliged to bring suit to
collect same nor shall the Village or its officials be liable in any manner for failure to collect the
recapture. In the event that any person challenges the Village’s right to recover or seek recovery of such
recapture or questions the method of calculation for the same or refuses to make payment of the same, the
Village reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to connect or permit the connection to the subject public
improvement to avoid the potential hardship or financial losses due to delay in the utilization of said
public improvement, which shall not constitute a waiver or release of rights of the party claiming
entitlement to recapture.
(k) Transferability - The party entitled to the recapture shall be only that entity identified in the ordinance.
The ordinance cannot be transferred without prior approval of the Village Council. In the case of a
Corporation or Limited Liability Company, that business entity must remain in good standing with the
Illinois Secretary of State throughout the period of time that the recapture ordinance is in effect or at least
at the time any collection on the recapture is made.
(l) Change of Address - It shall be incumbent upon the party entitled to the recapture to notify the Village
of any change of address. Any recapture fees collected where the entitled party cannot be located within
ninety (90) days, shall be returned to the payer less the three percent (3%) administrative fee. There will
be no further attempts to collect the recapture.












