6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 1/470
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Prospect Heights, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 0-19-06, passed February 25, 2019.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 0-81-30
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A NEW CODE OR ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF PROSPECT HEIGHTS; ESTABLISHING THE SAME; AND
PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN, EXCEPT AS HEREIN PROVIDED.
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Prospect Heights, Cook County, Illinois, as follows:
Section 1. That the ordinance consisting of titles 1 through 10 and entitled "Prospect Heights City Code" be and is hereby adopted as the official Municipal
Code of the City of Prospect Heights and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other
general and permanent ordinances of the City passed prior to June 1, 1981, except such as by reference thereto are expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force and effect for any purpose.
Section 2. That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after 10 days after publication thereof in book or pamphlet form, and all
ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Prospect Heights, passed prior to June 1, 1981, and not included in such Code or recognized
and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of such Code, except as hereinafter provided.
Section 3. That the repeal provided in Section 2 shall not affect:
(a)Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of
this Ordinance.
(b)Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City, or any evidence of the
City's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the City.
(c)Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance of the City.
(d)Any ordinance, dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the City.
(e)Any appropriation ordinance.
(f)Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes.
(g)Any ordinance establishing and prescribing street or sidewalk grades.
(h)Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor.
(i)Any ordinance extending or contracting the boundaries of the City.
(j)Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any City officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith.
(k)Any ordinance relating to zoning.
(l)Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the corporate authorities not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code.
(m)Any ordinance passed on or after June 1, 1981.
Such repeal shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this
Ordinance.
Section 4. That whenever in such Code an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such
Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any
such provision of such Code shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Unless specifically provided otherwise, or the
content thereof so dictates, a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day or part thereof on which a violation occurs or continues or is
permitted to occur or continue.
Section 5. That any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the corporate authorities to
make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Prospect Heights City Code", shall be
understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Section 6. That in case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 4 of
this Ordinance and Section 1-4-1 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended; or, in case such amendment contains provisions in another section
in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically
repealed therein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 2/470
Section 7. That three copies of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the City
Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk, or someone authorized by said Clerk, to insert in such copy and in their
designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the corporate authorities to make the same a part of such Code when the
same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such copies all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the corporate
authorities. Such copy shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same.
Section 8. That it shall be unlawful for any person to change or alter, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete
pages or portions thereof, or alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby.
Any person violating this Section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-4-1 of such Code, and in Section 4 of this Ordinance.
Section 9. That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section 10. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect and after its passage, approval and publication in book or pamphlet form according to law.
PASSED this 2nd day of November, 1981.
APPROVED this 3rd day of November, 1981.
Title 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the City Council, this Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official Code of the City of Prospect Heights. This
Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the PROSPECT HEIGHTS CITY CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the Council and shall
be kept up to date as provided in Section 1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to
the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause, relating thereto, as well as to the section
itself, when reference is made to this Code by title in any legal documents. (1981 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this State
as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section 1-2-1 of this Code. (1981 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Code. All such amendments
or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place
in each copy of this Code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this Code. (1981 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized
by the City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk.
Any person having in his custody an official copy of this Code shall make every effort to maintain said Code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the City Clerk.
Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to
the office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the City Council. (1981 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 3/470
repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Code or by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as this Code may contain provisions for such matters, in
which case this Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1981 Code)
1-2-2: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable, if any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the
same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of
this Code. (1981 Code)
1-2-3: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this
Code, or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1981 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this Code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or person is
referred to in this Code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as well as
males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this Code
which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been changed in the content of this City Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1981 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such
meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The City of Prospect Heights, County of Cook, State of Illinois.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
City of Prospect Heights".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year for the City shall begin on May 1 of each year and conclude on April 30 of the following year.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the City; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 4/470
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Prospect Heights".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every
right or interest therein.
RETAILER: A person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property for use by the consumer and not for resale.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such buildings or land, whether alone or with
others.
WHOLESALER: A person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write,
by his proper mark. (Ord. 76-01, 5-27-1976; amd. 1981 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1981 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTIES1:
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City an act or omission is prohibited or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a violation of this Code,
or whenever in this Code or such ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a violation of this Code,
where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance is hereby declared to be an offense and
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day or part thereof on
which a violation occurs or continues or is permitted to occur or continue. (1981 Code)
1-4-2: PROSECUTION WHERE DIFFERENT PENALTIES EXIST FOR SAME OFFENSE; EFFECT OF LICENSE, PERMIT
REVOCATION OR USE OF OTHER PENALTY:
In all cases where the same offense is punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which
to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit
shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. (1981 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or
penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intent of the City Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1981 Code)
Chapter 5
CITY COUNCIL
1-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules of order and procedures governing the deliberations and meetings of the city council and the committees
thereof. (Ord. 0-76-06, 6-21-1976)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 5/470
1-5-2: MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL:
A. Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the fourth Monday of each calendar month at six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M.
Regular meetings shall take place at a convenient location to be authorized by the corporate authorities of the city. Any regular meeting falling on a
legal holiday observed by the city shall be held on the next day after the legal holiday at the same time and place. The city council shall provide a
schedule of regular meetings at the beginning of each calendar or fiscal year in accord with the open meetings act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et
seq., as amended.
B. Special Meetings:
1. Special meetings may be called by a majority vote of the city council taken at a regular or special meeting of the city council. No separate notice to
individual council members not present when the vote to call a special meeting was taken is necessary to call the special meeting. The city
administrator shall notify any alderman not present at the meeting of the date and time of the special meeting.
2. Special meetings may also be called by the mayor or by any three (3) members of the council by written request or notice being filed with the city
clerk at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the time specified for such meetings. At least twenty four (24) hours' written notice of such special meeting
shall be given by the clerk, which notice shall specify the time and purpose of such meeting and shall be delivered to each member of the council
personally if he/she can be found; and, if he/she cannot be found, then by leaving a copy of such notice at the home of such council member in the
presence of an adult member of the family of the alderman or mayor, as the case may be.
The clerk shall cause an affidavit showing service of such notice as herein provided to be filed in her office prior to the time fixed for such special
meeting; together with a statement of compliance with the notices to members of the media as provided in "an act in relation to meetings". Any
special meeting attended by all of the members of the council shall be a regular meeting for the transaction of any business that may come before
such meeting if all members are present and so agree.
C. City Council Workshop Meetings: The city council shall meet on the second Monday of each month at six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M. at city hall to conduct
a workshop meeting. In addition, the council may also meet in a workshop format at such times as it determines necessary.
D. Compliance With Open Meetings Act: All meetings of the city council shall comply with the open meetings act. (Ord. 0-13-10, 4-22-2013)
1-5-3: PRESIDING OFFICER:
The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the city council, but he shall have a vote only where the vote of the aldermen has resulted in a tie; or where onehalf
(1/2) of the aldermen elected have voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution or motion even though there is no tie vote; or where a vote greater than a
majority of the corporate authorities is required by state statute or city ordinance to adopt an ordinance, resolution or motion.
During the absence or disability of the mayor, the council shall elect one of its number mayor pro tem of the council, and he shall act as presiding officer of
the council. Where the absence or disability of the mayor is to be of a very short duration and no individual is required to be granted the powers of the
mayor, the council shall elect one of its members temporary chairman. The mayor pro tem or the temporary chairman, when acting as presiding officer,
shall vote on all questions on which the vote is taken by "ayes" and "nays", his name being called last. The mayor pro tem shall have all the powers and
duties of the mayor; the temporary chairman shall only have such powers and duties as accrue to a presiding officer. (Ord. 0-76-06, 6-21-1976)
1-5-4: MEETING PROCEDURES:
A. Each meeting of the city council shall convene at the time appointed for such meeting, as provided by ordinance. The city clerk, or someone appointed
to fill his place by the presiding officer, shall thereupon immediately call the roll of members.
B. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of a majority of all the council entitled by law to be elected.
1. If no quorum be present, the council shall not thereby stand adjourned, but the members present shall be competent to adjourn or recess the council
by a majority vote of said council.
2. If no quorum is present and the members present desire to compel the attendance of absent members, they themselves, or by their agents, shall
attempt to communicate the call to the session personally to the absentees. Any absent member who refuses for no cause to attend the meeting (or
a new meeting to which the members present have adjourned) after personal notice to attend may be fined by the members present a sum not to
exceed twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each occurrence. (Ord. 0-76-06, 6-21-1976)
1-5-5: AGENDA AND ORDER OF BUSINESS:
A. City Council Workshop: The city council workshop shall be a meeting of the city council for purposes of informal discussion of city business. The mayor
or any two (2) aldermen by written request directed to the city administrator may place a matter on the workshop agenda for discussion purposes.
Matters may be passed out of the city council workshop and placed on the city council agenda by the affirmative vote of the majority of aldermen
present.
1. Payment Of Bills At Workshop Meetings: At each workshop meeting, the city council may take final action on payment of any city bills which are due
as of the date of the workshop.
2. Final Action At Workshops: Provided the agenda complies with the open meetings act, the city council may take final action on any matter at a city
council workshop meeting, but with the exception of paying bills, such instances shall be infrequent.
3. Public Comment: Public comment shall be allowed at the beginning of each city council workshop meeting and shall be limited to matters listed on
the agenda. The mayor or temporary chairman may limit the time of each speaker and/or allow public comment on nonagenda matters in his or her
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 6/470
discretion, subject to being overruled by a majority of the aldermen present.
B. City Council Regular And Special Meetings: Generally, matters should appear first for discussion at the city council workshop prior to appearing for
action on the regular or special city council agenda. The mayor may direct that any matter be placed on the agenda. The order of business at city
council meetings shall be substantially as follows. The presiding officer at any city council meeting may adjust the order of business in his or her
discretion subject to the procedure for appeals of the decision of the chair as set forth in this code. Members of the city council may, by motion,
temporarily alter the order of business for any given meeting. This section is intended as a guide in the preparation of the city council agenda and is not
intended to override the rules of procedure of the city council in the conduct of its business. Deviations from the order of business set forth below shall
not affect the validity of any city council action:
1. Call to order.
2. Roll call.
3. Pledge Of Allegiance.
4. Petitions and communications.
Persons desiring to address the city council during this section shall register with the city administrator a written request to address the council, or to
have the matter put on the agenda, no later than Thursday preceding the regular meeting of the city council. Any such written request shall state the
person's name and address, shall describe the nature of the matter to be presented, and shall identify the date of the meeting at which the person
desires to make the presentation. The city administrator will place the matter on the agenda under "petitions and communications" for the meeting
specified in the request. Any person registered to address the city council may speak for five (5) minutes.
5. Residents' comments (agenda matters).
Residents desiring to address the city council shall register with the city clerk on a form provided at the council meeting. On the form the requester
shall state the resident's name and address, and the subject matter to be presented. The clerk shall provide the forms of requesters to the mayor.
Residents speaking on agenda matters will be recognized by the mayor and allowed to address the city council at this time. The mayor may
recognize or refuse to recognize any person who has not registered with the city clerk. Should there be a challenge to the decision, a majority vote of
the council is in order. Any resident who has registered and/or is recognized may speak for five (5) minutes only.
6. Reports and communications from the mayor, officers, and special commissions.
7. Consent agenda.
All items on the consent agenda shall be adopted by the city council in a single motion following an affirmative roll call vote. Any member of the city
council may request removal of any item from the consent agenda for separate discussion. The failure to remove any item or items from the consent
agenda by any alderman or the mayor shall be deemed to constitute unanimous consent as to the inclusion of each item or items on the consent
agenda. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, any ordinance, resolution, order or motion may be placed on the consent agenda.
8. Approval of exceptions.
Consideration of consent agenda items that have been removed for separate discussion and for awarding of bids.
9. Legislation.
The city administrator shall maintain a list of all legislation, action on which has been tabled or otherwise postponed, and shall indicate the status of
said legislation monthly.
a. Pending matters.
b. Plan/zoning board of appeals report.
If the city council has by motion approved the recommendation as submitted by the plan/zoning board of appeals to the city council, the city council
may waive first reading of an ordinance granting such action recommended by the plan/zoning board of appeals.
If the city council has by motion approved the recommendation as submitted by the plan/zoning board of appeals to the city council, the city council
may adopt a resolution approving the action recommended by the plan/zoning board of appeals.
c. Resolutions.
d. Ordinances, first reading.
e. Ordinances, second reading.
10. Approval of expenditures.
11. Residents' comments (nonagenda matters).
Residents desiring to address the city council shall register with the city clerk on a form provided at the council meeting. On the form the requester
shall state the resident's name and address, and the subject matter to be presented. The clerk shall provide the forms of requesters to the mayor.
Residents speaking on nonagenda matters will be recognized by the mayor and allowed to address the city council at this time. The mayor may
recognize or refuse to recognize any person who has not registered with the city clerk. Should there be a challenge to the decision, a majority vote of
the council is in order. Any resident who has registered and/or is recognized may speak for five (5) minutes only.
12. Executive session.
13. Adjournment. (Ord. 0-13-10, 4-22-2013)
1-5-6: DUTIES OF PRESIDING OFFICER, MEMBERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 7/470
A. Presiding Officer: The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum and may speak to points of order in preference to other members, and shall
decide all questions of order subject to appeal. If he refuses to allow the aldermen to exercise their right to appeal a decision of the chair, the aldermen
may consider and pass upon the matter in spite of the chair's failure to grant them an appeal.
In case of any disturbances or disorderly conduct, the presiding officer shall have the power to require the chamber to be cleared.
B. Members:
1. While the presiding officer is putting the question, no member shall walk across or out of the council chamber.
2. Every member, previous to his speaking, making a motion or seconding the same, shall address himself to the presiding officer and say: "Mr. Mayor"
and shall not proceed with his remarks until recognized and named by the chair. He shall confine himself to the question under debate avoiding
personalities and refraining from impugning the motives of any other member's argument or vote. (Ord. 0-76-06, 6-21-1976)
3. When two (2) or more members address the chair at the same time, the presiding officer shall name the member who is first to speak.
C. Appeals: The ruling of the mayor or chairman shall be final. Aldermen may appeal the ruling of the presiding office by motion, second and the
concurring vote of three (3) aldermen. (Ord. 0-09-09, 4-20-2009)
1-5-7: RESIDENTS' COMMENTS:
Except during the time allotted for public comment under section 1-5-5 of this chapter, no resident, other than a member of the city council, shall address
that body, except with the consent of the mayor or two (2) of the council members.
No such resident may be recognized or permitted to speak on any matter (except during the time allotted for public discussion) other than on that matter
immediately before the city council and only then after all members of the city council who wish to discuss that matter have had an opportunity to do so.
The mayor shall indicate to residents requesting an opportunity to address the council that the city council shall be given both first and final opportunities
for discussion.
When the mayor recognizes the resident, the resident will stand and announce his or her name and address before beginning to speak. (Ord. 0-97-47, 8-
18-1997, eff. 8-28-1997)
1-5-8: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-09-09, 4-20-2009)
1-5-9: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-09-09, 4-20-2009)
1-5-10: CALL OF MEMBER TO ORDER:
A member, when called to order by the chair, shall thereupon discontinue speaking and take a seat and the order or ruling of the chair shall be binding and
conclusive, subject only to the right of appeal. (Ord. 0-76-06, 6-21-1976)
1-5-11: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-04-50, 11-8-2004, eff. 11-18-2004)
1-5-12: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-04-50, 11-8-2004, eff. 11-18-2004)
1-5-13: PARTICIPATION IN CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS BY AUDIO OR VIDEO CONFERENCE:
A. Compliance With Open Meetings Act: The mayor and any alderman shall be allowed to participate in and vote, as set forth in this code, in any city
council workshop, regular and special meetings, via telephone or any other electronic communication device, but only in compliance with the open
meetings act and this code. In the event of a conflict between the open meetings act and this code, the open meetings act shall control.
B. Eligibility: If a quorum of the corporate authorities is physically present as required by section 2.01 of the open meetings act, any alderman or the mayor
may attend the meeting by video or audio conference if such alderman or the mayor is prevented from physically attending because of: 1) personal
illness or disability; 2) employment purposes or the business of the public body; or 3) a family or other emergency. Audio or video conference
attendance shall be in accord with this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 8/470
C. Notice To Clerk: If a member of the corporate authorities wishes to attend a meeting by video or audio conference, the member must notify the city clerk
in writing or by e-mail at least forty eight (48) hours before the meeting. The clerk or his or her designee, after receiving the electronic attendance
request, shall inform the mayor and city council of the request for electronic attendance.
D. Audio Standards: To be allowed to attend by audio or video conference, there must be suitable equipment available in the room where the meeting is to
be physically held which will provide a clear, audible, two-way transmission of the audio from the physical meeting to all members desiring to attend
remotely and from the member(s) attending remotely to the physical meeting in sufficient volume to be comfortably heard by members, the city clerk,
and the public in physical attendance. The telephonic connection shall be of sufficient quality to carry uninterrupted audio of the meeting.
Cellular/wireless phone and speakerphone usage by members attending remotely is discouraged.
E. Determination Of Mayor Or Temporary Chairman: The mayor (if physically present), or duly elected temporary chairman of the meeting, may refuse to
allow a member to attend by video or audio conference if he or she determines that the audio standards set forth above cannot be met. The mayor or
temporary chairman shall make such determination as a matter of record and direct the clerk or recording secretary note such determination in the
minutes of the meeting. Members may override the determination of the mayor or chairman if a majority of the members physically present determine
that the audio transmissions meet the above audio standards. Such override shall be upon motion passed by the affirmative vote of a majority of the
members physically present.
F. Remote Attendance Of Mayor; Chairman Must Physically Attend: The mayor may attend a meeting by audio or video conference, but may not chair. In
the physical absence of the mayor, a member must be physically present to serve as temporary chairman.
G. Rights Of Remote Member: A member permitted to attend electronically will be able to express his or her comments during the meeting and participate
in the same capacity as those members physically present, subject to all general meeting guidelines and procedures previously adopted and adhered
to. Accordingly, although the mayor cannot chair the meeting, the mayor may break a tie or vote when statutorily permitted when attending
electronically. The member attending electronically shall be heard, considered, and counted as to any vote taken. Accordingly, the name of any
member attending electronically shall be called during any vote taken, and his or her vote counted and recorded by the clerk and placed in the minutes
for the corresponding meeting. A member attending electronically may leave a meeting and return as in the case of any member, provided the member
attending electronically shall announce his or her leaving and returning. (Ord. 0-13-10, 4-22-2013)
1-5-14: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-04-50, 11-8-2004, eff. 11-18-2004)
1-5-15: ACTION ON MOTIONS, RESOLUTIONS, ORDINANCES:
A. Motions: No motion, resolution or ordinance shall be put or debated in the council or in committee unless it is so moved by an alderman and seconded.
When a motion is seconded, it shall be stated by the presiding officer before debate.
B. Initial Debate: The presiding officer shall then open the floor for debate and the movant shall have the floor for debate on the subject for not more than
five (5) minutes. After the movant finishes speaking on his or her motion, each alderman shall have the floor in an order determined by the presiding
officer for not more than five (5) minutes. Aldermen may not defer their opportunity for debate. The presiding officer may debate any matter before the
city council after all aldermen present have had the opportunity for debate.
C. Additional Debate And Calling The Question: After initial debate as set forth above, the presiding officer may call for a vote or may allow additional
debate in his or her discretion. However, after initial debate, any alderman may move to "call the question" and terminate debate. Upon receipt of the
affirmative vote of a majority of the aldermen present, a motion to call the question shall immediately terminate debate and the clerk shall call the roll on
the question before the city council. If the presiding officer has decided to put the question to a vote and not allow additional debate, any member may
move to extend debate for an additional round of debate as set forth in subsection B of this section. A motion to extend debate shall carry upon an
affirmative vote of a majority of the aldermen present.
D. Recognition Of Nonmembers: The presiding officer may recognize the clerk, treasurer, city administrator, city attorney or any member of the staff or
public during debate.
E. Record: Upon the vote on any question, the clerk shall record the votes in the journal of proceedings (minutes) by listing each alderman and his or her
corresponding vote by name. A vote to adjourn may be recorded as a voice vote. (Ord. 0-09-09, 4-20-2009)
1-5-16: MOTIONS TO RECONSIDER:
A motion to reconsider must be made by an alderman who voted with the prevailing side on the matter. It may be seconded by any other alderman and
must receive an affirmative vote of three (3) aldermen to be adopted. The motion to reconsider may be made at the same meeting at which the
reconsidered item was addressed or not later than the first regular meeting following the meeting at which the reconsidered item was addressed. (Ord. 0-
09-09, 4-20-2009)
1-5-17: MOTIONS TO POSTPONE:
Any alderman may move to postpone a matter indefinitely or to a date certain. The form of the motion shall be "move to table" or "move to postpone". The
motion must be seconded and receive the affirmative vote of a majority of the members present to be adopted. The motion is not debatable. Any matter
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 9/470
postponed indefinitely pursuant to this section may be placed on a future agenda by direction of the mayor or by the consensus of the city council. There
shall be no "motion to lay upon the table" as that motion is known in "Robert's Rules Of Order Newly Revised". (Ord. 0-09-09, 4-20-2009)
1-5-18: RECORD OF MOTIONS:
In all cases where a resolution or motion is entered in the journal, the name of the member moving and seconding the same shall be entered. (Ord. 0-76-
06, 6-21-1976)
1-5-19: RECORDING VOTES:
The "ayes" and "nays" upon any question shall be taken and entered in the journal. When the clerk has commenced to call the roll of the council for the
taking of a vote by "ayes" and "nays", all debate on the question before the council shall be deemed concluded, and during the taking of the vote a
member shall be permitted to briefly explain his vote and shall respond to the calling of his name by the clerk by answering "aye" or "nay" as the case may
be. (Ord. 0-76-06, 6-21-1976)
1-5-20: CONSENSUS ACTION:
To the extent allowed at law, the presiding officer may declare that an action be taken pursuant to consent of the city council and direct that said action be
recorded in the minutes "by consensus" or some such similar designation. Upon such a declaration by the presiding officer, any alderman may
immediately, prior to the next agenda item, voice his or her objection to proceeding by consensus. In the event of such an objection, there shall be no
consensus action and the mayor may call for a motion on such matter in the manner set forth in this code for action on motions. (Ord. 0-09-09, 4-20-2009)
1-5-21: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-04-50, 11-8-2004, eff. 11-18-2004)
1-5-22: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-04-50, 11-8-2004, eff. 11-18-2004)
1-5-23: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-04-50, 11-8-2004, eff. 11-18-2004)
1-5-24: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-04-50, 11-8-2004, eff. 11-18-2004)
1-5-25: ADOPTION OF ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER NEWLY REVISED:
The rules contained in this code shall be the rules of procedure for the city council and its committees. To the extent that these rules are silent on a matter,
the rules of parliamentary practice comprised in the latest published edition of "Robert's Rules Of Order Newly Revised", shall govern the city council in all
cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with the special rules of the council or the statutes or laws of the state. (Ord. 0-
09-09, 4-20-2009)
1-5-26: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-04-50, 11-8-2004, eff. 11-18-2004)
1-5-27: CENSURE OF MEMBERS; EXPULSION OF MEMBERS:
Any member acting or appearing in a lewd or disgraceful manner, or who uses opprobrious, obscene or insulting language to or about any member of the
council, or who does not obey the order of the chair, shall be, on motion, censured by a majority vote of the corporate authorities and, in addition, may be
fined not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for each such occurrence. With the concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of the aldermen elected, the council may expel
an alderman, but not a second time for the same incident. (Ord. 0-01-23, 10-15-2001, eff. 10-25-2001)
1-5-28: STANDING COMMITTEES:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-03-22, 6-2-2003, eff. 6-10-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 10/470
1-5-28-1: MAYORAL APPOINTMENTS, AUTHORIZATION AND PROCEDURE:
A. Generally: The members of all boards, committees, and commissions of the city shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city
council. This provision shall not apply where there exists an ordinance or statute specifically providing a procedure for the appointment of members to a
particular board, committee, or commission.
B. Chicago Executive Airport Board: There exists the Chicago Executive Airport board ("CEA board") as provided in a certain intergovernmental
agreement between the village of Wheeling and the city of Prospect Heights for the organization, operation and maintenance of Chicago Executive
Airport, as amended from time to time.
1. Chairman: The decision of the mayor in appointing the chairman of the CEA board shall first be approved by a majority of the aldermen.
2. City Appointed Members: The mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the city council, three (3) members to the CEA board. The city
appointed members may include an elected official, but shall not include more than one elected official.
C. Mayor's Failure Or Refusal To Act: In the event that the mayor fails or refuses to make appointments to ad hoc, advisory or other boards, committees
and commissions, the city council may make such appointments in the following manner, if not prohibited by law: Upon the favorable vote of three-fifths
(3/5) of all the aldermen, a three (3) member nominating committee shall be formed to consider and recommend aldermanic appointments. This
committee shall be formed as follows: The city clerk shall draw the names of three (3) aldermen in a random lottery who shall comprise the nominating
committee; the first name drawn shall be that of the chairman. (Ord. 0-08-20, 6-2-2008)
1-5-28-2: CITY COUNCIL EXPENDITURES:
The mayor and individual aldermen are authorized to obligate the city to pay actual expenses not to exceed the following amounts when incurred in the
conduct of city business without prior approval of the mayor or city council so long as said expenses do not exceed authorized budget amounts:
Aldermen $100.00
Mayor 500.00
The above expenditures shall be promptly submitted to the mayor and city council for approval of payment at the next regularly scheduled city council
meeting along with an itemized account of all expenditures and reason for necessity of the obligation. (Ord. 0-97-35, 6-2-1997, eff. 6-12-1997)
1-5-29: AD HOC AND ADVISORY COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS:
The mayor with the concurrence of the city council, or the city council under provisions of section 1-5-28-1 of this chapter, may appoint ad hoc committees
of aldermen and other elected city officials to address concerns which are of a temporary nature.
The mayor with the advice and consent of the city council, or the city council under provisions of section 1-5-28-1 of this chapter, may appoint advisory
boards and commissions composed wholly or in part of citizens. The purpose, size and duration of advisory boards and commissions shall be established
by resolution of the city council. The duties and responsibilities of advisory boards and commissions including those specified by the city council regarding
the conduct of meetings shall also be provided by resolution, and the resolution shall also stipulate the funds available, if necessary, the limitations on
expending them and the purposes for and manner in which they are to be expended. The purpose, composition, duration, available funds and funding
conditions may also be changed or amended by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 0-97-35, 6-2-1997, eff. 6-12-1997)
1-5-29-1: AUTHORITY AND PROCEDURE FOR CITY COUNCIL APPOINTMENTS:
In the event that the mayor fails or refuses to appoint or delays excessively or unduly in appointing ad hoc committees, the city council may elect to do so
by a three-fifths (3/5) majority vote. The same procedures shall be followed as in section 1-5-28-1 of this chapter, except that the council may elect to form
a three (3) member nominating committee.
In the event that the mayor fails or refuses to appoint or delays excessively or unduly in appointing citizens advisory commissions or boards, the city
council may elect to do so by a three-fifths (3/5) majority vote. The same procedure shall be followed as in section 1-5-28-1 of this chapter, except that the
nominating committee shall consist of the mayor and two (2) aldermen selected at random, the first alderman selected being the chairman, and except that
the nominating committee shall make its recommendations to the city council no later than the third regularly scheduled city council meeting following the
appointment of the committee.
Ad hoc and citizens advisory commissions and boards shall serve until dissolved or terminated by written order of the mayor. The city council, however,
may override such an order of the mayor and continue any such commission, committee or board by a favorable three-fifths (3/5) majority vote. In no case
shall any commission, committee or board continue for more than two (2) years or beyond the installation of the newly elected aldermen, whichever occurs
first. The mayor may reappoint such boards, commissions and committees with the advice and consent of the city council, or they may be reappointed by
the city council under provisions of this section. (Ord. 0-03-29, 8-18-2003, eff. 8-28-2003)
1-5-29-2: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE OF SITTING MEMBERS NOT APPROVED BY CITY COUNCIL:
Any sitting member of an ad hoc, citizens advisory commission or board, and any member previously appointed by the city council of the Palwaukee
municipal airport commission and not approved for reappointment by the city council shall be deemed removed from office ninety (90) days following that
sitting member's term expiration date. (Ord. 0-01-38, 1-22-2002, eff. 2-1-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 11/470
1-5-30: COMMITTEE PROCEEDINGS, RECORDS AND MINUTES:
At every committee meeting, the committee chairman (or presiding officer) shall prepare (or cause to be prepared) appropriate records stating the date,
place and purpose of the meeting, a summary of significant discussions and testimony, and actions taken by the committee. Before or during any
committee meeting any person shall have the right to submit written remarks to the committee chairman (or presiding officer) for inclusion in the
proceedings of the meeting. The minutes of committee meetings shall include the names, addresses and, if appropriate, the affiliation of all noncouncil
members who provide evidence or testimony; shall include or refer to all written statements presented within the time allotted for such statements; and a
draft of said minutes shall be published within thirty five (35) days of the committee meeting. Approval of the minutes shall be by majority vote of the
committee and by signature of the chairman or of the member designated by the committee to so approve.
Any member of the committee may submit a minority report or clarifying remarks within ten (10) days of the meeting or within ten (10) days after approval
of minutes of such meeting, and such report or remarks shall become an official addendum to said minutes. Once approved and signed, the minutes shall
become official records of the committee and shall not be altered thereafter except by a majority vote of the committee.
Meetings, public hearings and other official activities of or conducted by committees which are continued or adjourned to a later date shall be considered
to be separate meetings for the purposes of records keeping and publication of minutes. (Ord. 0-85-12, 6-3-1985)
1-5-31: THE JOURNAL:
The city clerk shall keep the journal of the proceedings of the city council. Within no more than ten (10) days after each meeting of the council, the clerk
shall supply to each member a typewritten copy of the proceedings. (Ord. 0-85-12, 6-3-1985)
1-5-32: SMOKING LIMITATIONS IN CITY COUNCIL CHAMBERS:
A. No smoking will be allowed in the city council chambers at any time.
B. During any meeting of the city council a motion to recess for the purpose of smoking may be made. Such recess shall follow a successful motion and
shall not exceed ten (10) minutes in length.
Subsequent motions to recess for the same person may be made no earlier than forty five (45) minutes after the previous recess. The presiding officer
shall direct that those who wish to smoke during such recess must do so outside the city facilities. (Ord. 0-91-21, 6-17-1991)
1-5-33: SMOKING LIMITATIONS IN CITY FACILITIES:
In addition to smoking limitations imposed by section 1-5-32 of this chapter, it shall be the general policy of the city to prohibit smoking within general
meeting areas and work places municipally owned or operated by the city. (Ord. 0-91-21, 6-17-1991)
1-5-34: ELECTED OFFICERS, TERMS:
The terms of elected officers shall commence on the date specified in section 3.1-10-15 of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-
10-15, as hereinafter amended. (Ord. 0-04-51, 11-8-2004, eff. 11-18-2004)
1-5-35: INTERIM EXECUTIVE SUCCESSION FOR MAYOR'S OFFICE:
A. Statement Of Policy: Because of the existing possibility of an emergency or occurrence of disasters as set forth in section 1-14-1 of this title1, and in
order in the event of such an emergency, to assure continuity of government through legally constituted leadership, authority and responsibility in the
office of the mayor, it is found and declared to be necessary to provide for additional officers who can exercise the powers and discharge the duties of
the mayor as set forth in chapter 14 of this title, in the event the mayor is unavailable to perform the duties and functions of his office.
B. Definitions:
DISASTER: See definition as set forth in section 1-14-3 of this title.
UNAVAILABLE: Either a vacancy in the mayor's office exists and there is no mayor authorized to exercise the duties of the office, or that the lawful
incumbent of the office, or his duly authorized successor, is absent or unable to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office of the mayor.
C. Emergency Interim Successors For Office Of The Mayor: The mayor and city council hereby adopts the following order of interim successors:
1. Alderman with longest continuous length in office;
2. Alderman with second longest continuous length in office;
3. Alderman with third longest continuous length in office;
4. Alderman with fourth longest continuous length in office.
The city council shall review and revise, if necessary, the order of succession; but, in no event shall the order of succession extend beyond the term
of the office of the mayor at time of execution of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 12/470
If any of the subject aldermen is unavailable, the succession shall be to the next alderman by alphabetical order.
The emergency interim successor shall exercise such powers and discharge such duties only until such time as the mayor or the lawful incumbent of
the office shall resume the exercise of the powers and discharge his duties or the city council shall elect and qualify a successor as provided by law.
D. Statute Guidelines: This section shall guide the administrative staff in determining appropriate authority during times of emergency and said interim
succession shall be consistent with 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 275/1, "emergency interim executive succession act".
E. Repeal Of Resolution: Resolution R-89-107, titled "resolution establishing an interim executive succession for the office of the mayor" adopted by the
city council on November 20, 1989, is hereby repealed by adoption of this section. (Ord. 0-97-62, 10-20-1997)
Chapter 6
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
1-6-1: CREATION AND APPOINTMENT:
The office of city administrator is hereby created, which officer shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the advice and consent of the city council. He
shall be chosen on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in, or his knowledge of,
accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 0-78-01, 1-3-1978)
1-6-2: TENURE OF OFFICE:
The term of office of the city administrator shall be not shorter than one year nor longer than the term of the mayor appointing him. The city administrator
may resign from his office or may be removed therefrom by the mayor, on any formal charge, whenever he is of the opinion that the interests of the city
demand removal, but he shall report the reasons for the removal to the city council at a meeting to be held not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10)
days after the removal. If the mayor fails or refuses to report to the city council the reasons for the removal, or if the city council by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of
all its members authorized by law to be elected, disapproves of the removal, the city administrator thereupon shall be restored to the office from which he
was removed. (Ord. 0-78-01, 1-3-1978)
1-6-3: BOND AND OATH:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city administrator shall furnish a bond in such amount and with such surety as may be approved by the
city council, said bond to be conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties and shall be conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss by reason of
any neglect of duty or any act of the city administrator. The cost of the bond shall be paid by the city.
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city administrator shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by the statutes of the state in such case
provided1. (Ord. 0-78-01, 1-3-1978)
1-6-4: TEMPORARY ABSENCE OR DISABILITY:
During the temporary absence or disability of the city administrator, the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, may designate some
properly qualified person to act as city administrator pro tempore, with all the powers and duties of the office without furnishing any additional bond, if such
appointee shall already be under bond to the city in any other capacity. If such appointment shall be of a person not already under bond to the city, such
appointee shall furnish a bond in such amount and with such surety as may be approved by the city council. The cost of the bond shall be paid by the city.
(Ord. 0-78-01, 1-3-1978)
1-6-5: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
In case of a vacancy in the office of city administrator, the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, may appoint a city administrator pro
tempore who shall possess the powers and duties of the city administrator until such time as a new city administrator is appointed. Such city administrator
pro tempore shall meet the bond requirements of section 1-6-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 0-78-01, 1-3-1978)
1-6-6: COMPENSATION:
The city administrator shall receive compensation in such amount and manner as the mayor and city council may approve from time to time. (Ord. 0-04-33,
7-19-2004, eff. 7-29-2004)
1-6-7: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and shall be responsible to the mayor and city council for the management and
operation of all affairs and departments of the city. As such administrative officer, he shall have the management and control of all matters and things
pertaining to the operation and maintenance of the properties of the city and of all city departments. To that end, he shall have the power and shall be
required to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 13/470
A. Enforce all laws and ordinances within the city.
B. Attend all meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom by the council. The city administrator shall have the right to take part in the discussion
of all matters coming before the city council and shall make recommendations on all matters under his purview, but shall have no right to vote. The city
administrator shall be entitled to notice of all special and regular meetings of the city council.
C. Recommend to the city council adoption of such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient.
D. Appoint, suspend or remove all employees of the city except when such appointive power is vested with the mayor and city council under the statutes of
the state or this code, and the appointment is made in accordance with authorized positions set forth in the annual budget. Such appointments,
suspensions or removals shall be based upon the merit and fitness of such employee, without regard to political belief or affiliation. The city
administrator may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint, suspend or remove subordinates in such department or office.
E. Exercise control of all departments and divisions thereof now in existence, or that may hereafter be created by the city council.
F. Make recommendations to the city council concerning compensation for each appointive office and employee position in the city service.
G. Create, consolidate or reorganize offices, positions, departments, or units of the administrative and executive departments of the city, consistent with
this code.
H. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration, operation and activities of the government of the city and services
maintained by the public utilities in the city and see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed. (Ord. 0-88-53,
10-17-1988)
I. Purchase all materials, supplies and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget, but he may not purchase any item which exceeds any budget
appropriation until the city council has increased the appropriation; provided, that for a purchase above the amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) shall be presented to the city council for approval or rejection. He may issue rules and regulations governing requisitions and the
transaction of the business of purchasing between himself as purchasing agent and the heads of departments, officers and employees of the city. In
case of circumstances creating an emergency, the city administrator may, without the prior consent of the city council, award contracts and make
purchases for the purpose of meeting said emergency; but he shall properly file with the city council a report of such emergency and the necessity of
such action, together with an itemized account of all such expenditures. (Ord. 0-14-27, 11-24-2014)
J. Facilitate the budget officer's preparation of the annual budget, or prepare or cause to be prepared, on or before March 15 of each year, the annual
budget in the event the city administrator is also the budget officer; and prepare, or cause to be prepared, the annual tax levy. (Ord. 0-08-05, 2-19-
2008)
K. Submit to the city council, promptly following the end of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for said
fiscal year.
L. Present to the city council each month a statement showing the exact financial condition of the city as of the end of the preceding month and showing
amounts expended and unexpended balances for each department in accordance with the annual budget. (Ord. 0-88-53, 10-17-1988)
M. Keep a current inventory of all real and personal property of the city and the location of such property. He shall be responsible for the care and custody
of all city property which is not by statute or ordinance assigned to some other officer or body for care and control. The authority to dispose of such
property, without explicit council approval is allowed for assets with a fair market value estimated at five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less. This
authority is limited to an aggregate amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) if several assets are to be disposed of at one time. (Ord.
0-95-04, 1-16-1995)
N. Provide or cause to provide administrative support to all city boards and commissions and make recommendations to the city council and/or boards and
commissions relating to matters of public health, safety or welfare, economic development or general public improvements. Said duties shall not
supersede any authorities vested with the city council, boards or commissions under the statutes of the state or this code.
O. Devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties.
P. Perform such other lawful duties as may be required of him by resolution, ordinance or direction of the city council, or statutes of the state. (Ord. 0-88-
53, 10-17-1988)
Chapter 6A
LEGAL COUNSEL
1-6A-1: POSITIONS CREATED:
There are created the offices of city attorney and city prosecutor, each of whom shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city
council. As used in this chapter, the term "legal counsel" shall mean the city attorney and city prosecutor. The city attorney and the city prosecutor shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 14/470
an individual or law firm licensed to practice law in the state of Illinois. They shall each serve for an indefinite term, their employment to be terminated
either by resignation or by removal by the mayor with the approval of the city council. The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, may
appoint the same individual or law firm to serve in both positions. (Ord. 0-04-09, 2-17-2004, eff. 2-27-2004)
1-6A-2: CITY ATTORNEY; DUTIES:
A. The city attorney shall be the chief legal officer of the city and shall be responsible for all legal matters pertaining to the city. It shall be the duty of the
city attorney to prosecute or defend all suits of any nature which may be begun by or against the city, or in which the city may be an interested party.
He shall see to the enforcement or collection of all judgments, orders and decrees entered in favor of the city. He shall be the legal adviser to the city
council and to the boards and commissions of the city, city administrator or staff. He shall give advice or opinions and perform legal services on any
legal subject upon request of the mayor, council or city administrator. The city attorney shall render opinions on city bond issues. He shall attend all
regular and special meetings of the city council, and assist the council in its deliberations upon the request of any member.
B. The city attorney shall review all contracts, leases, assignments, deeds, or other legal documents entered into or executed by or on behalf of the city
before the same shall be executed, provided that this provision shall not be construed as affecting the legality and validity of any such instrument which
has been executed without the review of the city attorney. (Ord. 0-04-09, 2-17-2004, eff. 2-27-2004)
1-6A-3: CITY PROSECUTOR; DUTIES:
The city prosecutor shall prosecute city ordinance violations and shall cooperate with the various city departments and officers to see to the punishment of
persons violating city ordinances. The city prosecutor shall report to and assist the city attorney upon request of the city attorney. It shall be the further duty
of the city prosecutor to attend city council meetings upon request of the city attorney. (Ord. 0-04-09, 2-17-2004, eff. 2-27-2004)
1-6A-4: ADDITIONAL COUNSEL MAY BE APPOINTED:
The mayor with the advice and consent of the city council may from time to time appoint special counsel to handle certain specific matters or to assist the
city attorney. (Ord. 0-04-09, 2-17-2004, eff. 2-27-2004)
1-6A-5: COMPENSATION, INDEMNIFICATION:
A. Compensation: The city attorney and the city prosecutor shall each receive compensation as may be agreed from time to time between each of them
and the city council.
B. Indemnification: The city of Prospect Heights shall defend, indemnify and hold the legal counsel harmless from any and all claims brought by third
parties against them for acts or omissions arising out of their duties as city attorney or city prosecutor. Claims for wilful and wanton conduct, intentional
torts, or criminal activity shall not be included in this subsection. (Ord. 0-04-09, 2-17-2004, eff. 2-27-2004)
Chapter 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-7-1: COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS, EMPLOYEE SALARIES AND PAY PLAN:
A. Elected Officers:
1. Salaries: Effective with the commencement of the terms of the below elected officers in May 2015, the annual salaries of the following elected
officials of the city shall be as follows:
Mayor $500.00 per month
City clerk 250.00 per month
Aldermen 250.00 per month
City treasurer 250.00 per month
B. Employees; Authorized Positions And Pay Plan:
1. Adoption Of Pay Plan: The city council shall from time to time adopt an ordinance which sets forth the title of each employee position in the city, the
number of authorized positions in each title and the salary range for every employment position in the city and such other information about each title
or position as it deems necessary. Such an ordinance shall be known as the pay plan ordinance.
2. Appointments And Promotions: The city administrator shall appoint, reappoint or promote employees to authorized positions and within the
designated salary range based upon merit performance and subject to the availability of funds in the annual budget.
3. Authority To Hire And Promote: Appointment and promotion of all employees who are not officers shall be done in accordance with section 1-6-7 of
this title except where applicable law places the power of appointment with the mayor, city council or some other body. Appointment of all officers
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 15/470
shall be done in accordance with applicable law.
4. Departments: Except for the police department, and subject to any collective bargaining agreement, the city administrator may organize departments
and employees in accord with subsection 1-6-7G of this title. Accordingly, the city administrator may change the department designation in the
approved pay plan ordinance. Upon any such change, the city administrator shall notify the city council. The department designations shall be
revised to reflect the city administrator's changes whenever the pay plan is updated.
C. Chairman And Board Members Of Plan/Zoning Board Of Appeals: The sums of money set out below shall be paid monthly; provided, that each
individual being paid has attended a minimum of one meeting during said month. The annual salaries of the following appointed officials of the city shall
be as follows:
Chairperson $600.00 ($50.00 per month)
Board member 480.00 ($40.00 per month)
(Ord. 0-15-15, 6-22-2015)
1-7-2: ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-15-15, 6-22-2015)
1-7-3: EXECUTIVE SECRETARY:
(Rep by Ord. 0-15-15, 6-22-2015)
1-7-4: DEPUTY CLERK1:
There is hereby created the office of deputy clerk. The city clerk is hereby authorized to appoint a deputy clerk to have the power and duty to execute all
documents required by any law or ordinance to be executed by the clerk, and affix the seal of the city thereto whenever required. This appointment is to be
made with the advice and consent of the city council.
When signing any documents, the deputy clerk shall sign the name of the city clerk followed by the word "by" and the deputy clerk's own name and the
words "Deputy Clerk".
The powers and duties above described shall be exercised by such deputy clerk only in the absence of the city clerk from his office in the city hall, and
only when either written direction has been given by the city clerk to exercise such power, or the city council has determined by resolution that the city
clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform such function.
Such deputy clerk shall have the authority and power herein described, and such further power and authority as may be provided by statute.
The deputy clerk shall receive such salary as shall be established by the city council. (Ord. 0-76-15, 9-7-1976)
1-7-5: CITY COLLECTOR:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-90-15, 5-21-1990)
1-7-6: CLERICAL SUPERVISOR:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-01-39, 1-7-2002, eff. 1-17-2002)
1-7-7: ASSISTANT CLERICAL SUPERVISOR:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-01-39, 1-7-2002, eff. 1-17-2002)
1-7-8: BOOKKEEPER:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-15-15, 6-22-2015)
1-7-9: CITY ENGINEER:
A. Creation Of Position: There is hereby created the full time position of city engineer. Such employee shall be appointed by the city administrator or, in the
event of a vacancy in the office of city administrator, shall be appointed by the mayor with the concurrence of the city council. The city engineer shall
have the responsibilities of a department head.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 16/470
B. Duties: The city engineer shall supervise and coordinate activities of the engineering department including planning, designing and review of city
construction work and subdivision construction such as roads, drainage, water and sewer installations; shall provide technical assistance to other
departments upon request including the building department, public works department and water department; shall serve as an ex officio member of
the plan/zoning board of appeals and as its technical consultant; and shall accomplish technical and engineering studies at the direction of the mayor,
city administrator or city council. (Ord. 0-86-07, 3-17-1986; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
1-7-10: SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
A. Creation Of Position: There is hereby created the full time employee position of superintendent of public works. Such employee shall be appointed by
the city administrator, or in the event of a vacancy in the office of the city administrator, shall be appointed by the mayor with the concurrence of the city
council. The superintendent of public works shall have the duties and responsibilities of a department head.
B. Duties: The superintendent of public works shall supervise and coordinate all activities of the city public works department, and all activities of the water
department until such time as a separate department head is appointed for the water department. (Ord. 0-86-07, 3-17-1986)
1-7-11: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
A. Creation: There is hereby created the department of public works. Such department shall be supervised by the superintendent of public works or in his
absence, the city administrator.
B. Duties: The department shall be responsible for various maintenance activities of city property, including street maintenance, storm drainage, sanitary
sewers, street signs, maintenance of vehicles, traffic control signs, removal of dead trees, and other activities as assigned.
C. Employees: The public works department shall include the superintendent of public works and other full and part time employees as determined as
being necessary by the city administrator and which shall be within funds available pursuant to the annual budget and city council salary resolution.
D. Equipment: The public works department shall use equipment as provided by the city council in the annual budget. (Ord. 0-84-43, 12-17-1984)
1-7-12: HEALTH INSPECTOR:
A. Creation; Appointment: There is hereby created the position of health inspector which may be a full or part time position as determined by the city
administrator or city budget. Such employee shall be appointed by the city administrator.
B. Qualifications: The health inspector shall have work experience and educational background sufficient to carry out duties as enumerated below.
C. Duties: It shall be the duty of the health inspector to serve at the direction of the city engineer.
1. The nature of these duties is to enforce all city ordinances containing provisions for the protection of public health; to make inspections of foodstuffs
and of the premises used for storing or selling of provisions as may be provided by ordinance including, but not limited to, inspections of food
establishments, banquet facilities, pools, and gas stations. The health inspector shall perform such other duties and functions as may be required by
statute or city ordinance.
2. The health inspector shall be authorized to issue citations for the violation of city ordinances. Unless the health inspector is also a sworn police
officer, the health inspector shall not be authorized to issue criminal citations.
3. The health inspector shall regularly file reports summarizing his or her activities with the city engineer and the city administrator. (Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-
2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
1-7-13: POLICE RECORDS CLERK:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-15-15, 6-22-2015)
1-7-14: ANIMAL WARDEN:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-01-42, 1-7-2002, eff. 1-17-2002)
1-7-15: WATER DEPARTMENT:
A. Department Created: There is hereby created and established a water department to be supervised by the director of public works or his designee,
consisting of such full and part time employees as may be deemed necessary utilizing funds appropriated for employees of the department in the city's
annual budget and city council salary resolution.
B. Responsibility: The water department shall be responsible for the maintenance of the city's water system, and for that purpose, may use any and all
equipment that the city council procures or authorizes in the annual budget of the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 17/470
C. Prohibition Against Connection To System: The water system shall be utilized to service only those facilities as directed by the director of public works
or his designee. Except for other city departments and emergency service departments such as fire districts, no person shall take water from, or
otherwise utilize any fireplug, hydrant, valve, faucet or pipe or any other apparatus or opening connected to the water system except pursuant to the
express written permission of the Director of Public Works or his designee.
D. Installation And Maintenance Of Customer Service Lines And Valves: All customer service lines and valves connecting a City water main to facilities
shall be installed only after plans for such installation are reviewed and approved by the Director of Public Works or his designee. The cost of such
installation shall be borne by the owner or occupier of the facilities serviced, together with any other service fee or connection fee. The connection fee
shall be paid to the City prior to installation of such service line. All installations shall be made under the supervision of the Director of Public Works or
his designee. After installation, the customer shall be responsible for maintenance of the service line from the individual facility to the facility entrance of
the service valve, exclusive of the meter. The remainder of the water system shall be maintained by the City.
E. Meters: At the time the service lines are installed from mains to facilities to be serviced, City water meters shall also be installed in a location that is
readily accessible to City employees and has been approved by the Director of Public Works or his designee prior to the installation of such meters. No
water from the water system shall be turned on to facilities unless approved meters have been installed. Duly authorized City employees shall be
afforded free entry for the purpose of examining, testing, reading or repairing any meters and equipment appurtenant thereto. All meters shall be
owned and maintained by the City. The cost of the initial installation of the meters shall be borne by the owner of the facilities receiving water.
F. Plumbing: No water shall be turned on for service to any facility in which the plumbing does not comply with the ordinances of the City and Illinois
Plumbing Code, subject to the provisions of this section. All plumbing fixtures and methods of installation shall comply with the applicable regulations of
the City.
G. Repairs: As indicated in subsection D of this section, all repairs for customer service lines and plumbing systems of buildings shall be made by and at
the expense of the owners of the premises served. The City may in case of an emergency, repair any service line and if this is done the cost of such
repair work shall be repaid to the City by the owner of the facility served.
H. Excavations: Excavations for installing customer service lines or repairing the same shall be made in compliance with the ordinance provisions relating
to making excavations in City streets. Provided, that it shall be unlawful to place any customer service line in the same excavation with, or directly over,
any drain or sewer pipe. (Ord. 0-07-36, 12-3-2007, eff. 12-14-2007)
I. Water Rates:
1. Metered Usage: Each and every business or residential dwelling unit utilizing the City's water distribution system shall be considered a facility. Any
facility having connection with the City's distribution system that may hereafter be constructed and used in connection with the distribution system
shall pay the following rates per month, effective May 1, 2017:
FY 2016-17 FY 2017-18
Water supply charge per 1,000 gallons $ 6.30 $ 6.51
Monthly customer delivery charge 24.88 26.62
Monthly infrastructure reserve charge 10.93 11.47
Monthly debt service charge 6.19 5.99
Supply charges by the City water supplier will be based on actual billed charges to the City and will be determined on an annual basis. (Ord. 0-17-08, 4-
24-2017)
2. Bulk Water Usage: The use of the City's water system without a permanent meter installed at a given facility constitutes bulk water use and is billed
as follows:
Daily $35.00 (first 1,000 gallons; $6.00/1,000 thereafter)
Weekly $175.00 (first 2,000 gallons; $6.00/1,000 thereafter)
Monthly $756.00 (first 9,000 gallons; $6.00/1,000 thereafter)
J. Billings: Bills for water used will base themselves on monthly meter readings. Such meter readings will occur during the first three (3) business days of
the month. All payments of water used shall be due thirty (30) days after the billing date as it appears on the bill. Late payments shall carry a penalty of
an additional ten percent (10%). Payments overdue for more than thirty (30) days past the deadline will incur a monthly interest charge of one percent
(1%), compounded monthly. The water supply may be shut off from any facility for which the water bill remains unpaid for a period of ninety (90) days
after the due date. When shut off, water shall not be turned on except upon the payment in full of the overdue water bill and a fee, if any, established by
ordinance or resolution of the city.
K. Liens: Charges for water shall be a lien upon the facility as provided by statute. Whenever a bill for water service remains unpaid for a period of sixty
(60) days after it has been rendered, the city clerk may file with the recorder of Cook County a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the
legal description of the facility served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges for
water served subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 18/470
If the consumer of water whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the serviced facility, and the city clerk has notice thereof, the notice shall be mailed to
the owner of the facility if his address is known to the city clerk, whenever such bill remains unpaid for a period of sixty (60) days after it has been
rendered.
The failure of the city clerk to record such lien claim or to mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid water bills as mentioned in subsection L of this section.
L. Foreclosure Of Liens: A facility subject to a lien for unpaid water charges shall be sold for the nonpayment of same, and the proceeds of such sale shall
be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by an action in equity
in the name of the city.
M. Resale: No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the water system to any facilities other than that for which application has
been made and the meter installed, except in case of emergency.
N. Waiver Of Liability: All connections to the water system shall be authorized only after the owner or user of the facilities shall execute an agreement
holding the city harmless from any and all liability that may result from any damage or injury caused by reason of the breaking of any main, service
pipe, or the breakage or malfunction of any part of the water system, or any interruption in the supply of water for any reason whatever.
O. Connection Fee: Owners or operators of facilities to be serviced by the water system shall pay a connection fee as determined by appropriate
resolution or ordinance of the city council (unless otherwise lawfully exempted from the payment of this connection fee by the provisions of other
agreements applicable to such facilities). Whenever a connection to the water system is abandoned because the facilities to which the water
connection is made have been abandoned, destroyed or removed, the water department at the direction of the director of public works may cause the
removal of the meter and any pipe or connections in the public way or easement, and cap, plug or otherwise seal the pipe or main. Except in
emergency situations as determined by the director of public works, before taking any such steps, the director of public works or his designee shall
notify the owner of the facility if the owner's name and address is known, and shall notify the person shown on the latest available real estate tax
records as having paid taxes on the facility. Notice shall be made by first class mail, at least thirty (30) days before any action is taken under this
section.
P. Construction Contractors: No person shall make any connection to the water system without the permission of the director of public works. During the
construction of any building and before any meter is installed, as is herein provided, the contractor so constructing such building may be permitted to
use the city water supply by making application therefor, and paying a charge for bulk water usage as specified in subsection I2 of this section.
Q. Larceny Charges: Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as prohibiting institution of larceny charges against any person stealing water from the city
by bypassing a meter, tampering with a meter or by any other means. (Ord. 0-07-36, 12-3-2007, eff. 12-14-2007)
1-7-16: DEPARTMENT HEADS, RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Appointment: The city administrator shall have the authority to hire or dismiss all employee department heads.
B. Duties: Department heads shall be responsible for the administrative and technical direction of their departments, including supervision of personnel
assigned to their departments, preparation of personnel reviews and evaluations, preparation of budgets, maintenance of fiscal and financial
performance records, coordination and liaison with the appropriate city council (oversight) committees, and day to day direction of department
activities.
The city administrator shall retain final authority in all administrative matters and shall have the authority to assume responsibility for technical direction
of any department when he (or she) deems it to be in the best interests of the city.
C. Authorized Departments: The departments which shall have employee department heads are the administrative department, public works department,
engineering department and water department. (Ord. 0-86-07, 3-17-1986)
1-7-17: CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
A. Creation; Appointment: There is hereby created the full time employee position of code enforcement officer. Such employee shall be hired by the city
administrator.
B. Duties: It shall be the duty of the code enforcement officer to enforce all state statutes and city codes including building, zoning, subdivision, flood
control and property maintenance; to make inspections of building or structure construction; and in addition, shall include such other duties as may be
assigned by the city administrator. (Ord. 0-88-07, 3-7-1988)
1-7-18: PLUMBING OFFICIAL; ASSISTANT PLUMBING OFFICIAL:
A. Plumbing Official:
1. Creation; Appointment: There is hereby created the office of plumbing official. The office shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the advice and
consent of the council.
2. Qualifications: The plumbing official shall have work experience and educational background sufficient to carry out duties as enumerated below. The
plumbing official must maintain an Illinois state plumber's license while serving in this capacity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 19/470
3. Duties: It shall be the duty of the plumbing official to schedule inspections at the direction of the building/code enforcement department. The nature
of these duties is:
a. Inspect for compliance with local ordinances.
b. Schedule follow up inspections as conditions on the job site merit.
c. File a report summarizing each inspection with the building/code enforcement department.
4. Compensation: The plumbing official's compensation will be enumerated per contract.
5. Relationship: Although the plumbing official is a city official, this office by no means confers employment status to the individual. Consequently, the
plumbing official is ineligible for employment benefits from the city. (Ord. 0-95-54, 11-6-1995)
B. Assistant Plumbing Official:
1. Creation; Appointment: There is hereby created the office of assistant plumbing official. The office shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the
advice and consent of the council. The plumbing official will recommend candidates for the office to the mayor.
2. Qualifications: The assistant plumbing official shall have work experience and educational background sufficient to carry out duties as enumerated
below. Additionally, the assistant plumbing official must maintain an Illinois plumbing license.
3. Duties: It shall be the duty of the assistant plumbing official to serve at the direction of the plumbing official. The nature of these duties is:
a. Inspect for compliance with local ordinances.
b. Schedule follow up inspections as conditions on the job site merit.
c. File a report summarizing each inspection with the plumbing official.
4. Compensation: The assistant plumbing official's compensation will be enumerated per contract.
5. Relationship: Although the assistant plumbing official is a city official, this office by no means confers employment status to the individual.
Consequently, the assistant plumbing official is ineligible for employment benefits from the city. (Ord. 0-95-55, 11-6-1995)
1-7-19: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; ASSISTANT ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
A. Electrical Inspector:
1. Creation; Appointment: There is hereby created the office of electrical inspector. The office shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the advice
and consent of the council.
2. Qualifications: The electrical inspector shall have work experience and educational background sufficient to carry out duties as enumerated below.
3. Duties: It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to schedule inspections at the direction of the building/code enforcement department. The
nature of these duties is:
a. Inspect for compliance with local ordinances.
b. Schedule follow up inspections as conditions on the job site merit.
c. File a report summarizing each inspection with the building/code enforcement department.
4. Compensation: The electrical inspector's compensation is enumerated per contract with the city.
5. Relationship: Although the electrical inspection is a city official, this office by no means confers employment status to the individual. Consequently,
the electrical inspector is ineligible for employment benefits from the city. (Ord. 0-95-56, 11-6-1995)
B. Assistant Electrical Inspector:
1. Creation; Appointment: There is hereby created the office of assistant electrical inspector. The office shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the
advice and consent of the council. The electrical inspector will recommend candidates for the office to the mayor.
2. Qualifications: The assistant electrical inspector shall have work experience and educational background sufficient to carry out duties as enumerated
below.
3. Duties: It shall be the duty of the assistant electrical inspector to serve at the direction of the electrical inspector. The nature of these duties is:
a. Inspect for compliance with local ordinances.
b. Schedule follow up inspections as conditions on the job site merit.
c. File a report summarizing each inspection with the electrical inspector.
4. Compensation: The assistant electrical inspector's compensation is enumerated per contract with the city.
5. Relationship: Although the assistant electrical inspection is a city official, this office by no means confers employment status to the individual.
Consequently, the assistant electrical inspector is ineligible for employment benefits from the city. (Ord. 0-95-57, 11-6-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 20/470
Chapter 8
PERSONNEL REGULATIONS
1-8-1: ADOPTION OF EMPLOYEE MANUAL:
That certain document, two (2) copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, being marked and designated as the Employee Manual of the City
of Prospect Heights, December 1986, and as amended June 1994, be and is hereby adopted as the Employee Manual of the City for the control of
employee work rules and benefits and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the Employee Manual are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Chapter. (Ord. 0-94-26, 6-20-1994)
1-8-2: EMPLOYEE SERVICE AWARD PLAN:
The City rewards employee tenure with longevity pay. As a reward for length of continuous City service and as an incentive to continue that service,
employees in grades one through twenty five (25) will receive the following benefits paid once a year on a separate check, normally November 1.
Employed less than 5 years No benefit
Employed 5 through 9 years $ 250.00 benefit
Employed 10 through 14 years 500.00 benefit
Employed 15 through 19 years 750.00 benefit
Employed 20 years or more 1,000.00 benefit
(Ord. 0-96-36, 7-15-1996, eff. 7-25-1996)
Chapter 9
ELECTION WARDS
1-9-1: ELECTION WARDS DESIGNATED:
The City is hereby divided into five (5) wards described as follows:
Ward 1 shall consist of:
All that part of the City located Easterly of a line beginning at the point of intersection of the centerline extended East of Apple Drive and the
centerline of Milwaukee Road, thence Southeasterly along said centerline of Milwaukee Road to its intersection with the centerline of Des Plaines
River Road, thence Southwesterly along said centerline of said Des Plaines River Road to its point of intersection with Old Willow Road; and all that
part of the City located Westerly of the above described line, bounded on the North by Apple Drive, on the South by Old Willow Road and on the
West by Burning Bush Lane.
Ward 2 shall consist of:
All that part of the City located South of Camp McDonald Road, and East of Wheeling Road; and all that part of the City located North of Camp
McDonald Road, East of Wolf Road, South of Old Willow Road; and all that part of the City known as Evergreen Glen Apartments.
Ward 3 shall consist of:
All that part of the City located North of Palatine Road and West of Wheeling Road; and all that part of the City located South of Palatine Road, West
of Wolf Road, North of Willow Road as extended East and East of Windsor Drive.
Ward 4 shall consist of:
All that part of the City located South of Willow Road as extended East, West of Wolf Road, and North of Camp McDonald Road; and all that part of
the City located South of Camp McDonald Road, West of Wheeling Road; and that portion of the City North of East Thomas Avenue, West of
Windsor Drive, including lots 19 through 21, and lots 86 through 91.
Ward 5 shall consist of:
All that part of the City located North of Palatine Road, East of Wolf Road; and all that part of the City located South of Palatine Road, West of
Milwaukee Road, East of Burning Bush Lane, and North of Apple Drive; and all that part of the City located South of Palatine Road, West of Burning
Bush Lane, East of Wolf Road, and North of Old Willow Road, excluding all of that part of the City known as Evergreen Glen Apartments.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 21/470
Wards 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 described herein are delineated on the map attached to Ordinance 0-92-40 on file in the office of the City Clerk as Exhibit "A" and
by reference made a part hereof. (Ord. 0-92-40, 10-5-1992)
1-9-2: REDISTRICTING OF WARDS:
In the event there is a redistricting of the wards of the City, and such redistricting does not result in an increase or decrease in the number of wards, the
next City election shall be held in accordance with the new redistricting. At such election, Aldermen whose terms of office are not expiring shall be
considered Aldermen for the new wards respectively in which their residences are situated. If there are two (2) or more Aldermen with terms of office not
expiring and residing in the same ward under the new redistricting, the Aldermen who holds over for each such ward shall be determined by lot in the
presence of the City Council, in whatever manner the Council shall direct, and all other such Aldermen shall fill their own unexpired terms as Aldermen-atlarge.
The Aldermen-at-large, if any, shall have the same powers and duties as all other Aldermen, but upon the expiration of their terms, the offices of
Aldermen-at-large shall be abolished. If the redistricting results in one or more wards in which no Aldermen reside whose terms of office have not expired,
one Alderman shall be elected for a four (4) year term from each such ward in the same manner as from any other ward. At the second general election for
the election of Aldermen succeeding the redistricting, a second Alderman shall be elected for a four (4) year term from each such ward from which no
Alderman, whose term of office had not expired, resided as a result of said redistricting. (Ord. 0-82-32, 11-1-1982)
Chapter 10
ORDINANCES
1-10-1: STYLE OF ORDINANCES:
The style of all ordinances shall be: "Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of Prospect Heights", as is provided by statute1. (Ord. 0-76-06, 6-21-
1976)
1-10-2: CALL FOR VOTES:
The ayes and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances, on all propositions to create any liability against the City, or for the expenditure or
appropriation of its money, and in all other cases at the request of any member of the Council; and such vote shall be entered on the journal of the
proceedings, as is provided by statute. (Ord. 0-76-06, 6-21-1976)
1-10-3: FIRST READINGS OF ORDINANCES:
Every ordinance shall be read when introduced and lay over until the next regular meeting of the City Council; provided, that this rule may be suspended
and an ordinance read and passed at the same meeting of the Council at which it is introduced only by the concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of all the
Aldermen elected, by a roll call vote. (Ord. 0-78-10, 3-6-1978)
1-10-4: APPROVAL OR VETO:
All ordinances passed by the City Council, before they take effect, shall be deposited with the City Clerk, and if the Mayor approves thereof, he shall sign
the same, and such as he shall not approve, he shall return to the Council with his objections thereto in writing at the next regular meeting occurring not
less than five (5) days after the passage thereof. Such veto may extend to any one or more items or appropriations contained in any ordinance making an
appropriation, or to the entire ordinance; and in case the veto only extends to a part of such ordinance, the residue thereof shall take effect and be in force.
But in case the Mayor shall fail to return any ordinance with his objections thereto by the time aforesaid, he shall be deemed to have approved such
ordinances and the same shall take effect accordingly.
Upon the return of any ordinance by the Mayor, the vote by which the same was passed shall be reconsidered by the Council; and if, after such
reconsideration, two-thirds (2/3) of all the Aldermen elected to the Council shall agree, by ayes and nays, to pass the same, it shall go into effect
notwithstanding the Mayor's refusal to approve the same. (Ord. 0-76-06, 6-21-1976)
1-10-5: RECORD OF ORDINANCES:
The City Clerk shall keep a record of all ordinances passed in an ordinance book for such purpose. (Ord. 0-76-06, 6-21-1976)
1-10-6: PUBLICATION:
All ordinances imposing any penalty for a violation thereof or making any appropriation shall be published as required by statute2, either in a newspaper or
in pamphlet form, in which case, the ordinance in its pamphlet form shall be displayed for a reasonable period in a public place in the City Hall. (Ord. 0-76-
06, 6-21-1976)
1-10-7: TIME OF TAKING EFFECT:
No ordinance which must be published to comply with the foregoing Section shall go into effect until ten (10) days after it is so published, unless a
statement of the urgency of the ordinance is contained therein and such ordinance achieves passage by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 22/470
corporate authorities then holding office. In all other cases, the ordinances shall go into effect upon the passage thereof, as provided by statute, even
though the operation of the ordinance may not take effect until a later date. (Ord. 0-76-06, 6-21-1976)
Chapter 11
CITY FINANCES
1-11-1: DEPOSITORIES FOR CITY FUNDS:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-89-02, 2-24-1989)
1-11-2: SIGNATURES ON CHECKS:
All checks drawn on funds of the City shall be signed by any two (2) of the following persons:
City Administrator
City Clerk
Mayor
Police Chief
Treasurer
(Ord. 0-17-18, 6-26-2017)
1-11-3: CITY TREASURER:
A. Duties: It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer or his designee to collect and receive all money due to the City, including money due on special
assessments, special taxes and fees for permits or licenses, and to keep such records pertaining to such collections as may be required by statute or
ordinance.
B. Deposit Of Receipts: The City Treasurer or his designee shall deposit, at least once each week, or more frequently if required by the Council, all money
collected from any source whatever, in accordance with section 1-11-4 of this chapter.
C. Reports: The City Treasurer shall make such reports regarding delinquent special assessments as are required by statute, and shall make a monthly
report to the City Council, showing what money has been received and the source thereof.
The Treasurer shall also make an annual report, during the last month of the fiscal year, showing all the activities of the Office of City Treasurer.
D. Absence Of City Treasurer: In the event that the Office of City Treasurer is vacant, the Mayor shall appoint, with the concurrence by the City Council, an
interim custodian of the funds of the City, with all the powers and duties of the office. (Ord. 0-90-15, 5-21-1990)
1-11-4: INVESTMENT OF FUNDS:
A. Definitions:
AGENCIES: Federal agency securities.
ASKED: The price at which securities are offered.
BANKERS' ACCEPTANCE (BA): A draft or bill or exchange accepted by a bank or trust company. The accepting institution guarantees payment of
the bill, as well as the issuer.
BID: The price offered for securities.
BROKER: A broker brings buyers and sellers together for a commission paid by the initiator of the transaction or by both sides; he does not position
(take ownership of securities). In the money market, brokers are active in markets in which banks buy and sell money and in interdealer markets.
CERTIFICATE OF DEPOSIT (CD): A time deposit with a specific maturity evidenced by a certificate. Large denomination CDs are typically
negotiable.
COLLATERAL: Securities, evidence of deposit or other property which a borrower pledges to secure repayment of a loan. Also refers to securities
pledged by a bank to secure deposits of public monies.
COMPREHENSIVE ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT (CAFR): The official annual report for the City of Prospect Heights. It includes five (5) combined
statements and basic financial statements for each individual fund and account group prepared in conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles. It also includes supporting schedules necessary to demonstrate compliance with finance-related legal and contractual provisions,
extensive introductory material, and a detailed statistical section.
COUPON: 1. The annual rate of interest that a bond's issuer promises to pay the bondholder on the bond's face value.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 23/470
2. A certificate attached to a bond evidencing interest due on a payment date.
DEALER: A dealer, as opposed to a broker, acts as a principal in all transactions, buying and selling securities from an inventory on hand.
DEBENTURE: A bond secured only by the general credit of the issuer. When the City issues bonds of this type they are termed general obligation
(GO).
DELIVERY VERSUS PAYMENT: There are two (2) methods of delivery of securities: delivery versus payment and delivery versus receipt (also called
free). Delivery versus payment is delivery of securities with an exchange of money for the securities. Delivery versus receipt is delivery of securities
with an exchange of a signed receipt for the securities.
DISCOUNT: The difference between the cost price of a security and its value at maturity when quoted at lower than face value. A security selling
below original offering price shortly after sale also is considered to be a discount.
DISCOUNT SECURITIES: Noninterest bearing money market instruments that are issued at a discount and redeemed at maturity for full face value;
e.g., U.S. Treasury bills, zero coupon bonds.
DIVERSIFICATION: Dividing investment funds among a variety of securities offering independent returns. The purpose of diversification is to
minimize risk from default or market fluctuations.
FEDERAL CREDIT AGENCIES: Agencies of the Federal Government set up to supply credit to various classes of institutions and individuals; e.g., S
& Ls, small business firms, students, farmers, farm cooperatives, and exporters.
FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION (FDIC): A Federal agency that insures bank deposits, currently up to one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) per depositor.
FEDERAL FUNDS RATE: The rate of interest at which Federal funds are traded. This rate is currently pegged by the Federal Reserve through openmarket
operations, and is regarded as a very short-term index for interest rates.
FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANKS (FHLB): The institutions that regulate and lend to savings and loan associations. The Federal home loan banks
play a role analogous to that played by the Federal Reserve banks vis--vis member commercial banks.
FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION (FNMA): FNMA, like GNMAS was chartered under the Federal National Mortgage Association
Act in 1938. FNMA is a Federal corporation working under the auspices of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, HUD. It is the largest
single provider of residential mortgage funds in the United States. Fannie Mae, as the corporation is called, is a private stockholder-owned
corporation. The corporation's purchases include a variety of adjustable mortgages and second loans in addition to fixed-rate mortgages. FNMA's
securities are also highly liquid and are widely accepted. FNMA assumes and guarantees that all security holders will receive timely payment of
principal and interest.
FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE (FOMC): Consists of seven (7) members of the Federal Reserve Board and five (5) of the twelve (12)
Federal Reserve bank presidents. The president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank is a permanent member while the other presidents serve on
a rotating basis. The committee periodically meets to set Federal Reserve guidelines regarding purchases and sales of government securities in the
open market as a means of influencing the volume of bank credit, money, and ultimately, interest rates.
FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM: The central bank of the United States created by Congress and consisting of a seven (7) member board of
governors in Washington D.C., twelve (12) regional banks and about five thousand seven hundred (5,700) commercial banks that are members of
the System.
GOVERNMENT NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION (GNMA OR GINNIE MAE): Securities guaranteed by GNMA and issued by mortgage
bankers, commercial banks, savings and loan associations, and other institutions. Security holder is protected by full faith and credit of the U.S.
Government. Ginnie Mae securities are backed by FHA, VA or FMHM mortgages. The term pass-throughs is often used to describe Ginnie Maes.
REPURCHASE AGREEMENT (RP OR REPO): A holder of securities sells these securities to an investor with an agreement to repurchase them at a
fixed price on a fixed date. The security "buyer" in effect lends the "seller" money for the period of the agreement, and the terms of the agreement
are structures to compensate him for this. Dealers use RP extensively to finance their positions. Exception: When the Fed is said to be doing RP, it is
lending money; that is, increasing bank reserves.
SAFEKEEPING: A service to customers rendered by banks for a fee whereby securities and valuables of all types and descriptions are held in the
bank's vaults for protection.
SEC RULE 15C3-1: See definition of Uniform Net Capital Rule in this subsection.
SECONDARY MARKET: A market made for the purchase and sale of outstanding issues following the initial distribution.
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION: Agency created by Congress to protect investors in securities transactions by administering
securities legislation.
TREASURY BILLS: A noninterest-bearing discount security issued by the U.S. Treasury to finance the national debt. Most bills are issued to mature
in three (3) months, six (6) months or one year. Although the security does not bear an interest rate, a return is determinable. Treasury bills are sold
below face value and reach face value upon maturity.
TREASURY BOND: Long-term U.S. Treasury securities having initial maturities of more than ten (10) years.
TREASURY NOTES: Intermediate term coupon bearing U.S. Treasury securities having initial maturities of from one to ten (10) years.
UNIFORM NET CAPITAL RULE: Securities and Exchange Commission requirement that member firms as well as nonmember broker/dealers in
securities maintain a maximum ratio of indebtedness to liquid capital of fifteen to one (15:1): also called "net capital rule" and "net capital ratio".
Indebtedness covers all money owed to a firm, including margin loans and commitments to purchase securities, one reason new public issues are
spread among members of underwriting syndicates. Liquid capital includes cash and assets easily converted into cash.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 24/470
YIELD: The rate of annual income return on an investment, expressed as a percentage.
Income Yield: Is obtained by dividing the current dollar income by the current market price for the security.
Net Yield Or Yield To Maturity: Is the current income yield minus any premium above par or plus any discount from par in purchase price, with the
adjustment spread over the period from the date of purchase to the date of maturity of the bond.
B. Policy: It is the policy of the City to invest public funds in a manner which will provide the highest investment return with the maximum investment
security. This policy will meet the daily cash flow demands of the City and conform to all State and local statutes governing the investment of public
funds.
C. Scope: This investment policy applies to all financial assets of the City. These funds are accounted for in the City's Comprehensive Annual Financial
Report and include:
1. Funds:
Capital project funds
Debt service funds
Enterprise funds
General Fund
Retirement/pension funds
Special revenue funds
Trust and agency funds
D. Prudence:
1. Investments: Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing; which persons of prudence, discretion and
intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their capital as
well as the probable income to be derived.
2. Standard Of Prudence: The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall be the "prudent person" standard and shall be applied in
the context of managing an overall portfolio. Investment officers acting in accordance with written procedures and the investment policy and
exercising due diligence shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security's credit risk or market price changes, provided
deviations from expectations are reported in a timely fashion and appropriate action is taken to control adverse developments.
E. Objective: The primary objectives, in priority order, of the City investment activities shall be:
1. Safety: Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the investment program. Investments of the City shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to
ensure the preservation of capital in the overall portfolio. To attain this objective, diversification is required in order that potential losses on individual
securities do not exceed the income generated from the remainder of the portfolio.
2. Liquidity: The City's investment portfolio will remain sufficiently liquid to enable the City to meet all operating requirements.
3. Return On Investment: The City's investment portfolio shall be designed with the objective of attaining a market rate of return throughout budgetary
and economic cycles, taking into account the City's investment risk constraints and the cash flow characteristics of the portfolio.
F. Delegation Of Authority: Management responsibility for the investment program is hereby delegated jointly to the City Treasurer and Finance Director
who shall establish written procedures for the operation of the investment program consistent with this investment policy. Procedures should include
reference to: safekeeping, PSA repurchase agreements, wire transfer agreements, collateral/depository agreements and banking service contracts.
Such procedures shall include explicit delegation of authority to persons responsible for investment transactions. No person may engage in an
investment transaction except as provided under the terms of this policy and the procedures established by the City Treasurer and Finance Director.
The City Treasurer and Finance Director shall be responsible for all transactions undertaken and shall establish a system of controls to regulate the
activities of subordinate officials.
G. Ethics And Conflicts Of Interest: Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from personal business activity that could
conflict with the proper execution of the investment program, or which could impair their ability to make impartial investment decisions. Employees and
investment officials shall disclose to the City Administrator any material financial interests in financial institutions that conduct business within this
jurisdiction, and they shall further disclose any large personal financial/investment positions that could be related to the performance of the City's
portfolio. Employees and officers shall subordinate their personal investment transactions to those of the City, particularly with regard to the time of
purchases and sales.
H. Authorized Financial Dealers And Institutions:
1. The Treasurer will maintain a list of financial institutions authorized to provide investment services. In addition, a list will also be maintained of
approved security broker/dealers selected by credit worthiness who are authorized to provide investment services in the State. These may include
"primary" dealers or regional dealers that qualify under Securities And Exchange Commission Rule 15C3-1. No public deposit shall be made except
in a qualified public depository as established by State laws.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 25/470
2. All financial institutions and broker/dealers who desire to become qualified bidders for investment transactions must supply the Treasurer with the
following: audited financial statements, proof of National Association of Security Dealers certification, proof of State registration.
3. An annual review of the financial condition and registrations of qualified bidders will be conducted by the Treasurer.
4. A current audited financial statement is required to be on file for each financial institution and broker/dealer in which the City invests.
I. Authorized And Suitable Investments: The City is empowered by statute to invest in the following types of securities:
Insured commercial banks,
Savings and loan institutions,
Obligations of the U.S. Treasury and U.S. agencies,
Insured credit union shares,
Money market mutual funds with portfolios of securities issued or guaranteed by the United States or agreements to repurchase these same
obligations,
Repurchase agreements,
Short-term commercial paper rated within the three (3) highest classifications by at least two (2) standard rating services, and
The Illinois Public Treasurer's Investment Pool.
J. Collateralization:
1. Collateralization will be required on two (2) types of investments: certificates of deposit and repurchase (and reverse) agreements. In order to
anticipate market changes and provide a level of security for all funds, the collateralization level will be one hundred ten percent (110%) of market
value of principal and accrued interest.
2. Collateral will always be held by an independent third party with whom the City has a current custodial agreement. A clearly marked evidence of
ownership (safekeeping receipt) must be supplied to the City and retained.
3. The right of collateral substitution is granted.
K. Safekeeping And Custody: All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase agreements, entered into by the City shall be conducted on a
delivery versus payment (DVP) basis. Securities will be held by a third party custodian approved by the treasurer and evidenced by safekeeping
receipts.
L. Diversification: The city will diversify its investments by security type and institution. With the exception of U.S. treasury securities and authorized pools,
no more than fifty percent (50%) of the city's total investment portfolio will be invested in a single security type or with a single financial institution.
M. Maximum Maturities: To the extent possible, the city will attempt to match its investments with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a
specific cash flow, the city will not directly invest in securities maturing more than three (3) years from the date of purchase. However, the city may
collateralize its repurchase agreements using longer dated investments not to exceed thirty (30) years to maturity.
Reserve funds may be invested in securities of three (3) years maturity or less, if the maturity of such investments are made to coincide as nearly as
practicable with the expected use of the funds.
N. Internal Control: The city treasurer and finance director shall establish an annual process of independent review by an external auditor. This review will
provide internal control by assuring compliance with policies and procedures.
O. Performance Standards: The investment portfolio will be designed to obtain a market average rate of return during budgetary and economic cycles,
taking into account the city's investment risk constraints and cash flow needs.
1. Market Yield (Benchmark): The city's investment strategy is passive. Given this strategy, the basis used by the treasurer to determine whether
market yields are being achieved shall be the three (3) month U.S. treasury bill. (Ord. 0-96-89, 11-18-1996, eff. 11-28-1996)
P. Reporting Requirements: Quarterly written reports of investment activities by the public agency's chief financial officer for submission to the governing
body and chief executive officer of the public agency. The reports shall include information regarding securities in the portfolio by class or type, book
value, income earned, and market value as of the report date. (Ord. 0-99-36, 12-20-1999, eff. 1-4-2000)
Q. Investment Policy Adoption: The city's investment policy shall be adopted by resolution of the city's legislative authority. The policy shall be reviewed on
an annual basis by the finance committee and any modifications made thereto must be approved by the city council. (Ord. 0-96-89, 11-18-1996, eff. 11-
28-1996)
R. Authorized Advisors/Money Managers: This policy requires that investment advisors possess the following qualifications:
1. Minimum five (5) years' continuous service for municipal clients.
2. Minimum three (3) years' municipal clients as current references.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 26/470
3. Minimum licensing and certification as accepted in the industry for the service engaged.
S. Ethics And Conflicts Of Interest: Investment advisors and money managers must adhere to a minimum level of standards consistent with the
Association For Investment Management And Research Code Of Ethics. If a more stringent regulation applies under an advisor's or manager's
certification standard, than this policy dictates as the ethical benchmark. (Ord. 0-99-36, 12-20-1999, eff. 1-4-2000)
1-11-5: PUBLIC HEARINGS FEES:
A fee schedule for public hearings before the plan/zoning board of appeals is provided for in section 5-10-14 of this code. (Ord. 0-96-55, 7-15-1996, eff. 7-
25-1996; amd. Ord. 0-03-18, 6-2-2003, eff. 6-12-2003; Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
1-11-6: PUBLIC WORKS; WAGE RATES:
A. To the extent and as required by "an act regulating wages of laborers, mechanics and other workers employed in any public works by the state, county,
city or any public body or any political subdivision or by any one under contract for public works", approved June 26, 1941, as amended1, the general
prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other workers engaged in construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction
of the city of Prospect Heights is hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for construction work in the Cook County area as
determined by the department of labor of the state of Illinois as of June of the current year, a copy of that determination being attached to the ordinance
codified herein and incorporated herein by reference. As required by said act, any and all revisions of the prevailing rate of wages by the department of
labor of the state of Illinois shall supersede the department's June determination and apply to any and all public works construction undertaken by the
city of Prospect Heights. The definition of any terms appearing in this section which are also used in aforesaid act shall be the same as in said act.
B. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except
public works construction of the city of Prospect Heights to the extent required by the aforesaid act.
C. The city clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by any interested party in the city hall of the city of Prospect Heights this determination
or any revisions of such prevailing rate of wage. A copy of this determination or of the current revised determination of prevailing rate of wages then in
effect shall be attached to all contract specifications.
D. The city clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any employer, and to any association of employers and to any person or association of
employees who have filed their names and addresses, requesting copies of any determination stating the particular rates and the particular class of
workers whose wages will be affected by such rates.
E. The city clerk shall promptly file a certified copy of the ordinance codified herein with both the secretary of state index division and the department of
labor of the state of Illinois.
F. The city clerk shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the area a copy of the ordinance codified herein, and such
publication shall constitute notice that the determination is effective and that this is the determination of this body. (Ord. 0-08-25, 6-16-2008, eff. 6-27-
2008)
1-11-7: PENALTIES:
A. In the event that payment is not made within ninety (90) days of the original issue date, an additional cost of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be assessed to
defray the cost of collection.
B. Nothing therein contained shall prevent the filing of a complaint in the first instance in the circuit court of Cook County and the payment of any fine and
costs, which shall be determined and established by the circuit court. (Ord. 0-95-06, 2-6-1995)
1-11-8: CITY EMERGENCY RESERVES:
A. A reserve account shall be established in the initial amount of seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000.00) to be maintained in a separate bank
account named "city emergency reserves". Any and all earnings on the amounts in the city emergency reserves account shall remain in said account.
No other city funds will be commingled with the funds and earnings thereon residing in the city emergency reserves account. The funds and earnings
shall be invested as provided in section 1-11-4 of this chapter.
B. The addition of any funds or the removal of any funds or earnings residing in the city emergency reserves account shall be approved by a majority of all
members then holding office on the city council, including the mayor.
C. The payback of borrowed funds will be accomplished in a timely manner as soon as it is possible. (Ord. 0-02-16, 8-19-2002, eff. 8-29-2002)
1-11-9: TAX RATE:
The aggregate general ad valorem property tax levied by the city exclusive of the amount levied for the payment of bonded indebtedness, or interest
thereon, and exclusive of taxes levied for the payment of judgments, for which a special tax is authorized by law, and exclusive of the amounts levied for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 27/470
the purposes of pension funds, and exclusive of the amount levied as part of any special service area, shall not exceed the rate of 0.15 percent ($0.15 per
$100.00) upon the aggregate valuation of all property within the municipality subject to taxation therein, as the property is equalized or assessed by the
department of revenue for the current year. Provided, the interpretation and application of this section shall be within the sole discretion of the city council
which decision shall be final. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the foregoing provisions of this section, any ordinance or resolution hereafter
adopted by action of the city council shall not be invalidated, impaired or affected in any way by noncompliance or alleged noncompliance with any one or
more provisions of this section. (Ord. 0-03-55, 1-5-2004, eff. 1-15-2004)
1-11-10: BAIL PROCESSING FEE:
An administrative bail processing fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be imposed upon any person arrested and charged with a violation of any bailable
city of Prospect Heights ordinance, state or federal law. The bail processing fee shall be collected when such person posts bail or bond. (Ord. 0-13-20, 10-
28-2013)
Chapter 11A
ANNUAL BUDGET AND BUDGET OFFICER
1-11A-1: BUDGET OFFICER:
A. There is created hereby the position of budget officer in the city of Prospect Heights, who shall be designated by the mayor with the approval of the city
council.
B. The budget officer may hold another municipal office, either elected or appointed, and may receive the compensation established from time to time by
the mayor and city council of the city for both offices. Such budget officer shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor.
C. Before entering upon the duties of this office, the budget officer shall take oath and post bond as provided by statute. (Ord. 0-08-05, 2-19-2008)
1-11A-2: POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUDGET OFFICER:
A. The budget officer shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To permit, encourage, and establish the efficient planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting, and other fiscal management procedures in all
municipal departments, commissions, and boards;
2. To compile an annual budget;
3. To examine all books and records of all city departments, commissions, and boards which relate to monies received and paid out by the city, its
departments, commissions, and boards and debts and accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to the city, its departments, commissions, and
boards;
4. To obtain such additional information from the city, its departments, commissions, and boards as may be useful for purposes of compiling a
municipal budget, such information to be furnished by the city, its departments, commissions, and boards in the form required by the budget officer;
and
5. To establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no expenditures are made by the city, its departments, commissions, or boards
except as authorized by the budget. (Ord. 0-08-05, 2-19-2008)
1-11A-3: COMPILATION AND CONTENTS OF BUDGET:
The budget officer shall compile a budget which contains estimates of revenues available to the city for the fiscal year for which the budget is drafted,
together with recommended expenditures for the city and all of its departments, commissions, and boards. Revenue estimates and expenditure
recommendations shall be presented in a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal management practices. Substantial conformity to a chart of
accounts recommended by the National Committee On Governmental Accounting, the auditor of public accounts of the state of Illinois, or the division of
local government affairs and property taxes of the department of revenue of the state of Illinois or successor agencies thereof shall be deemed proof of
such conformity. The budget shall contain actual or estimated revenues and expenditures for the two (2) years immediately preceding the fiscal year for
which the budget is prepared. So far as is possible, the fiscal data for such two (2) preceding fiscal years shall be itemized in the manner which is in
conformity with the chart of accounts recommended above. Each budget shall show the specific fund from which each anticipated expenditure shall be
made. (Ord. 0-08-05, 2-19-2008)
1-11A-4: PASSAGE OF ANNUAL BUDGET; EFFECT:
A. Passage of the annual budget by adoption of an appropriate ordinance by the corporate authorities shall be in lieu of passage of the appropriation
ordinance as required by statute.
B. The annual budget shall be published in the manner provided for in section 1-11A-8 of this chapter.
C. The annual budget shall be adopted by the corporate authorities before the beginning of the fiscal year to which it applies. (Ord. 0-08-05, 2-19-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 28/470
1-11A-5: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT, REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT FUND:
A. In the preparation of the budget by the budget officer, an amount not to exceed three percent (3%) of the equalized assessed value of property subject
to taxation by the city may be accumulated in a separate fund for the purpose or purposes of specific capital improvements, repairs, and/or
replacement of specific types of municipal equipment or other tangible property, both real and personal, to be designated as the "capital improvement,
repair or replacement fund".
B. Expenditures from the capital improvement, repair or replacement fund shall be budgeted in the fiscal year in which the capital improvement, repair or
replacement will occur.
C. Upon the completion or abandonment of any project, or in the event any surplus monies remain after the completion or abandonment of any project for
which the capital improvement, repair or replacement fund was instituted, then such funds no longer necessary for capital improvement, repair or
replacement shall be transferred to the general corporate fund of the city on the first day of the fiscal year following such abandonment or completion,
or discovery of surplus funds. (Ord. 0-08-05, 2-19-2008)
1-11A-6: REVISION OF ANNUAL BUDGET:
A. The city council of the city may delegate authority to heads of city departments, commissions, and boards to delete, add to, change or create
subclasses within object classes budgeted previously to the department, board, or commission, subject to such limitation or requirement for prior
approval by the budget officer, as the city council, upon a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the corporate authorities then holding office, may establish.
B. By a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the corporate authorities then holding office, the annual budget for the city may be revised by deleting,
adding to, changing, or creating subclasses within object classes and object classes themselves.
C. No revision of the budget shall be made increasing the total budget in the event funds are not available to effectuate the purpose of the revision. (Ord.
0-08-05, 2-19-2008)
1-11A-7: FUNDS FOR CONTINGENCY PURPOSES:
The annual budget may contain money set aside for contingency purposes not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the total budget, less the amount set aside
for contingency purposes, which monies may be expended for contingencies upon a majority vote of the corporate authorities then holding office. (Ord. 0-
08-05, 2-19-2008)
1-11A-8: PUBLIC INSPECTION, NOTICE AND HEARING ON BUDGET:
A. The mayor and city council shall make the tentative annual budget conveniently available to public inspection for at least ten (10) days prior to the
passage of the annual budget by publication in the journal of the proceedings of the corporate authorities or in such other form as the mayor and city
council may prescribe.
B. Not less than one week after the publication of the tentative annual budget, and prior to final action on the budget, the mayor and city council of the city
shall hold at least one public hearing on the tentative annual budget, after which hearing or hearings the tentative annual budget may be further revised
and passed without any further inspection, notice or hearing.
C. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city at least one week prior to the time of the
hearing. (Ord. 0-08-05, 2-19-2008)
Chapter 12
INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL REVENUE BONDS
1-12-1: PURPOSE:
In the exercise of the City's powers and the performance of its functions pertaining to its government and affairs, and in order to promote the public health,
safety, morals and welfare, this Chapter has been enacted for the following specific purposes:
A. To relieve conditions Of unemployment, to maintain existing levels of employment, to aid in the rehabilitation of returning veterans, and to encourage the
increase of industry and commerce within this City, thereby reducing the evils attendant upon unemployment.
B. To increase the tax base of the City and to permit the City to take as much advantage of the provisions of section 103 of the United States Internal
Revenue Code as is possible.
C. To provide financing devices which will aid in financing the cost of pollution control facilities in order to eliminate, abate or reduce the serious danger to
the public health and welfare caused by environmental pollution. (Ord. 0-80-48, 11-17-1980)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 29/470
1-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this Chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the following words and terms shall mean:
INDUSTRIAL PROJECT: A. Any capital project, including one or more buildings and other structures, improvement, machinery and equipment whether or
not on the same site or sites now existing or hereafter acquired, suitable for use by any manufacturing, industrial, research or commercial enterprise,
including, but not limited to, use as a factory, mill, processing plant, assembly plant, packaging plant, fabricating plant, office building, industrial distribution
center, warehouse, repair, overhaul or service facility, freight terminal, research facility, test facility, commercial facility, and including also the sites thereof
and other rights in land therefor whether improved or unimproved, site preparation and landscaping, and all appurtenances and facilities incidental thereto
such as utilities, access roads, railroad sidings, truck docking and similar facilities, parking facilities, dockage, wharfage, and other improvements
necessary or convenient thereto; or
B. Any land, buildings, machinery or equipment comprising an addition to, or renovation, rehabilitation or improvement of, any existing capital project.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation (including public utilities), association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
political subdivision, state agency, or any other legal entity, or its legal representative, agent or assigns.
PROJECT: Any economic development project or pollution control facility or any combination thereof.
PROJECT COSTS: The sum total of all reasonable or necessary costs incidental to the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, repair, alteration,
improvement and extension of a project including without limitation the cost of studies and surveys; plans, specifications, architectural and engineering
services; legal, marketing or other special services; financing, acquisition, demolition, construction, equipment and site development of new and
rehabilitated buildings, rehabilitation, reconstruction, repair or remodeling of existing buildings and all other necessary and incidental expenses including
an initial bond and interest reserve together with interest on bonds issued to finance a project to a date six (6) months subsequent to the estimated date of
completion. (Ord. 0-80-48, 11-17-1980)
1-12-3: ADDITIONAL POWERS:
In addition to powers which it may now have, the City has the power under this Chapter:
A. To construct, acquire by gift, lease or purchase, reconstruct, improve, better or extend, or to finance the construction, acquisition, reconstruction,
improvement, betterment, or extension of any industrial project within or without the Municipality or partially within or partially without the Municipality,
but in no event further than ten (10) miles from the territorial boundaries of such Municipality, and to acquire by gift, lease or purchase lands or rights in
land in connection therewith.
B. To issue its bonds to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment or extension
of any industrial project. The City need not acquire or hold title to such industrial project. The City Council, in determining such cost, may include all
cost and estimated cost of the issuance of such bonds, all engineering, inspection, fiscal and legal expenses, and interest which it is estimated will
accrue during the construction period and for six (6) months thereafter on money borrowed or which it is estimated will be borrowed pursuant to the
Industrial Project Revenue Bond Act1.
C. To rent or lease, sell or otherwise dispose of such industrial project or to loan the proceeds of its bonds to industrial or commercial enterprises (which
may include corporations, partnerships or individuals engaged in business or commerce) in such manner that rents or other payments to be derived
with respect to the industrial project shall be fixed and revised from time to time so as to produce income and revenues sufficient to provide for the
prompt payment of interest upon all bonds issued, and to create a sinking fund to pay the principal of such bonds when due, and to provide for the
operation and maintenance of such industrial project and for an adequate depreciation account in connection therewith.
D. To pledge to the punctual payment of such bonds and interest thereon the income and revenues to be received with respect to such industrial project
(including improvements, betterments or extensions thereto thereafter constructed or acquired) sufficient to pay such bonds and interest as they
become due and to create and maintain reasonable reserves therefor.
E. To mortgage or grant a security interest in such industrial project in favor of the holder or holders of bonds issued therefor.
F. To sell and convey such industrial project, including without limitation the sale and conveyance thereof subject to a mortgage or security interest for such
price and at such time as the City Council may determine. However, no sale or conveyance of such industrial project shall ever be made in such
manner as to impair the rights or interests of the holder or holders of any bonds issued for the construction, purchase, improvement or extension of any
such industrial project.
G. To issue bonds to refund in whole or in part, bonds theretofore issued by the City pursuant to the Industrial Project Revenue Bond Act. (Ord. 0-80-48,
11-17-1980)
1-12-4: EXERCISE OF POWERS:
The financing of the construction, acquisition, reconstruction, improvement, betterment or extension of any industrial project may be authorized under the
Industrial Project Revenue Bond Act and bonds may be authorized to be issued under the Industrial Project Revenue Bond Act to provide funds for such
purpose or purposes or for the refunding of bonds theretofore issued under the Industrial Project Revenue Bond Act by resolution of the City Council which
may be adopted at the same meeting at which it is introduced by a majority of all the members thereof then in office and shall take effect immediately upon
adoption. The bonds shall bear interest at such rate or rates without regard to any limitation in any other law, payable at such times, may be in one or more
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 30/470
series, may bear such date or dates, may mature at such time or times not exceeding forty (40) years from their respective dates, may be payable in such
medium of payment at such place or places, may carry such registration privileges, may be subject to such terms of redemption, may be executed in such
manner, may contain such terms, covenants and conditions, and may be in such form, either coupon or registered as such resolution or subsequent
resolutions may provide. The bonds may be sold in such manner and upon such terms as may be deemed advisable by the City Council. Pending the
preparation of the definitive bonds, interim receipts or certificates in such form and with such provisions as the City Council may determine, may be issued
to the purchaser or purchasers of bonds sold pursuant to the Industrial Project Revenue Bond Act. The bonds and interim receipts or certificates are fully
negotiable within the meaning and for all purposes of the Uniform Commercial Code. (Ord. 0-80-48, 11-17-1980)
1-12-5: COVENANTS IN BONDS:
Any resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds under the Industrial Project Revenue Bond Act may contain covenants as to:
A. The use and disposition of the income and revenues from or with respect to the industrial project for which the bonds are to be issued, including the
creation and maintenance of reserves;
B. The issuance of other or additional bonds payable from the income and revenues from or with respect to such industrial project;
C. The maintenance and repair of such industrial project;
D. The insurance to be carried thereon and the use and disposition of insurance monies; and
E. The terms and conditions upon which the holders of the bonds or any portion thereof or any trustees therefor, are entitled to the appointment of a
receiver by the Chancery Court, which Court has jurisdiction in such proceedings, and which receiver may enter and take possession of the industrial
project if it is then owned by the City and lease, sell or otherwise dispose of it and maintain it, prescribe rentals or other payments and collect, receive
and apply all income and revenues thereafter arising therefrom in the same manner and to the same extent as the City itself might do.
Any resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds under the Industrial Project Revenue Bond Act may provide that the principal of and interest on any
bonds issued under the Industrial Project Revenue Bond Act shall be secured by a mortgage or deed of trust covering such industrial project for which
the bonds are issued and may include any improvements or extensions thereafter made. Such mortgage or deed of trust may contain such covenants
and agreements to properly safeguard the bonds as may be provided for in the resolution authorizing such bonds but not inconsistent with the
Industrial Project Revenue Bond Act and shall be executed in the manner as may be provided for in the resolution. A mortgage or deed of trust by
which a security interest is created or a financing statement relating thereto need not be filed or recorded under the Uniform Commercial Code, or
otherwise, except in the records of the City. The provisions of the Industrial Project Revenue Bond Act and any resolution or resolutions and any such
mortgage or deed of trust is a contract with the holder or holders of the bond and continues in effect until the principal of and the interest on the bonds
so issued has been fully paid and the duties of the City and its City Council and officers pursuant to the Industrial Project Revenue Bond Act, and any
such resolution or resolutions and any such mortgage or deed of trust are enforceable by any bondholder by mandamus or authorization of any such
mortgage or deed of trust or other appropriate suit, action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 0-80-48, 11-17-1980)
1-12-6: SIGNATURES OF OFFICERS ON BONDS; VALIDITY OF BONDS:
Bonds shall bear the signatures of such officers of the City as may be designated in the ordinance authorizing such bonds, and such signatures shall be
the valid and binding signatures of the officers of the City notwithstanding that before the delivery thereof and payments therefor any and all of the persons
whose signatures appear thereon have ceased to be officers of the City issuing such bonds. The validity of the bonds is not dependent upon nor affected
by the validity or popularity of the proceedings relating to the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipping, betterment or
extension of the development project for which the bonds are issued. The ordinance authorizing the bonds may provide that the bonds shall contain a
recital that they are issued pursuant to this Chapter, and that no officer or agent of the City shall question or contest any such recital. (Ord. 0-80-48, 11-17-
1980)
1-12-7: LIEN BONDS:
All bonds issued under this Chapter have a lien upon the income and revenues delivered by the City with respect to the industrial project for which the
bonds have been issued, and the City Council may provide in the resolution or resolutions authorizing such bonds for the issuance of additional bonds to
be equally and ratably secured by a lien upon such income and revenues or may provide that the lien upon such income and revenues for future bonds is
subordinate. (Ord. 0-80-48, 11-17-1980)
1-12-8: LIABILITY FOR BONDS:
All bonds issued under and pursuant to this Chapter shall not be general obligations of the City but shall be limited obligations payable solely out of the
income and revenues derived from the development project with respect to which such bonds are issued. No holder of any bonds issued under this
Chapter shall have the right to compel any exercise of taxing power of the City to pay the bonds, the interest or premium, if any, thereon, and the bonds do
not constitute any indebtedness of the City or a loan of credit thereof within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory provision. It shall be plainly
stated on the face of each bond that it has been issued under the provisions of this Chapter and that it does not constitute an indebtedness of the City or a
loan of credit thereof within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory provisions. (Ord. 0-80-48, 11-17-1980)
1-12-9: INVESTMENT OF FUNDS:
A. Funds held by the City pursuant to this Chapter may, to the extent not inconsistent with the laws of the State of Illinois, be invested in:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 31/470
1. Bonds, notes, certificates of indebtedness, treasury bills or other securities constituting direct obligations of or guaranteed by the United States of
America;
2. Certificates of deposit or time deposits constituting direct obligations of any bank as defined by the Illinois Banking Act2, or heretofore and hereafter
amended; provided, however, that investments under this subsection A2 may be made only in those certificates of deposit or time deposits issued by
banks which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, if then in existence;
3. Short-term discount obligations of the Federal National Mortgage Association; and
4. Any other debt obligation or obligations issued by any corporation or corporations organized under the laws of the United States or any state of the
United States, provided that in each of the investments under this subsection A4 shall be expressly authorized by the City Council stating with
particularity the amount of such investment and the issuer of such debt obligation, and expressly finding in each case that such investment will not
involve any undue risk or loss of funds derived from the general revenues of the City. Any such securities may be purchased at the offering or market
price thereof at the time of such purchase.
B. The investment of funds authorized in subsection A1 of this Section may be made on behalf of the City by the City Treasurer, without further
authorization, or such other person, firm or corporation as may be authorized in a lease, indenture, purchase contract or other contract authorized by
the City Council; provided such other person, firm or corporation agrees in writing to bear the risk of any loss that may occur as a result of such
investment of funds, and further provided the City Council expressly finds that such authorization will not involve any undue risk or loss of funds derived
from the general revenue of the City. (Ord. 0-80-48, 11-17-1980)
1-12-10: RENTALS FROM DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS:
The corporate authorities of the City shall prescribe and collect revenues with respect to an industrial project and shall revise such from time to time
whenever necessary so that such revenues are always sufficient to pay when due all bonds and interest thereon for the payment of which such revenues
are pledged, including reserves therefor. (Ord. 0-80-48, 11-17-1980)
1-12-11: EXEMPTION FROM CONSTRUCTION AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
The acquisition and construction of a development project shall not be subject to any requirements relating to public buildings, structures, grounds, works
or improvements imposed by the Illinois Compiled Statutes or any other similar requirements which may be lawfully waived by this Chapter, and any
requirement of competitive bidding or restriction imposed on the procedure for award of contracts for such purpose of the lease, sale or other disposition of
property of the Village is not applicable to any action taken under authority of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-80-48, 11-17-1980)
1-12-12: REQUIRED VOTE ON BOND ISSUE:
No bonds shall be issued under this Chapter unless the bond issue is approved by the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the corporate authorities of the
City. (Ord. 0-80-48, 11-17-1980)
1-12-13: DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST:
Any member of the corporate authority of the City shall disclose any pecuniary interest in any employment, financing, agreement or other contract made
under the provisions of this Chapter before any action by the corporate authority on it, and shall not vote on any such matter. Notwithstanding the
provisions of any other law, any financing agreement or other contract made or procured in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter shall not be void
by reason of the pecuniary interest of any member of the corporate authority of the City therein; nor shall such person be subject to any penalty by reason
of the making or procuring thereof. (Ord. 0-80-48, 11-17-1980)
ARTICLE A. PROCEDURES AND FEES
1-12A-1: INITIATION OF APPLICATION:
Any person may file an application, as hereinafter provided, requesting the City Council to consider the issuance of industrial and commercial revenue
bonds to finance an "industrial project" as that term is defined in the Industrial Project Revenue Bond Act1. (Ord. 0-80-49, 11-17-1980)
1-12A-2: APPLICATION:
The person requesting the issuance of commercial and industrial revenue bonds for a project shall file an application therefor with the City Administrator
on a form available in the office of the City Clerk. Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee as established from time to
time by the corporate authorities of the City and shall contain the following information:
A. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
B. Name, address and telephone number of the person signing the application on behalf of the applicant along with a brief description of the relationship of
such person to the applicant;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 32/470
C. Street address and legal description of the property where the project is to be located;
D. Name and address of any and all legal and beneficial owners of the property where the project is to be located;
E. If the applicant is not the owner of the property where the project is to be located, a statement indicating what interest, if any, the applicant has in the
property where the project is to be located (e.g., contract purchaser, lessee) and if applicant is a lessee or contract purchaser of said property, a copy
of such lease or contract shall be filed along with the application;
F. A description of the project for which industrial and commercial bond financing is requested;
G. A resume of the applicant which shall include:
1. A description of each business in which the applicant is engaged;
2. A description of any and all projects in which the applicant has participated which were similar to the project for which industrial and commercial
revenue bond financing is requested;
3. A statement indicating whether applicant has ever been involved in a project financed by commercial and industrial revenue bonds and if so, a
description of each such project and a statement indicating whether there has ever been a default in any such bonds;
4. A statement indicating whether applicant has been a party in any bankruptcy proceedings at any time in the five (5) year period preceding the date of
the filing of the application and if so, a description of such proceedings, including the caption of any lawsuits, and the outcome thereof;
5. A statement indicating whether applicant, within three (3) years preceding the date of the application, has been in default or allegedly in default in the
payment of any debt instruments on which the applicant is a signatory and if so, a description of such debt instrument and such default;
6. If applicant is a corporation, a statement indicating the dates and places of incorporation of such corporation along with a statement that applicant is
either a corporation in good standing in Illinois or that applicant is a registered foreign corporation in Illinois and in good standing;
7. If applicant is registered or is required to be registered under the Illinois Assumed Name Act2, the date applicant filed under the Assumed Name Act,
the county within which applicant filed and the assumed name under which the applicant has filed;
8. A statement indicating the length of time applicant has been doing business and the length of time applicant has been engaged in projects of the
type for which industrial and commercial project revenue bond financing is requested;
9. If the applicant is a corporation, copies of any and all annual reports and prospectuses issued within three (3) years preceding the date of the
application for commercial and industrial revenue bond financing;
10. Certified copies of audited financial statements of the applicant for three (3) years preceding the date of the filing of the application for commercial
and industrial revenue bond financing;
11. A list setting forth the caption, if pending, and a brief description of any and all pending or threatened litigation against the applicant which could
have an impact on the existence of the applicant or its business or the financial position of applicant. In this regard, applicant shall disclose any
pending or threatened litigation which charges applicant or, if applicable, any of its officers or partners with misfeasance, misrepresentation, fraud, a
violation of any criminal law, or antitrust violations; and any cases in which judgment has been entered or requested against applicant in an amount
in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) unless the disclosure of cases in which lesser or greater judgments have been entered
or requested is required by the City Administrator;
12. Any other data which discloses relevant financial information such as the applicant's bond rating and the like.
H. A statement indicating the zoning classification of the property where the project is to be located along with a statement indicating whether any
amendments to the Zoning Ordinance of the City, or special approvals such as variations or special permits will be required for the project;
I. A site plan for the property where the project is to be located showing existing structures and the proposed project;
J. A rendering of the project;
K. A statement indicating the amount of money requested for the project and a description of the purpose for which the money will be used;
L. A description of any proposed financing arrangements for the project (e.g., City to own the project and lease it to applicant);
M. The name and address of the proposed purchaser of the commercial and industrial revenue bonds proposed to be issued, if known;
N. Any additional information requested by the City Administrator;
O. A proposed memorandum of agreement;
P. A statement of the public purpose to be served by the issuance of industrial and commercial revenue bonds for the project. (Ord. 0-80-49, 11-17-1980)
1-12A-3: PROCEDURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 33/470
A. The City Administrator shall review an application for commercial and industrial revenue bond financing within ten (10) days of the date it is filed and
shall notify the applicant in writing within fifteen (15) days of the date said application is filed whether said application is complete. If it is not complete,
the City Administrator shall in said written notice advise the applicant of any additional information which is required.
B. Within thirty (30) days after a completed application has been filed with the City Administrator, he shall forward said application to the Finance
Committee of the City Council.
C. The Finance Committee shall review said application and hold whatever meetings or hearings and conduct whatever investigations it deems necessary
and shall forward its report and recommendations with regard to the requested issuance of industrial and commercial revenue bonds to the City
Council within ninety (90) days after the receipt of said application from the City Administrator.
D. The report and recommendations of the Finance Committee on an applicant's request for industrial and commercial revenue bond financing shall be
placed on the agenda of the City Council as provided by the applicable ordinances of the City. (Ord. 0-80-49, 11-17-1980)
1-12A-4: CONSIDERATION BY CITY COUNCIL:
The City Council shall consider each application for industrial and commercial revenue bonds which comes before it on the agenda. Compliance with the
procedures set forth herein shall not be construed as obligating the City Council to act upon the application favorably. The issuance of such bonds
pursuant to this Chapter wholly is at the discretionary judgment of the City Council. (Ord. 0-80-49, 11-17-1980)
1-12A-5: COSTS:
In addition to the nonrefundable application fee to be paid by the applicant at the time of the filing of the application for industrial and commercial revenue
bond financing, applicant shall pay any and all costs, including, but not limited to, attorney fees, fees of financial consultants, fees of any and all other
consultants and any and all other costs of the City in connection with the review of applicant's application, negotiations, preparation and duplication of
documents and any and all other work undertaken by the City relating or pertaining to the applicant's application, including, but not limited to, any and all
costs associated with the issuance of industrial and commercial revenue bonds. Applicant shall pay any and all such costs within ten (10) days of receipt
of a bill therefor from the City. (Ord. 0-80-49, 11-17-1980)
1-12A-6: FEES:
In addition to payment of a nonrefundable application fee and any and all costs, as provided hereinabove, applicant shall pay the City a fee, as established
from time to time by the corporate authorities, if commercial and industrial revenue bonds are issued for the project at the time such bonds are issued.
Such fee shall be considered a project cost. (Ord. 0-80-49, 11-17-1980)
1-12A-7: VALIDITY OF BONDS:
Failure on the part of the applicant or the City to comply with the requirements of this Chapter shall not affect the validity of any industrial or commercial
revenue bonds issued. (Ord. 0-80-49, 11-17-1980)
Chapter 13
PLAN COMMISSION
1-13-1: PLAN/ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS TO ACT AS PLAN COMMISSION:
The plan/zoning board of appeals shall act as and is hereby constituted as the plan commission of the city of Prospect Heights. (Ord. 0-00-14, 7-3-2000)
1-13-2: MEMBERSHIP:
Members appointed to the zoning board of appeals pursuant to the terms of section 11.04 of the city of Prospect Heights zoning ordinance shall
automatically be constituted as members of the plan commission. All members of the zoning board of appeals shall be residents of the city. (Ord. 0-00-14,
7-3-2000)
1-13-3: ADMINISTRATION:
The plan commission shall keep written records of its proceedings which shall be open to public inspection.
Such records shall be kept by the secretary of the plan commission, who shall be an employee of the city designated by the city administrator and
approved by the plan commission. The secretary of the plan commission shall not be a voting member thereof.
Following their appointment, the members of the plan commission shall meet, organize and elect such additional officers as may be necessary and adopt,
and later change or alter rules and regulations of organization and procedure consistent with the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. (Ord. 0-
86-06, 2-18-1986)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 34/470
1-13-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The plan commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To prepare and recommend to the city council, from time to time, but not less frequently than every three (3) years, such changes in the official
comprehensive plan and map of the city as may be deemed necessary by the city council or by the plan commission.
B. To prepare and recommend to the city council, from time to time, plans and recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of the official
comprehensive plan and map.
C. To give aid to city officials, charged with the direction of projects or improvements embraced within the official comprehensive plan, to further the
making of such improvements, and generally to promote the realization of such official comprehensive plan.
D. To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its activities for the general purpose of public understanding.
E. To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and other agencies or groups to further the local planning program, and to assure
harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
F. To exercise such other powers as are now or hereafter granted by ordinances of the city. (Ord. 0-86-06, 2-18-1986)
1-13-5: IMPROVEMENTS:
Upon request of the chairman of the plan commission, the city clerk shall furnish or make available to the plan commission, for its consideration, a copy of
all ordinances, plans and data relative to public improvements of any nature. The plan commission may report to the city council in relation thereto if it
deems a report necessary or advisable for the consideration of the city council. (Ord. 0-86-06, 2-18-1986)
1-13-6: EXPENDITURES:
The plan commission may at the discretion of the city council utilize necessary help whose salaries, wages, fees and other necessary expenses shall be
provided for by adequate appropriation made by the city council from public funds. If said plan commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical
advice or services, it may be done upon authority from the city council and appropriations by the city council therefor. (Ord. 0-86-06, 2-18-1986)
Chapter 14
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
1-14-1: POLICY AND PROCEDURES:
A. Because of the possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and destructiveness resulting from the explosion in this or in neighboring
municipalities of atomic or other means from without or by means of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or from fire, flood, earthquake,
telecommunications failure, or other natural or technological causes, and in order to ensure that the City will be prepared to and will adequately deal
with any disasters, preserve the lives and property of the people of this City and protect the public peace, health, and safety in the event of a disaster, it
is found and declared to be necessary:
1. To create a Municipal emergency services and disaster agency as set forth under 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3305.
2. To confer upon the Mayor the extraordinary power and authority set forth under section 11-1-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code1.
3. To provide for the rendering of mutual aid to other cities and political subdivisions with respect to the carrying out of an emergency management
program.
B. Whenever the Mayor determines after an investigation that a dangerous situation or a potentially dangerous situation exists which could cause death or
serious injury to persons or property or to the health and welfare of the public, the Mayor may declare that a state of emergency exists. A state of
emergency shall expire when the Mayor has determined that such a state no longer exists or if the City Council should so determine by a majority vote.
C. It is further declared to be a purpose of this Chapter and a policy of the City that all disaster functions of the City be coordinated to the maximum extent
with the comparable functions of other municipalities of the County, Federal and State governments, including their various departments and agencies,
and of private agencies, to the end that the most effective preparation and use may be made of their manpower, resources, and facilities for dealing
with any disaster that may occur. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-2: LIMITATIONS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 35/470
A. Interfere with the course or conduct of a private labor dispute, except that actions otherwise authorized by this Chapter or other laws may be taken
when necessary to forestall or mitigate imminent or existing danger to public health or safety;
B. Interfere with dissemination of news or comment of public affairs; but, any communications facility or organization (including, but not limited to, radio
and television stations, wire services, and newspapers) may be requested to transmit or print public service messages furnishing information or
instructions in connection with a disaster emergency;
C. Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces, firefighting forces, units of the Armed Forces of the United States, or of any personnel thereof,
when on active duty; but, State, local and interjurisdictional disaster emergency plans shall place reliance upon the forces available for performance of
functions related to disaster emergencies;
D. Limit, modify or abridge the authority of the Mayor and the City Council to exercise any other powers vested in them under the constitution, statutes, or
common law of this State, independent of or in conjunction with any provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and terms shall have the definitions hereinafter ascribed:
COORDINATOR: The staff assistant to the principal executive officer of a political subdivision with the duty of coordinating the emergency management
programs of that political subdivision.
DISASTER: An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or technological cause,
including, but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, hazardous materials spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert
danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, extended periods of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, critical storages of
essential fuels and energy, explosion, riot, or hostile military or paramilitary action.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT: The efforts of the State and the political subdivisions to develop, plan, analyze, conduct, provide, implement and maintain
programs for disaster mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY: The agency established by ordinance within a political subdivision to coordinate
the emergency management program within that political subdivision and with private organizations, other political subdivisions, the State and Federal
governments.
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN: The written plan of the City and political subdivisions describing the organization, mission, and functions of the
government and supporting services for responding to and recovering from disasters.
EMERGENCY SERVICES: The coordination of functions by the City and its political subdivision, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, as may be necessary or proper to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury and damage resulting from any natural or technological
causes. These functions include, without limitation, fire fighting services, police services, emergency aviation services, medical and health services,
rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense, evacuation of persons from stricken or
threatened areas, emergency assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian
protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to protecting life or property.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION: Any county, city, village, or incorporated town.
PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER: Chairman of the county board, supervisor of a township if the township is in a county having a population of more
than two million (2,000,000), mayor of a city or incorporated town, president of a village, or in their absence or disability, the interim successor as
established under section 7 of the Emergency Interim Executive Succession Act2.
UNITED STATES: The several states, the District of Columbia and the Panama Canal zone. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-4: CITY EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY:
A. There is hereby created an Emergency Services and Disaster Agency and a coordinator of the Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, herein called
the "Coordinator", who shall be the head thereof. The Coordinator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. He
shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and the City Council.
B. The City Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall obtain, with Council approval, such technical, clerical, stenographic and other administrative
personnel, and may make such expenditures within their appropriation therefor, as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this Chapter.
C. The Coordinator, subject to the direction and control of the Mayor, shall be the executive head of the City Emergency Services and Disaster Agency,
and shall be responsible under the direction of the Mayor for carrying out the program for emergency services and disaster operations of the City. He
shall coordinate the activities of all organizations for emergency services and disaster operations within the City and shall maintain liaison, and
cooperate with, the civil defense and disaster agencies and organization of Cook County, other counties and municipalities, and of the Federal and
State government.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve by the Coordinator, the Mayor or any persons designated by him, shall be and act
as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this Chapter.
D. The City Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall take an integral part in the development and revision of local and interjurisdictional disaster
plans.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 36/470
E. In the development of local and interjurisdictional disaster plans, the Municipal Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall interrelate with business,
labor, industry, agriculture, civic and volunteer organizations, and community leaders.
F. The City Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall:
1. Determine the requirements of the City for inventorying food, clothing and similar necessities in the event of an emergency;
2. Develop standards and requirements for local and interjurisdictional disaster plans;
3. Periodically review local and interjurisdictional disaster plans;
4. Establish a register of persons with types of training and skills in emergency prevention, preparedness, response and recovery;
5. Establish a register of mobile and construction equipment, and temporary housing available for use in a disaster;
6. Prepare ordinances, proclamations and regulations as necessary or appropriate in coping with disasters;
7. Cooperate with the Federal, State and County government and any public or private agency or entity in achieving any purpose of this Chapter and in
developing programs for disaster prevention, preparation, response and recovery;
8. Initiate and coordinate planning for:
a. The establishment of an emergency operating center;
b. The implementation of a 911 system.
9. All other things necessary, incidental or appropriate for the implementation of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-5: EMERGENCY POWERS OF THE MAYOR:
A. In performing his duties under this Chapter, the Mayor is authorized to cooperate with State and Federal governments and with other municipalities and
political subdivisions in all matters pertaining to the provision of emergency services.
B. In performing his duties under this Chapter, the Mayor is further authorized:
1. To make, amend and rescind all lawful necessary orders, rules and regulations of the local disaster plan to carry out the provisions of this Chapter
within the limits of the authority conferred upon him, by this Chapter and/or State statutes.
2. To cause to be prepared a comprehensive plan and program for emergency services and disaster preparedness, response and recovery of this
Municipality which plan and program shall be integrated into and coordinated with disaster plans of the State and Federal governments and of other
political subdivisions, and which plan and program may include:
a. Prevention and minimization of injury and damage caused by disaster;
b. Prompt and effective response to disaster;
c. Emergency relief;
d. Identification of areas particularly vulnerable or sensitive to disasters;
e. Recommendations for zoning, building and other land use controls, safety measures for securing permanent structures and other preventive and
preparedness measures designed to eliminate or reduce disasters or their impact;
f. Assistance to local officials in designing local emergency action plans;
g. Authorization and procedures for the erection or other construction of temporary works designed to protect against or mitigate danger, damage or
loss from flood, conflagration or other disaster;
h. Preparation and distribution to the appropriate Municipal officials of a Municipal catalog of Federal, State and private assistance programs;
i. Organization of Municipal manpower and chains of command;
j. Coordination of Federal, State and local disaster activities;
k. Other necessary matters.
3. In accordance with such plan and program for the emergency services and disaster preparedness, response and recovery of the City, and out of
funds appropriated for such purposes, to procure and requisition supplies, medicines, materials and equipment to institute training programs and
public information programs, and to take all other preparatory steps, including the partial or full mobilization of emergency services and disaster
organizations in advance of actual disaster to ensure the furnishing of adequately trained and equipped forces for disaster operations.
4. Out of funds appropriated for such purposes, to make such studies and surveys of the industries, resources and facilities in this Municipality as may
be necessary to ascertain the capabilities of the City for disaster operations and disaster preparedness, response and recovery, and to plan for the
most efficient emergency use thereof.
C. The Mayor is authorized to designate space in a Municipal building, or elsewhere for the Emergency Services and Disaster Agency as the control
center. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 37/470
1-14-6: FINANCING:
A. It is the intent of the City Council and declared to be the policy of the City that every effort shall be made to provide funds for disaster emergencies.
B. It is the City Council's intent that the first recourse shall be to funds regularly appropriated to the Agency. If the Mayor finds that the demands placed
upon these funds in coping with a particular disaster are unreasonably great, he may make application for funds from the State Disaster Relief Fund.
C. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to limit the Mayor's authority to apply for, administer and expend grants, gifts, or payments for a
declared emergency for the purposes of responding to that emergency. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-7: LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCIES:
A. An emergency may be declared only by the Mayor. If declared by the Mayor, it shall not be continued for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by
or with the consent of the City Council.
B. The effect of a declaration of an emergency is to activate the response emergency mechanisms and provisions of this Chapter and to authorize the
furnishing of aid and assistance thereunder.
C. No interjurisdictional agency or official thereof may declare a local disaster emergency, unless expressly authorized by the agreement pursuant to which
the agency functions. However, an interjurisdictional disaster agency may provide aid and services in accordance with the agreement pursuant to
which it functions.
D. During a local disaster emergency, the Mayor may suspend the provisions of any Municipal ordinance prescribing procedures for the conduct of City
business, or the orders, rules and regulations of any ordinance, rule or regulation of any City department, if strict compliance with the provisions of any
ordinance, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency, as authorized by "The Illinois
Emergency Services and Disaster Agency Act of 1975", provided that, if the City Council meets at such time, he shall act subject to the directions and
restrictions imposed by that body. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-8: TESTING OF CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER WARNING DEVICES:
The testing of outdoor warning devices shall be held only on the first Tuesday of each month at ten thirty o'clock (10:30) A.M. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-9: MUTUAL AID ARRANGEMENTS BETWEEN POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The Coordinator for emergency services and disaster operations may, in collaboration with other public agencies within his immediate vicinity, develop
mutual aid arrangements for reciprocal disaster assistance, in those cases too great to be dealt with unassisted, which arrangements shall not, however,
be effective unless and until approved by each of such public agency as are parties thereto. Such arrangements shall be consistent with the State
emergency services and disaster operations plan and program. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-10: COMMUNICATIONS:
The City Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall ascertain what means exist for rapid and efficient communications with its own forces and those
of other public agencies in times of disaster emergencies. The agency shall consider the desirability of supplementing these communications resources or
of integrating them into a comprehensive system or network.
In studying the character and feasibility of any system or its several parts, the Agency shall evaluate the possibility of multipurpose use thereof for general
Municipal and local governmental purposes. The Agency shall make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-11: IMMUNITY:
Neither the City, the Agency or any member thereof or any person acting at their direction, engaged in any emergency services and disaster operations or
disaster activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with this Chapter or any rule or regulations promulgated pursuant to this Chapter is liable
for the death of or any injury to persons, or damage to property, as a result of such activity. This Section does not, however, affect the right of any person
to receive benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under this Act, under the Workmen's Compensation Act or the Workmen's Occupational
Diseases Act, or under any pension law, and this Section does not affect the right of any such person to receive any benefits or compensation under any
act of Congress. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-12: PROFESSIONS, TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS:
If such disaster as is described in Section 1-14-3 of this Chapter, occurs in the City and the services of persons who are competent to practice any
profession, trade or occupation are required in the City to cope with the disaster situation and it appears that the number of persons licensed or registered
in the City to practice such profession, trade or occupation may be insufficient for such purpose, then any persons who are licensed elsewhere to practice
any such profession, trade or occupation may, if a member of another political subdivision rendering aid in the City pursuant to the order of the head of that
political subdivision and upon the request of the City, or if otherwise requested to do so by the Mayor or the Coordinator of the City, during the time the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 38/470
disaster condition continues, practice such profession, trade or occupation in the City without being licensed or registered in the City. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-
1995)
1-14-13: APPROPRIATIONS AND LEVY OF TAX FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER OPERATIONS:
The City Council may make appropriations for emergency services and disaster operations in the manner provided by law for making appropriations for
the ordinary expenses of such political subdivision. The Council may also levy for emergency services and disaster operations a tax not to exceed five
one-hundredths percent (0.05%) of the full, fair cash value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue on all taxable property in the City for
the current year.
However, the amount collectible under such a levy shall in no event exceed twenty five cents ($0.25) per capita. The annual tax shall be in addition to and
in excess of the amount authorized to be levied for general corporate purposes. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-14: AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT SERVICES, GIFTS, GRANTS OR LOANS:
Whenever the Federal or State governments, or any agency or officer thereof, or whenever any person, firm or corporation shall offer to the City services,
equipment, supplies, materials or funds by way of gift or grant for purposes of emergency services and disaster operations, the City acting through the
Mayor or through its Council, may accept such offer and upon such acceptance the Mayor or the Council may authorize any officer of the City to receive
such services, equipment, supplies, materials, or funds on behalf of the City. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-15: ORDERS, RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. The Mayor shall file a copy of every rule, regulation or order and any amendment thereof made by him pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter in the
office of the City Clerk.
B. The City Agency for Emergency Services and Disaster Operations established pursuant to this Chapter, and the Coordinator thereof, shall execute and
enforce such orders, rules and regulations as may be made by the Governor under the authority of the Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency Act of 1975. The City Agency shall have available for inspection at its office all orders, rules and regulations made by the Governor, or under
this authority. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-16: UTILIZATION OF EXISTING AGENCY, FACILITIES AND PERSONNEL:
In carrying out the provisions of this Chapter, the Mayor and the Coordinator of the Emergency Services and Disaster Agency are authorized to utilize the
services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices and agencies of the City to the maximum extent practicable, and the officers
and personnel of all such departments, offices and agencies are directed, upon request, to cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the
Coordinator and the Emergency Services and Disaster Agency. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-17: NO PRIVATE LIABILITY:
Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants a license or privilege, or otherwise permits
the designation or use of the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual or impeding
disaster, or a mock or practice disaster response activity together with his successors in interest, if any, shall not be civilly liable for negligently causing the
death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for negligently causing loss
of, or damage to, the property of such person. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-18: SUCCESSION:
In the event of the death, absence from the City or other disability of the Mayor preventing him from acting under this Chapter or for any other City
purpose, and until the office is filled in the manner prescribed by law, the Coordinator of the Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall succeed to the
duties and responsibilities of the Mayor as set forth in Section 1-14-5 of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-19: COMPENSATION:
The City Council, by its annual appropriations ordinance, may provide for the payment of the salary of the Coordinator and such other office staff and
personnel as may be expressly provided for in the ordinance. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit any member of the Agency from receiving
compensation from the State Disaster Agency under any provisions of that Agency. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-20: EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY PERSONNEL OATH:
Each person, whether compensated or noncompensated, who is appointed to serve in any capacity in a department of the City Emergency Services And
Disaster Agency, shall, before entering upon his duties, take an oath, in writing, before a person authorized to administer oaths in the City, which oath shall
be filed with the Coordinator of the City Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, and which oath shall be substantially as follows:
I, , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic;
that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 39/470
am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time I am affiliated with the
(name of department and governmental subdivision), I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence.
(Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-21: EMERGENCY TERMINATION OR REDUCTION OF ELECTRICAL SERVICE:
A. Declaration Of Emergency Condition: When in the judgment of the Mayor or City Council, as provided herein in subsection 1-14-7A of this Chapter, a
local disaster emergency requires the termination or reduction of electrical service, the Mayor or City Council shall forthwith declare the existence of the
emergency condition and order the termination or reduction. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-22: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating this Chapter or any order thereunder shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 0-
95-58, 11-6-1995)
1-14-23: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect such other
provisions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application; and, to this end, the provisions of this
Chapter are hereby declared to be severable. (Ord. 0-95-58, 11-6-1995)
Chapter 15
STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT
1-15-1: ADOPTED:
The regulations of section 5-151 and article 102 of the state officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et seq., (hereinafter
referred to as the "act" in this chapter) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the city to the extent
required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5. (Ord. 0-04-24, 6-7-2004, eff. 6-17-2004)
1-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c). (Ord. 0-04-24, 6-7-
2004, eff. 6-17-2004)
1-15-3: GIFT BAN:
A. The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the act, by any officer or any employee of the city, is hereby
prohibited.
B. The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an officer or employee of the city under the act, is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 0-04-24, 6-
7-2004, eff. 6-17-2004)
1-15-4: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
The participation in political activities prohibited under the act, by any officer or employee of the city, is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 0-04-24, 6-7-2004, eff. 6-
17-2004)
1-15-5: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
The penalties for violations of this chapter shall be the same as those penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar violations of the
act. (Ord. 0-04-24, 6-7-2004, eff. 6-17-2004)
1-15-6: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
This chapter does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of city officers and employees.
To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less restrictive than this chapter, however, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail in
accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(a). (Ord. 0-04-24, 6-7-2004, eff. 6-17-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 40/470
1-15-7: AMENDMENT:
Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be
applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes its
provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities
of the city. (Ord. 0-04-24, 6-7-2004, eff. 6-17-2004)
1-15-8: CONSTITUTIONALITY:
A. If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this chapter shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois supreme
court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This chapter shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the city if the act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois supreme court.
B. If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act, or does not address the
remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as adopted by this chapter shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this chapter
relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the city. (Ord. 0-04-
24, 6-7-2004, eff. 6-17-2004)
Chapter 16
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Article I. General Provisions
1-16-1: CREATION, POSITIONS:
A. Creation: There is hereby created a police department, an executive department of the city. The police department shall consist of the chief of police,
one deputy chief and five (5) sergeants and such other members of the department as may be provided from time to time in the annual budget and
appropriation ordinance adopted by the city council, or as provided in such ordinances as may be from time to time adopted. (Ord. 0-12-39, 10-22-
2012)
B. Appointment, Discharge Or Suspension Powers: The power of appointment, discharge or suspension of all members of the police department, other
than the chief of police shall lie with the board of fire and police commissioners or chief of police as provided below.
C. Deputy Chief: The deputy chief shall be appointed by the chief. The position of deputy chief shall be rank, exempt from the rules of the board of fire and
police commissioners, immediately below that of chief. The deputy chief may be appointed from any rank of sworn, full time officers of the police
department, but must have at least five (5) years of full time service as a police officer in that department. A deputy chief shall serve at the discretion of
the chief and, if removed from the position, shall revert to the rank currently held, without regard as to whether a vacancy exists in that rank. A deputy
chief, having been appointed from any rank of sworn full time officers of the police department, shall be permitted, regardless of rank, to take
promotional exams and be promoted to a higher classified rank than he or she currently holds, without having to resign as deputy chief.
D. Exempt: For purposes of the fair labor standards act, the chief and deputy chief of the police department are declared hereby to be exempt employees,
in that they are executive or administrative.
E. Sergeant: The rank of sergeant shall be a supervisory rank which shall be subject to the rules of the board of fire and police commissioners. (Ord. 0-12-
15, 4-23-2012)
F. Part Time Police: In accordance with section 3.1-30-21 of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-30-21, the department shall also
consist of up to five (5) part time police officers or such other amount which shall be established in the annual budget of the city. (Ord. 0-12-39, 10-22-
2012)
1-16-2: DUTIES OF MEMBERS OF POLICE DEPARTMENT:
It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to enforce all ordinances of the city and all statutes of the state effective in the city. This duty
shall be exercised in conformity with law and the rules and regulations of the police department promulgated by the chief of police.
All members of the police department shall be authorized to serve writs, summonses and other processes; but no patrolman shall serve any such process
except on the order of a superior officer or the chief of police. (Ord. 0-89-38, 9-5-1989)
1-16-3: POSITION OF CHIEF CREATED:
There is hereby created the position of chief of police, who shall be head of the police department. The chief shall be appointed by, and shall serve at the
discretion of, the city administrator with the advice of the city council. The chief need not be a member of the police department at the time of his
appointment. He shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the city council. (Ord. 0-89-47, 10-16-1989)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 41/470
1-16-4: DUTIES OF CHIEF:
The chief of police shall have the custody, care and control of the public property of the police department, subject to the direction of the city council, and
of all firearms and other equipment; he shall be responsible for the training of the members of the department; he shall attend to the municipal affairs of the
city and preserve the peace, order, safety, and cleanliness thereof, and to this end he shall execute and enforce all ordinances and orders of the city
council; he shall be charged with the duty of protecting the rights of persons and property, providing a proper police force at every fire, to take notice of any
nuisance, to take notice of any impediment, obstruction or defect in the walks, streets, avenues and public places of the city, to remove the same or cause
immediate notice thereof to be given to the proper person whose duty it may be to attend the removal of the same, and he shall cause to be enforced all
ordinances of the city. He shall keep a complete record of all arrests, fines and disposition of all calls and investigations. He shall also keep such records
and make such reports concerning the activities of the police department as may be required by statute, this chapter or by the city administrator. (Ord. 0-
89-38, 9-5-1989)
1-16-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the department as he shall see fit,
such rules and regulations to be in full force and effect upon the approval of the city council. (Ord. 0-89-38, 9-5-1989)
1-16-6: PROPERTY PROCESSED BY POLICE DEPARTMENT; CHIEF TO BE CUSTODIAN:
The chief of police shall be the custodian of all lost, abandoned or recovered stolen property in the city and of all property which may be seized or
otherwise taken possession of by the police department of the city. The disposition of all unclaimed property shall be in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the police department promulgated by the chief of police. (Ord. 0-89-38, 9-5-1989)
1-16-7: APPOINTMENT, DISCHARGE AND COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS:
A. The appointment and discharge of members of the police department, except the chief, deputy chief, part time police officers, and nonsworn personnel
shall be by the board of fire and police commissioners. Said members shall be employees of the city and shall receive such compensation as is fixed
by the city council from time to time. (Ord. 0-12-15, 4-23-2012)
B. All appointments of patrolmen shall be for a probationary period of one year. If, at the expiration of that time, the applicant, in the opinion of the board of
fire and police commissioners, proves to be qualified for the position, he shall be permanently certified to the position by the board. If, in the judgment
of the board of fire and police commissioners, he shall prove unsatisfactory at the expiration of one year, he shall be discharged from the police
department. (Ord. 0-09-08, 3-23-2009)
1-16-8: CONDUCT OF MEMBERS; SUSPENSION:
It shall be the duty of every member of the police department to conduct himself in a proper and law abiding manner, and in conformity with the rules and
regulations of the police department promulgated by the chief of police.
The chief of police shall have the authority to suspend any member of the police department, for cause and without pay, for a period of time not to exceed
five (5) calendar days, but he shall notify the board of fire and police commissioners in writing of such suspension. Such suspension shall be subject to
review by the board of fire and police commissioners upon receipt of a written appeal of such decision by the member suspended. The board of fire and
police commissioners, upon receipt of a request to review such suspension, shall notify both the chief and the suspended member of the date for a
hearing. Such appeal shall be by petition filed not less than five (5) calendar days after the order of suspension, with the chairman of the board of fire and
police commissioners or with the city clerk. (Ord. 0-89-38, 9-5-1989)
1-16-9: WITNESS FEES:
Every member of the police department shall appear as a witness whenever this is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of a city ordinance or a state
or federal law; provided, however, that no such member shall receive any witness fee for such services in any action or suit to which the city is a party. All
fees due for such services shall, if paid, be turned over to the city treasurer. (Ord. 0-89-38, 9-5-1989)
1-16-10: SPECIAL POLICEMEN:
The city administrator may, in times of peril, danger, riot or pestilence or apprehension thereof, and at all conflagrations and during any public election or
celebration, or unusual congregation of the people in the city, appoint for a time not to exceed three (3) days, such special police as he may deem
necessary, and during the term of service that special police shall possess all of the powers and privileges and perform all of the duties of regular
patrolmen of the city. Appointments may be revoked at any time by the city administrator. (Ord. 0-89-38, 9-5-1989)
1-16-10-1: PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
A. Part Time Police: The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council may appoint part time police officers. The number of part time police
officers shall not exceed the maximum number of positions established in section 1-16-1 of this chapter or the annual budget as the case may be. Part
time police officers may be disciplined by the chief of police, and upon recommendation of the chief of police terminated by the mayor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 42/470
B. Standards For Appointment: To be eligible for appointment, a candidate for part time police officer must hold a current certificate under section 8.2 of
the Illinois police training act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 705/8.2. Not more than one part time officer may have fewer than three (3) years'
experience as a full time sworn police officer at a regularly constituted police department in the state of Illinois. Not more than one part time officer may
have fewer than five (5) but more than three (3) years' experience as a full time sworn police officer at a regularly constituted police department in the
state of Illinois. All other part time police officers must have at least five (5) years' experience as a full time sworn police officer at a regularly constituted
police department in the state of Illinois. Candidates for part time police officers shall meet the following additional criteria:
1. Part time police officers shall be trained under the intergovernmental law enforcement officer's in-service training act in accordance with the
procedures for part time police officers established by the Illinois law enforcement training standards board.
2. Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health, and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
3. Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
4. Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
5. Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
6. Possess no prior felony convictions.
7. Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been honorably discharged.
C. Other Provisions: Part time police officers shall be members of the police department, except for pension purposes. A part time police officer shall have
all the responsibilities of a full time police officer and such specific duties as delineated in the general orders of the police department. The number of
hours a part time officer may work within a calendar year is restricted as set forth in the applicable collective bargaining agreement and/or the general
orders of the police department. Part time police officers shall not be assigned under any circumstances to supervise or direct full time police officers of
the police department. (Ord. 0-12-20, 6-11-2012)
Article II. Board Of Fire And Police Commissioners
1-16-11: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby established a board of fire and police commissioners (the "board") as provided by law. (Ord. 0-89-38, 9-5-1989)
1-16-12: MEMBERS:
The board shall consist of three (3) members, appointment by the mayor by and with the advice and consent of the city council. The members of the board
shall be residents of the city. (Ord. 0-89-38, 9-5-1989)
1-16-13: TENURE:
The term of office for members of the board shall be for three (3) years (except for the initial term of office as provided below), and until their respective
successors are appointed and have qualified.
Within thirty (30) days after this chapter becomes effective, the mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall appoint the first members of the board.
One of the members shall be appointed to serve until the end of the then current city fiscal year, another to serve until the end of the city fiscal year next
ensuing, and the third to serve until the end of the city fiscal year second next ensuing. Every member shall serve until his successor is appointed and has
qualified.
Vacancies on the board shall be filled only for unexpired terms, and shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Annually, the commissioners shall designate one of the three (3) members of the board to be chairman. The city administrator shall designate a city
employee to act as the secretary. (Ord. 0-94-02, 2-22-1994)
1-16-14: COMPENSATION:
Each member of the board shall receive compensation in the amount of forty dollars ($40.00) for each regular or special meeting attended. The chairman
shall receive an additional ten dollars ($10.00) for each meeting attended. Such compensation shall be payable quarterly. Nothing herein contained shall
be construed to authorize additional compensation to any person who is an officer or employee of the city and receives other compensation from the city.
(Ord. 0-14-04, 4-28-2014)
1-16-15: POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The board shall have such powers, duties and responsibilities as are assigned by the city council, to include those enumerated below: (Ord. 0-89-38, 9-5-
1989)
A. The board shall appoint all members of the police department of the city, except the chief of police, the deputy chief, part time police officers, and
nonsworn personnel. (Ord. 0-12-15, 4-23-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 43/470
B. The board shall make rules for and appointments to the police department as is necessary, except insofar as said power may otherwise be reserved to
the mayor and city council. Said rules shall also provide for the imposition of discipline upon members of the police department, including, but not
limited to, suspension and discharge. Said disciplinary action shall be in accordance with the statutes of the state. (Ord. 0-89-38, 9-5-1989)
1-16-16: MEETINGS, QUORUM, VOTING:
Regular meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman. Special meetings may be called by the mayor, city council, the chairman of the
board or a quorum of the board. Two (2) members shall constitute a quorum. The chairman shall vote with other members of the board. (Ord. 0-89-38, 9-5-
1989)
1-16-17: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
The board shall keep written records of its proceedings, which records shall be open at all times to public inspection. (Ord. 0-89-38, 9-5-1989)
1-16-18: LIAISON COMMITTEE:
The public health and safety committee of the city council shall be responsible for liaison with the board. (Ord. 0-89-38, 9-5-1989)
1-16-19: RECRUITMENT AND TESTING CONSORTIUM1:
A. The board of fire and police commissioners be and is hereby authorized to utilize the Northwest Municipal Conference Area Fire And Police
Recruitment And Testing Consortium to administer such segments of recruit testing as the fire and police commissioners shall determine to be in the
best interests of this municipality from time to time.
B. The board of fire and police commissioners be and it is hereby authorized to utilize the results of such testing in establishing its list of those eligible for
service in the fire and police departments.
C. The board of fire and police commissioners be and it is hereby authorized to utilize eligibility lists compiled by utilization of test results reported by the
Northwest Municipal Conference Area Fire And Police Recruitment Testing Consortium in making appointments to positions in the fire and police
service.
D. The Northwest Municipal Conference Area Fire And Police Recruitment Testing Consortium be and is hereby authorized to act as an agency of the
police and fire commission for the purpose of administering tests as hereinbefore authorized.
E. The city hereby approves the bylaws of the Northwest Municipal Conference Area Fire And Police Recruitment Testing Consortium, a copy of which is
attached to ordinance 0-90-10, expressly incorporated by reference herein and made a part hereof as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 0-90-10, 4-16-
1990)
Article III. Police Pension Fund
1-16-20: FUND ESTABLISHED PURSUANT TO STATE LAW:
There is hereby established a police pension fund under and in accordance with the provisions of an act of the legislature of the state entitled, "police
pension fund - municipalities 500,000 and under", 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. (the "act"). (Ord. 0-90-34, 8-20-1990)
1-16-21: PENSION FUND CREATED:
There shall be and is hereby created a police pension fund in and for the city for the purpose of providing pensions for members of the police department
of the city under the terms and regulations hereinafter set forth, and the provisions set forth in the act. (Ord. 0-90-34, 8-20-1990)
1-16-22: TAX LEVY:
The city council shall annually hereafter levy a tax upon all the taxable property of the city at the rate on the dollar of all such taxable property which will
produce an amount which, when added to the deductions from the salaries or wages of police officers, and revenues available from all other sources as
hereinafter referred to, will equal a sufficient sum to meet the annual requirements of the police pension fund. The annual requirements to be provided by
such tax levy are equal to: a) the normal cost of the pension fund for the year involved, plus, b) the amount necessary to amortize the fund's unfunded
accrued liabilities as provided in section 3-127 of the act. Such tax shall be levied and collected in the same manner as the general taxes of the city and
shall be in addition to all other taxes now or hereafter authorized to be levied upon all property within the city, and shall be in addition to the amount
authorized to be levied for general purposes as provided by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-3-1, as amended (the "Illinois municipal code"). In the event
that the police pension fund in any year, over and above the reserve fund described below, is sufficient to meet all demands of those requiring payment
therefrom in such year, the city council may dispense with the levy of such tax. (Ord. 0-90-34, 8-20-1990)
1-16-23: MONIES CONSTITUTING FUND:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 44/470
The police pension fund shall consist of the following monies which shall be set apart by the treasurer of the city:
A. All monies derived from the taxes levied hereunder;
B. Contributions by police officers under section 3-125.1 of the act;
C. All monies accumulated by the city under any previous legislation establishing a fund for the benefit of disabled or retired police officers; and
D. Donations, gifts or other transfers authorized by the act. (Ord. 0-90-34, 8-20-1990)
1-16-24: POLICE OFFICER DEFINED:
"Police officer" as used in this article III shall mean any person who: a) is appointed to the police force of the police department of the city and sworn and
commissioned to perform police duties; b) is found upon examination of a duly licensed physician or physicians selected by the board to be physically and
mentally fit to perform the duties of a police officer; and c) within three (3) months after receiving his or her first appointment, and if reappointed, within
three (3) months thereafter, makes written application to the Board (as hereinbelow described) to come under the provisions of this Article. Police officers
serving initial probationary periods, if otherwise eligible, shall be police officers within the meaning of this Section. (Ord. 0-90-34, 8-20-1990)
1-16-25: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This Article III is applicable to all police officers of the City who meet the qualifications set forth in the Act. (Ord. 0-90-34, 8-20-1990)
1-16-26: RESERVE FUNDS ESTABLISHED:
The Board shall establish and maintain a reserve to insure the payment of all obligations incurred under the Act. The reserve to be accumulated shall be
equal to the estimated total actuarial requirements of the Police Pension Fund.
If the Police Pension Fund has a reserve of less than the accrued liabilities of the said Fund, the Board of the Police Pension Fund, in making its annual
report to the City Council shall designate the amount needed annually to insure the accumulation of the reserve to the level of the Fund's accrued liabilities
over a period of forty (40) years subsequent to the date of establishment of the Fund, so that the necessary reserves will be attained over such a period.
(Ord. 0-90-34, 8-20-1990)
1-16-27: BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF FUND:
A. Board Established: A Board of five (5) members, a majority of whom shall be residents of the City to be chosen as hereinafter provided, shall be and
constitute a Board of Trustees to administer the Police Pension Fund and designate the beneficiaries thereof. The Board shall be known as the "Board
of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund of the City".
B. Appointment And Terms: Two (2) members of said Board shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City. One of said members shall serve from the date of
appointment until the second Tuesday in May 1991; the other of said members shall serve from the date of appointment until the second Tuesday in
May 1992. The successors to the foregoing trustees shall serve for a period of two (2) years each or until such time as their successors are appointed
and qualified. The third and fourth members of the Board shall be elected from the active participants of the Police Pension Fund by such active
participants. The fifth member shall be elected by and from the beneficiaries.
C. Election And Terms:
1. The election for Board members shall be held biennially on the third Monday in April, at such place or places in the City and under the Australian
ballot system and such other regulations as shall be prescribed by the appointed members of the Board.
2. The active Pension Fund participants shall be entitled to vote only for the active participant members of the Board. All beneficiaries of legal age may
vote only for the member chosen from among the beneficiaries. No person shall be entitled to cast more than one ballot at such election. The term of
elected members shall be two (2) years, beginning on the second Tuesday of the first May after the election. Upon the death, resignation or inability
to act of any elected Board member, his or her successor shall be elected for the unexpired term at a special election, to be called by the Board and
conducted in the same manner as the regular biennial election.
D. Trustees Not Compensated: Members of the Board shall neither receive nor have any right to receive any salary from the Pension Fund for services
performed as trustees in that office.
E. Meetings:
1. Rooms Provided: Suitable rooms for Board officers and meetings shall be assigned by the Mayor or City Council.
2. Quarterly Meetings, Election of Officers: The Board, herein provided for, shall hold regular quarterly meetings on the second Tuesday of July,
October, January and April of each year and special meetings upon the call of the president of said Board. At the first meeting of said Board, it shall
elect one of its members who shall act as the president of said Board for the period of one year or until such time as his successor is elected and
qualified. Said Board on the same day also shall elect another of its members as secretary and another as vice president, both of whom shall serve
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 45/470
for a period of one year or until such time as their successors are elected and qualified. Thereafter, at the regular July meeting, the Board shall select
from its members a president, vice president, secretary, and assistant secretary to serve for one year and until their respective successors are
elected and qualified.
The vice president shall perform the duties of president during any vacancy in that office, or during the president's absence from the City, or it he or
she is by reason of illness or other causes unable to perform the duties of the office.
The assistant secretary shall act for the secretary whenever necessary to discharge the functions of such office.
F. Powers And Duties: The Board shall have the power and duties as are set forth in the Act. (Ord. 0-90-34, 8-20-1990)
1-16-28: ELIGIBLE PERSONS:
All police officers and spouses or dependents who qualify under the Act are eligible for pension benefits from the Fund. (Ord. 0-90-34, 8-20-1990)
Footnote 1: See intergovernmental cooperation, constitution of the state of Illinois, art. 7, 10.
Chapter 17
STANDING COMMITTEES
ARTICLE A. ADVISORY FINANCE COMMITTEE
1-17A-1: CREATION, POSITIONS:
There is hereby established the advisory finance committee ("finance committee"). The finance committee shall be made up of five (5) members. (Ord. 0-
09-15, 6-15-2009)
1-17A-2: APPOINTMENT AND TERMS:
Members of the committee shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. At the time of appointment, one member shall
be designated by the mayor as the chairman and one member shall be designated as the secretary. Members may be removed from the committee by the
order of the mayor. Two (2) members shall serve for a period of three (3) years and three (3) members shall serve for a period of two (2) years. Up to two
(2) members may be nonresidents of the city, provided the mayor in his or her discretion finds that such members possess technical training, knowledge or
experience which will enhance the functioning of the finance committee. (Ord. 0-09-15, 6-15-2009)
1-17A-3: PURPOSE AND DUTIES:
The purpose of the finance committee shall be to evaluate purchasing, finance policies and practices and to monitor the revenue and spending of the city.
The finance committee shall report its findings to the mayor and city council from time to time or as requested by the mayor or city council. The duties of
the finance committee include the following:
A. To cooperate with the city council and appropriate officials and departments of the city in connection with the financial matters and activities of the city.
B. To recommend to the city council such legislation as it may deem appropriate related to city finances.
C. To recommend to the city council consultation or cooperation with appropriate governmental and private agencies, groups or individuals in order to
obtain professional advice and recommendations related to city finances.
D. Upon request by the city council, to conduct public hearings, carry on research, and otherwise obtain pertinent data and make appropriate
recommendations on the financial conduct and policies of the city.
E. To carry out such other functions as may be delegated to it by the city council. (Ord. 0-09-15, 6-15-2009)
1-17A-4: MEETINGS:
The finance committee shall meet monthly and shall set its own schedule of meetings and rules of procedure. The finance committee shall comply with the
open meetings act and all applicable law. (Ord. 0-09-15, 6-15-2009)
ARTICLE B. ECONOMIC/BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 46/470
1-17B-1: CREATION, POSITIONS:
There is hereby established a citizens' committee which shall be known as the economic/business development committee ("EBDC"). The EBDC shall be
made up of seven (7) members. (Ord. 0-09-19, 7-6-2009)
1-17B-2: APPOINTMENT AND TERMS:
A. At Large Members: Five (5) members of the committee shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. Upon the
creation and initial appointment to the EBDC, three (3) members shall serve for a term of two (2) years and two (2) members shall serve for a term of
three (3) years. After the expiration of the initial terms, all terms shall be for three (3) years.
B. Specified Members: One member shall be appointed by the Wheeling-Prospect Heights chamber of commerce and shall sit at the pleasure of the
chamber of commerce. One member shall be a department head or elected official of the city appointed by the mayor in his or her sole discretion and
shall sit at the pleasure of the mayor.
C. Service: The members of the EBDC shall serve until the expiration of their terms, or as soon thereafter as their successors have been duly appointed
and qualified.
D. Chairman; Secretary: One of the members of the EBDC shall be appointed as the chairman of the EBDC by the mayor and one shall be appointed as
the secretary, and shall hold such offices until his or her successor is elected and qualified.
E. Removal; Vacancies: The mayor may remove any member of the EBDC at any time. Vacancies upon the EBDC shall be filled for the unexpired term of
the vacating member in the manner provided for the appointments.
F. Compensation: Members of the EBDC shall serve without compensation.
G. Residency: The member appointed by the chamber of commerce need not be a resident of the city. Up to two (2) additional members may be
nonresidents of the city, provided the mayor in his or her discretion finds that such members possess technical training, knowledge or experience which
will enhance the functioning of the EBDC. (Ord. 0-09-19, 7-6-2009)
1-17B-3: PURPOSE AND DUTIES:
The purpose of the EBDC shall be to assist the city council in structuring sound economic and business development programs. The EBDC shall report its
findings to the mayor and city council from time to time or as requested by the mayor or city council. The duties of the EBDC include the following:
A. To seek and obtain the volunteer services of such other members of the community who shall work with it and assist in achieving the goal of sound
economic growth, broad community involvement and broad community support.
B. To conduct such research and inventory of resources necessary to prepare industrial, commercial, and business fact profiles for distribution to and use
by industrial and commercial entities considering location in the city or expansion of existing facilities in the city.
C. To promote existing businesses in the Prospect Heights area.
D. Upon request by the city council, to cooperate with the city council and appropriate officials of departments of the city in connection with the economic
development matters and activities of the city.
E. To recommend to the city council such legislation as it may deem appropriate related to economic development.
F. To recommend to the city council consultation or cooperation with appropriate governmental and private agencies, groups or individuals in order to
obtain professional advice and recommendations related to economic development.
G. Upon request by the city council, to conduct public hearings, carry on research, and otherwise obtain pertinent data and make appropriate
recommendations on the economic development policies of the city.
H. To make a report of its activities and its findings and recommendations to the mayor and city council, at least two (2) times each year during the months
of June and November.
I. To carry out such other functions as may be delegated to it by the city council. (Ord. 0-09-19, 7-6-2009)
1-17B-4: MEETINGS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 47/470
The EBDC shall meet monthly and shall set its own schedule of meetings and rules of procedure. The EBDC shall comply with the open meetings act and
all applicable law. (Ord. 0-09-19, 7-6-2009)
Chapter 18
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT AND OPEN MEETINGS ACT
1-18-1: FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT:
A. Establishment: The deputy clerk shall be the freedom of information officer as required in section 3.5 of the freedom of information act1 on and after
January 1, 2010. In the absence or vacancy of the deputy clerk, the city administrator shall be the freedom of information officer. In the temporary
absence of both the deputy clerk and the city administrator, the city administrator shall designate an employee of the city to act as the freedom of
information officer.
B. Designees: The deputy clerk may designate an individual or individuals to receive requests under the freedom of information act. Such designation is
subject to the approval of the city administrator.
C. Duties Of Freedom Of Information Officer: Except in instances when records are furnished immediately, the freedom of information officer, or his/her
designee, shall receive requests submitted to the city under the freedom of information act, ensure that the city responds to requests in a timely
fashion, and issue responses under the freedom of information act. The freedom of information officer shall develop a list of documents or categories of
records that the city shall immediately disclose upon request. Upon receiving a request for a public record, the freedom of information officer shall:
1. Note the date the city receives the written request;
2. Compute the day on which the period for response will expire and make a notation of that date on the written request;
3. Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request, including all documents submitted with the request until the request has been complied
with or denied;
4. Create a file for the retention of the original request, a copy of the response, a record of written communications with the requester, and a copy of
other communications.
D. Denials And Exemptions: In issuing responses, the freedom of information officer shall consult with the city attorney, city administrator and other
appropriate city employees to determine whether items are exempt from disclosure or whether exempt matter should be redacted as part of a response
to a freedom of information request. In all instances where the freedom of information act allows the "public body" to deny or redact information which
is exempt from disclosure, the freedom of information officer shall have the authority to make such determinations upon his or her consultation with the
city attorney and city administrator as set forth above.
E. Training: The deputy clerk and the city administrator shall comply with the training requirements set forth in the freedom of information act.
F. FOIA Fees: The freedom of information officer shall charge the following fees for copying documents:
First 50 pages No charge
Letter/legal, black and white copies for each page after the first 50 pages $0.15 per page
Certified copies $1.00 per document in addition to copy charges
Large format, audiotapes, digital copies or color copies Actual cost to the city, excluding any personnel costs
The freedom of information officer may waive or reduce the above fees upon a finding by the freedom of information officer that the request is in the public
interest as set forth in section 6 of the freedom of information act. (Ord. 0-09-28, 11-30-2009)
1-18-2: OPEN MEETINGS ACT TRAINING:
A. Persons Designated To Receive Training: The mayor, all aldermen, city clerk, city administrator, deputy clerk and zoning administrator are hereby
designated to receive the training required under the open meetings act. This designation shall apply to the city council as well as to all standing and ad
hoc committees, commissions or boards of the city ("subordinate public bodies") which may be considered a "public body" under the open meetings
act. The police pension board is not a committee or board of the city and, therefore, is not a subordinate public body for purposes of this section.
Subordinate public bodies need not make additional designations.
B. Electronic Training: On or before June 30, 2010, or as may be extended by the Illinois public access counselor, the above designated persons must
successfully complete an electronic training curriculum, developed and administered by the public access counselor, and thereafter must successfully
complete an annual training program.
C. Newly Elected/Appointed/Hired Persons: Whenever new individuals not currently holding the above offices assume the above offices, those persons
must successfully complete the electronic training curriculum within thirty (30) days after assuming office. (Ord. 0-09-28, 11-30-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 48/470
Title 2
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
LICENSES AND PERMITS
2-1-1: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever a license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or establishment or conduct of any business or engaging in any
activity or occupation, any person shall be subject to the requirement if by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds himself forth as
being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform any part of such
business or occupation in the city. (Ord. 0-77-12, 5-2-1977)
2-1-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSES:
Applications for all licenses required by ordinance shall be made in writing to the city clerk, except for peddlers', itinerant merchants' and solicitors' licenses
which shall be made in writing to the secretary of the chief of police. Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the license desired, the location
to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be paid, and each application shall contain such additional information as may be needed for the proper
guidance of the city officials in issuing the license. (Ord. 0-94-03, 3-7-1994)
2-1-3: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
A. Forms: Forms for all licenses and permits shall be kept on file by the city clerk.
B. Signatures: Each license or permit issued shall bear the signature of the mayor and city clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary. (Ord. 0-77-
12, 5-2-1977)
2-1-4: TERM OF LICENSES:
In the absence of provision to the contrary, all licenses shall terminate on April 30. The city clerk shall mail or cause to be mailed to all licensees of the city
a statement of the time of the expiration of said license. If an annual license, such notice shall be mailed three (3) weeks prior to the date of such
expiration; provided, that a failure to send out such notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive it shall not excuse the licensee from a failure to secure a
new license, or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an action for operation without a license. (Ord. 0-77-12, 5-2-1977)
2-1-5: PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEES:
In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application is made to the city
clerk. Unless otherwise provided, when an applicant has not engaged in the business until after the expiration of part of the current license year, the
license fee shall be prorated by quarters and the fee paid for each quarter or fraction thereof during which the business has been or will be pursued.
Except as otherwise provided, all license fees shall become a part of the corporate fund. (Ord. 0-77-12, 5-2-1977)
2-1-6: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where an ordinance of the city necessitates an inspection or investigation before the issuance of
such license or permit, the city clerk shall refer such application to the proper officer for making such investigation within seventy two (72) hours of the time
of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making an investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within a
reasonable time after receiving the application or a copy thereof. The health inspector shall make or cause to be made an investigation in regard to such
licenses in connection with food and food establishments and the prevention of nuisances and the spread of disease, and for the protection of health; and
the building official shall make or cause to be made any such inspections relative to the construction of buildings or other structures. All other
investigations except where otherwise provided shall be made by the police department or some other officer designated by the mayor. (Ord. 0-77-12, 5-2-
1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
2-1-7: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Building And Premises: No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business and no permit shall be issued for any thing or act, if the premises and
building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the ordinances of the city. No such license or permit shall be issued for
the conduct of any business or performance of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning ordinance of the city.
B. Change Of Location: The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any permitted act, may be changed, provided fourteen (14) days' notice
thereof is given to the city clerk, in the absence of any provision to the contrary, and provided further, that the requirements of all applicable ordinances
of the city are complied with.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 49/470
C. Posting License: It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the
premises used for such business at all times.
D. Vehicle Tags: Whenever the number of vehicles used is a basis of a license fee, the city clerk shall furnish each licensee with a tag or sticker for each
vehicle covered by the license, and such tag or sticker shall be posted in a conspicuous place on each such vehicle while it is in use. (Ord. 0-77-12, 5-
2-1977)
2-1-8: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
Whenever inspection of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation is provided for or required by
ordinance, or is reasonably necessary thereto to secure compliance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of the
city who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations
thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee whose business is governed by the provision to give any authorized officer or employee of the city requesting
the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon request.
In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, unless another specific procedure for revocation is provided by another ordinance, the city council
may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed business in the city who refuses to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized
to make such inspection or take such sample to make the inspection, or take an adequate sample of said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or
employee while in the performance of his duty in making such inspection; provided, that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand
is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises in the name of the city, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is
sought to make the inspection or to obtain the sample. (Ord. 0-77-12, 5-2-1977)
2-1-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license or permit may be revoked by the city council during the life of such license or permit for the violation by the licensee or permittee of any
ordinance provisions relating to the license or permit, the subject of the license or permit, or the premises occupied; such revocation may be in addition to
any fine imposed. This section shall not apply to any license or permit for which a specific procedure for revocation of such license or permit is provided by
another ordinance of the city. (Ord. 0-77-12, 5-2-1977)
2-1-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
Chapter 2
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
2-2-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A. A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property at retail in the city at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such
business.
B. Every such person engaged in such business in the city shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of
revenue required by section 3 of "an act in relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property to purchasers
for use or consumption", approved June 28, 1933, as amended1.
C. At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from
sales of tangible personal property during the preceding calendar month. (Ord. 0-76-02, 6-1-1976)
D. The exclusion contained in section 2(d) of the retailers' occupation tax act, approved June 28, 1933, as amended, shall not apply to property within the
city.
E. Exclusion a-1 contained in section 2 of the retailers' occupation tax act, approved June 28, 1933, as amended, shall not apply to persons engaged in
the business of selling tangible personal property at retail within the city. (Ord. 0-80-47, 10-7-1980)
2-2-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A. A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with section 8-11-5 of the Illinois municipal code upon all persons engaged, in the municipality, in the business of
making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the cost price of all tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen in the form of
tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 50/470
B. Every supplier and serviceman required to account for municipal service occupation tax for the benefit of the city shall file, on or before the first day of
each calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue required by section 9 of the "service occupation tax act", as amended2.
C. At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed upon the cost price of tangible
personal property transferred by servicemen during the preceding calendar month. (Ord. 0-76-03, 6-1-1976)
D. The exclusion contained in section 2(e) of the service occupation act, approved July 10, 1961, as amended, shall not apply to property within the city.
E. The farm machinery and equipment exclusion contained in section 3 of the service occupation tax act, approved July 10, 1961, as amended, shall not
apply to all persons engaged in the business of making sale of service within the city. (Ord. 0-80-47, 10-7-1980)
2-2-3: MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
A. A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-6 of the Illinois municipal code upon the privilege of using in the city any item
of tangible personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of Illinois
government. The tax shall be at a rate of one percent (1%) of the selling price of such tangible property with selling price to have the meaning as
defined in the use tax act, approved July 14, 19553.
B. Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois department of revenue and shall be paid before the title or certificate of registration for the personal property is
issued. (Ord. 0-76-04, 6-1-1976)
C. The farm machinery and equipment exclusion contained in section 3 of the use tax act, approved July 14, 1955, as amended, shall not apply to the
privilege of using in such municipality any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at retail from a retailer and which is
titled or registered with an agency of this state's government. (Ord. 0-80-47, 10-7-1980)
2-2-4: MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX:
A. A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in the city of Prospect Heights an automobile which is rented from a renter outside the state and
which is titled or registered with an agency of this state's government in this city at the rate of one percent (1%) of the rental price of such automobile
while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-8. (Ord. 0-04-29, 6-21-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
B. Every lessee of an automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which is titled or registered with an agency of Illinois government in the
city shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue required by sections 2 and 3 of "an act in
relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property to purchasers for use or consumption" approved June 29,
1933, as amended. (Ord. 0-82-17, 7-6-1982)
C. The tax provided for in this section shall be collected from the persons whose state address for titling or registration purposes is given as being in this
city and shall be paid to the Illinois department of revenue. (Ord. 0-04-29, 6-21-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
At the time each report required in subsection B of this section is filed, there shall be paid to state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby
imposed on account of the renting of automobiles during the preceding month. (Ord. 0-82-17, 7-6-1982)
2-2-5: MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX:
A. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting automobiles in the city of Prospect Heights at the rate of one percent (1%)
of the gross receipts from such rentals made in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-7.
B. Every such person engaged in such business in the city shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month the report to the state department of
revenue required by 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/3, as amended.
C. At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the renting of
automobiles during the preceding month. (Ord. 0-04-29, 6-21-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
2-2-6: MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX:
A. Imposition Of Tax: A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges:
1. Persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts from such
business originating within the corporate limits of Prospect Heights.
2. Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of Prospect
Heights, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom.
3. Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate limits of
Prospect Heights, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom. (Ord. 0-87-18, 5-4-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 51/470
B. Authority: No tax is imposed by this section with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business
may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall
any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas, or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting
messages be subject to taxation under the provisions of this section for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the
provisions of the "municipal retailers' occupation tax act" authorized by section 8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code, approved July 25, 1961, as
amended.
C. Value Added Tax: The tax imposed by this section shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to this
municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or
thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. (Ord. 0-84-18, 8-20-1984, eff. 9-4-1984)
D. Definitions: For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply:
ELECTRICITY: Has the same meaning as in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code of 1961, approved July 21, 1961, as amended.
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for the transmission of messages, or for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity
for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received
in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be
determined without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting said messages without any deduction on account of the cost of the service,
product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever; however, the term "gross receipts"
shall not include any charges added to customers' bills as payment for this tax or for any charges added to customers' bills pursuant to the provisions
of paragraphs (a) and (b) of section 36 of the public utilities act, nor shall the term "gross receipts" include any charges to customers for any other state
or federal taxes whatsoever.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal corporation or
political subdivision of this state, or receiver trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
TRANSMITTING MESSAGES: In addition to the usual and popular meaning of person to person communication, shall include the furnishing, for a
consideration, of services or facilities (whether owned or leased), or both, to persons in connection with the transmission of messages where such
persons do not, in turn, receive any consideration in connection therewith, but shall not include such furnishing of services or facilities to persons for the
transmission of messages to the extent that any such services or facilities for the transmission of messages are furnished for a consideration by such
persons to other persons, for the transmission of messages. (Ord. 0-84-18, 8-20-1984, eff. 9-4-1984; amd. Ord. 0-84-35, 12-3-1984)
E. Effective Date: This section shall be effective as of November 1, 1984, and the tax provided herein shall be based on the "gross receipts", as herein
defined, actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after November 1, 1984.
F. Tax Due: On or before the last day of November 1984, each taxpayer shall make a return to the city collector for the month of November 1984, stating:
1. His name.
2. His principal place of business.
3. His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax is imposed.
4. Amount of tax.
5. Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require.
On or before the last day of each month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the city for the corresponding one month period.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the city, the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period of which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. Provided, however, that in the event that the amount of
billing for a month is not ascertainable by the taxpayer, then the tax may be paid based upon an estimate of the month's collection for a period not to
exceed two (2) months. For the third month of each quarter, the payment shall be based on actual billings for the quarter, less the payments made for
the previous two (2) months.
G. Overpayment Remedy: If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this section, whether as the
result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this section from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided, that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor
shall be so credited. (Ord. 0-84-18, 8-20-1984, eff. 9-4-1984)
H. Rebate: (Rep. by Ord. 0-02-01, 1-22-2002, eff. 2-2-2002)
I. Double Taxation Not Allowed: The tax imposed pursuant to subsection A1 of this section shall not be imposed during such time as the tax imposed by
section 2-2-8 of this chapter is in effect. If section 8-11-17 of the Illinois municipal code is repealed, or becomes ineffective for any reason, subsection
A1 of this section, declared ineffective in favor of section 2-2-8 of this chapter, shall be deemed in full force and effect as of the date section 8-11-17 of
the Illinois municipal code is repealed or becomes ineffective. (Ord. 0-91-42, 12-16-1991)
2-2-7: HOTEL OPERATORS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 52/470
1. Imposition: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel at the rate of five percent
(5%) of the gross rental receipts from such renting, leasing or letting; excluding, however, gross receipts obtained from the renting, leasing or letting
to permanent residents of a hotel. (Ord. 0-02-22, 9-16-2002, eff. 9-26-2002)
2. Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall mean:
HOTEL: Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
The term includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging homes, rooming houses and apartment houses.
HOTEL TAX: The tax imposed under subsection A1 of this section.
PERSON: Shall include any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, public or private corporation or a
receiver, executor, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. (Ord. 0-00-02, 2-22-2000; amd. Ord. 0-12-22, 6-25-
2012)
3. Reimbursement: Persons subject to the tax imposed hereby may reimburse themselves for their tax liability for such tax by separately stating such
tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination with the state tax imposed under "the hotel operators' occupation tax act" or
in a single amount.
4. Exemption: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the city to impose a tax upon the privilege of engaging in any business which
under the United States constitution may not be made the subject of taxation by the state. (Ord. 0-00-02, 2-22-2000)
B. Report And Payment Required: Every person engaged in such business within the city shall file with the city treasurer for each calendar month on or
before the tenth day of the following calendar month a report of income against which the tax imposed by this section is computed. Also required is a
copy of the report for the same month to the Illinois department of revenue (IDR) required by section 6 of "the hotel operators' occupation tax act",
approved July 6, 1961, as amended.
At the time said report to the city and copy of the IDR report are filed with the city treasurer the person operating the hotel shall pay the amount of tax
required by this section. (Ord. 0-93-68, 1-3-1994)
C. Disposition Of Hotel Tax Funds: All hotel tax revenue derived under the provisions of this section shall be kept in a separate fund held by the city and
used only for the purpose of promoting meetings, tourism, conventions or other projects and events within the city, or otherwise to attract nonresidents
to visit the city and to patronize all businesses, as set forth in this chapter. No funds received pursuant to this section shall be used directly to advertise
or otherwise promote new competition in the hotel business. The hotel tax funds collected shall be used as follows:
1. Promotional Grants: The city council shall budget and expend a sum not to exceed 42.5 percent of the annual hotel tax revenue to be used for
promotional grants as recommended by the tourism board as set forth below.
2. Police Services: The city council shall budget and expend a sum not to exceed 42.5 percent of the annual hotel tax revenue to be used for the hiring
and compensation of police officers and the purchase of related police department equipment for the purpose of providing police services in the
tourism zone.
3. Beautification And Road Repair: The city council shall budget and expend a sum not to exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the annual hotel tax revenue
to be used for the beautification of streetscapes and the repair of roads in the tourism zone.
4. Reserve Account For Promotional Activities: The balance of the funds derived from hotel taxes shall be placed in a reserve account and spent on
promotional activities as determined by the city council upon the recommendation of the tourism board.
5. Use Of Reserve Cash On Hand: As of the date of this amendatory ordinance, there is currently one million fifty one thousand seven hundred sixty six
dollars ($1,051,766.00) in the hotel tax fund of the city. After the date of this amendatory ordinance, this amount shall be budgeted and spent as
follows:
a. One hundred sixty six thousand nine hundred sixty one dollars ($166,961.00) shall be distributed to the city's general fund for set up and operation
of the tourism zone and the funding of the police department activities in the tourism zone.
b. One hundred sixty six thousand nine hundred sixty one dollars ($166,961.00) shall be budgeted for tourism grants and shall be expended by the
city council as recommended by the tourism board in the current fiscal year.
c. The hotel tax reserve fund shall hold a balance of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
d. For the fiscal years 2014 through 2017, the remaining six hundred sixty seven thousand eight hundred forty four dollars ($667,844.00) from the
hotel tax reserve shall be budgeted and expended proportionally as set forth in subsections C5a and C5b of this section.
D. Tourism Board:
1. Creation: There is hereby created the Prospect Heights tourism board.
2. Purpose: The purpose of the tourism board is to promote and encourage tourism to area hotels, motels, restaurants and businesses by reviewing
applications for tourism grants from tourism zone businesses and recommending expenditure of hotel tax funds on said grant applications.
3. Members: The tourism board shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. At least two
(2) members shall be owners, operators or otherwise employed by hotels within the tourism zone.
4. Rules And Meetings:
a. The tourism board shall establish a schedule of meetings, rules of procedure and rules governing its conduct and the application process and
criteria for tourism grants.
b. A quorum for the transaction of all business by the board of directors shall be necessary and shall consist of three (3) members being physically
present.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 53/470
c. Each member must be present to vote on any matter before the board of directors. The act of a majority of the directors present at a meeting at
which a quorum is present shall be the act of the board of directors unless a greater number is required by statute or these bylaws.
d. All meetings are subject to the Illinois open meetings act.
5. Officers And Duties:
a. At the beginning of the city's fiscal year, currently May 1, the tourism board shall elect a chairperson and a secretary.
b. Upon resignation or incapacity, of either the chairperson or secretary, the members shall elect a replacement to serve the balance of the term.
c. The chairperson shall preside over all meetings. He or she also shall assume all duties incident to the office as may be prescribed by the
members.
d. The secretary shall keep minutes of all meetings and a record of all actions of the tourism board.
e. The members shall receive no compensation for service but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred with regard to tourism board
business.
E. Tourism Zone: There is hereby established the Prospect Heights tourism zone. The purpose of the tourism zone shall be to promote and encourage
tourism to area hotels, motels, restaurants and businesses. The boundaries of the tourism zone shall be as set forth on the map attached to the
ordinance codified herein and incorporated as exhibit A.
F. North Shore Convention And Visitors Bureau: The city shall join the North Shore Convention And Visitors Bureau and shall maintain membership in
good standing until further action of the city council. The city council shall budget and expend sufficient funds from hotel tax revenue to pay all
membership fees and dues associated with its membership in the bureau. The city administrator is authorized to take all steps to carry out the
purposes of this subsection.
G. Tourism Grants: The city council may make grants to businesses in the tourism zone for the purpose of promoting meetings, tourism, conventions or
other projects and events within the city, or otherwise to attract nonresidents to visit the city and to patronize all businesses, as set forth in this chapter.
Grants shall be approved by the city council upon the recommendation of the tourism board, provided that there are sufficient funds available in the
tourism grant portion of the annual budget and that the proposed grant comports with the purposes of this section. Persons awarded a tourism grant
shall provide such reports and access to books and records as may be required by the city administrator to ensure that grant funds are being used for
proper tourism grant purposes. (Ord. 0-12-22, 6-25-2012)
H. Interest On Late Payments: In the event a person required to pay the tax imposed hereby shall fail to remit the tax within fifteen (15) days after the
same is due, he shall be required to pay interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month for each month the tax, or any amount thereof, remains
unpaid. However, the total amount of such interest shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any one late payment.
For the purpose of definition, the term "net tax collected" is and shall mean the funds actually collected. (Ord. 0-93-68, 1-3-1994; amd. Ord. 0-12-22, 6-
25-2012)
2-2-8: TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in the city regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the city and for all services rendered in
connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every kind or nature,
and shall be determined without any deduction on account used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended,
the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. However, "gross charge" shall not include:
1. Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: a) the tax imposed by this section, b) additional charges added
to a purchaser's bill pursuant to section 9-222 of the public utilities act, c) the tax imposed by the telecommunications excise tax act, or d) the tax
imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue code;
2. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the city;
3. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time sharing
agreement;
4. Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
5. Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
time specified by the department of commerce and community affairs;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 54/470
6. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this section has already been paid to a retailer and only
to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent
expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service;
7. Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable Federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt
deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment
is made); or
8. Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications devices.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside the State of Illinois.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and terminate within the State of Illinois.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, or a receiver, trustee,
guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court, the Federal and State governments, including State universities created by statute,
or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of the State of Illinois.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this subsection.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A BUSINESS IN ILLINOIS (Or Any Like Term): Includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of Illinois,
directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business or any agent or
other representative operating within the State of Illinois under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in Illinois.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than Federal and State governments, and State universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the tax has already been paid to a retailer and the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, maritime
systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunication
equipment as defined by the telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his agents, employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating in the City or
receiving in the City telecommunications and who incurs a tax liability under this Section.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the usual and popular meaning, includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through
use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter services, computer exchange services; cellular
mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio services, paging service, or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way
communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which
computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for the purposes other than transmission.
"Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of
the service provided by him to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end communications. (Ord. 0-91-42, 12-
16-1991)
B. Tax Imposed:
1. Effective January 1, 2003, there is hereby imposed pursuant to the Illinois municipal code a tax upon:
a. The act or privilege of originating or receiving in the city intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent (6%) of the gross
charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer by such person. However, such tax is not imposed on such act or privilege
to the extent such act or privilege may not,under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by
municipalities in this state.
b. The act or privilege of originating or receiving in the city interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent (6%) of the gross
charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer by such person. To prevent actual multistate taxation of the act or privilege
that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be
allowed a credit against the tax to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state which was not previously allowed
a credit against any other state or local tax in this state. However, such tax is not imposed on the act or privilege to the extent such act or privilege
may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by municipalities in this state. (Ord. 0-91-42, 12-
16-1991; amd. Ord. 0-02-19, 8-19-2002, eff. 8-29-2002)
2. Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale.
C. Collection Of Tax By Retailers:
1. Retailers Maintaining A Place Of Business In Illinois:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 55/470
a. Any retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and making or effectuating a sale at retail shall collect the tax authorized by this section
from the taxpayer and remit it to the city in the manner and on forms provided by the city treasurer.
b. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this section and any tax collected by the retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the city.
c. The retailer shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications when sold for use in the manner presented by this section.
d. The tax authorized by this section shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the retailer providing taxable services until paid, and, if unpaid, is
recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for taxable services.
2. Retailers Not Maintaining A Place Of Business In Illinois: The city shall, upon application, authorize the collection of this tax by any retailer not
maintaining a place of business in this state who, to the satisfaction of the city, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the
tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the
tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the city in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer
maintaining a place of business in Illinois.
D. Registration And Filing Returns By Retailers:
1. Every retailer maintaining a place of business in Illinois shall register with the city within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this section or the
date of becoming such a retailer, whichever is later.
2. On or before the last day of each calendar month every retailer maintaining a place of business in Illinois and every retailer authorized by the city to
collect the tax imposed by this section shall file a return with the city and remit all applicable tax for the preceding calendar month. The return shall
state:
a. The retailer's name.
b. Its principal place of business.
c. The gross charge for telecommunications during such month.
d. The amount of tax due.
e. Such other reasonable and related information as the city may require.
3. The retailer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the city the amount of tax herein imposed; provided
that in connection with a return the retailer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business subject to the tax
during the period of which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any
differences between such billings and the taxable gross charges. Provided, however, that in the event that the amount of billing for a month is not
ascertainable by the retailer, then the tax may be paid based upon an estimate of the month's collection for a period not to exceed two (2) months.
For the third month of each quarter, the payment shall be based on actual billings for the quarter, less the payments made for the previous two (2)
months.
4. If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this section, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this section from the retailer who made the
erroneous payment; provided, that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
E. Obligation Of Taxpayers To File Returns And Pay Tax:
1. If a retailer fails to collect the tax authorized by this section from a taxpayer, as required by subsection C of this section, then the taxpayer shall pay
the tax directly to the city.
2. On or before the last day of each calendar month, every taxpayer that has not paid the tax imposed by this section to a retailer shall file with the city
a tax return and pay the tax upon the gross charges the taxpayer paid to the retailer during the preceding calendar month. The return shall be filed
on a form prescribed by the city, containing such information as the city may reasonably require.
F. Resellers: If a person who originates or receives telecommunications in the city claims to be a reseller of telecommunications, that person shall apply to
the city for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this section on any purchases of
telecommunications and shall furnish such additional information as the city may reasonably require. Upon approval of the application, the city shall
assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant. The city may cancel the resale number of any person if the
number:
1. Was obtained through misrepresentation;
2. Is used to originate or receive telecommunications tax free when such telecommunications are not for resale; or
3. Is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued making resales.
The act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the city shall not be made tax free on the ground of being a sale for resale
unless the person has an active resale number and furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to
such person is nontaxable because of being a sale for resale.
G. Maintaining Books And Records: Every retailer maintaining a place of business in Illinois, every retailer authorized by the city to collect the tax imposed
by this section and every taxpayer required by subsection E of this section, to pay the tax directly to the city shall keep accurate books and records of
its business or activity, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any
tax liability or exemption. All such books and records shall be kept in the English language and, at all times during business hours of the day, shall be
subject to and available for inspection by the city authorities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 56/470
H. Severability: If any provision of this section, or the application of any provision of this section, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such
occurrence shall not affect provisions of this section, or their application, that can be given effect with the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its
application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this section. In
particular, if subsection B1b of this section is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the tax imposed under subsection B1a of this section shall
remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 0-91-42, 12-16-1991)
2-2-9: NONHOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAXES:
A. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property
titled or registered with an agency of this state's government, at retail in this municipality at the rate of one-half of one percent (1/2%) of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this section is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in
this municipality in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of one-half of one percent (1/2%) of the selling price of all tangible personal
property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service. Such "nonhome rule municipal retailers' occupation tax" and the "nonhome
rule municipal service occupation tax" shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises
where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and
nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.
B. The imposition of these nonhome rule taxes is in accordance with the provisions of sections 8-11-1.1, 8-11-1.2, 8-11-1.3 and 8-11-1.4, respectively, of
the Illinois municipal code4.
C. The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the department of
revenue of the state of Illinois in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1 and 5/8-11-5. The department of revenue shall
have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this section. (Ord. 0-04-63, 12-6-2004)
2-2-10: TAX ON PLACES FOR EATING:
A. Title: The tax imposed by this section shall be known as the Prospect Heights tax on places for eating and is imposed in addition to all other taxes
imposed by the city of Prospect Heights, the state of Illinois or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state of Illinois.
B. Definitions: When any of the following words or terms are used in this section, whether or not capitalized, and whether used in a conjunctive or
connective form, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this subsection:
BEVERAGES: Both alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages.
FOOD OR PREPARED FOOD: All tangible personal property, whether solid or liquid, which is used or intended to be used for human consumption.
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, property and
services, at a place for eating for prepared food furnished at the place for eating. Gross receipts do not include amounts paid for federal, state and local
taxes, including the tax levied by this section, and do not include amounts paid as gratuities for the employees of the place for eating.
PLACE FOR EATING: Any restaurant or other business, by whatever name, that is a place for eating under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-42-5,
including, but not limited to, all premises located within the corporate limits of the city of Prospect Heights where prepared food is sold at retail for
immediate consumption, with seating provided for consumption of said prepared food on the premises, whether consumed on premises or not, and
whether or not such places for eating use is conducted along with any other use(s) in a common premises or business establishment.
SALE AT RETAIL: As that term is defined in the Illinois retailers' occupation tax act, as amended, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 and following.
All other words or terms used in this section that are not defined in section 1-3-2, "Definitions, General", of this code, as amended, shall have the
meaning set forth in the Illinois retailers' occupation tax act, as amended, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq.
C. Tax Imposed: Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-42-5, except as otherwise provided by this section, a tax is hereby imposed on each place
for eating located in the city. The rate of the tax shall be 1.50 percent of the selling price of all food and beverages sold at retail by the place for eating.
The tax levied by this section shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges.
D. Exemptions: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the following sales at retail shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section:
1. All sales of food and beverages which are exempt from tax under the provisions of the Illinois retailers' occupation tax, as amended, 35 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq.
2. All sales of food and beverages which may not be taxed by the city under applicable law.
E. Occasional Or De Minimis Sales: A place for eating whose liability for the tax imposed by this section would, in the absence of this section, be less than
or equal to two hundred dollars ($200.00) in an annual tax year (May 1 through April 30) shall not be required to file a return or make any payment of
tax with regard to that tax and annual tax year; provided, however, that this section shall not be available to any place for eating that has separately
stated and charged the tax to its customers during that annual tax year.
F. Tax Payments And Returns: The owner of a place for eating may collect an amount from persons who purchase prepared food at the place for eating
which shall reimburse the owner for the tax imposed on the owner by this section.
1. Transmittal Of Tax Revenue By Owner; Delinquency: The owner or owners of each place for eating shall file tax returns showing the gross receipts
received during each calendar month period upon forms prescribed by the city administrator. Returns for each calendar month shall be due on or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 57/470
before the twentieth day of the next calendar month (e.g., the return for January shall be due on or before February 20; the return for February shall
be due on or before March 20; etc.). Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that the owner of the place for eating is allowed to file Illinois
retailers' occupation tax and Illinois service occupation tax returns with the Illinois department of revenue at intervals which are greater than monthly,
said owner shall be allowed to file tax returns relative to the tax imposed by this section with the city at said greater intervals. At the time of the filing
of said tax returns, the owners shall pay to the city treasurer all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies.
2. Transmittal Of Excess Tax Collections: If any person collects an amount upon a sale not subject to the tax imposed hereby, but which amount is
purported to be the collection of said tax, or if a person collects an amount upon a sale greater than the amount of the tax so imposed herein and
does not for any reason return the same to the purchaser who paid the same before filing the return for the period in which such occurred, said
person shall account for and pay over those amounts to the city along with the tax properly collected.
G. Rules And Regulations:
1. Registration: Every owner maintaining a place for eating in the city shall register with the city administrator by June 1, 2009, or the date of becoming
such an owner, whichever is later.
2. Collection: Whenever any person shall fail to pay the tax imposed by this section, the city attorney or city prosecutor shall, upon request of the city
administrator, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction.
3. Suspension Of Licenses: If the city administrator, after a hearing held by her or her designee, shall find that any owner has wilfully avoided the
payment of any tax imposed by this section, he/she may suspend or revoke all city licenses held by such tax evader. The owner shall have an
opportunity to be heard at such hearing to be held not less than ten (10) days after being mailed notice of the time when and the place where the
hearing is to be held, addressed to him at last known place of business. Any suspension or revocation of any license(s) shall not release or
discharge the owner from his civil liability for the payment of the tax nor from prosecution for such offense.
4. Penalties: Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with or unlawfully resisting or opposing the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this section, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine
of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the first offense, and not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the second and each subsequent offense in any one hundred eighty (180)
day period.
a. Each day upon which a person shall continue any violations of this section, or permit any such violation to exist after notification thereof, shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
b. Any owner subjected to the penalties provided for by this subsection shall not be discharged or released from the payment of any tax due.
H. Books And Records:
1. Every person required to pay or remit the tax to the department shall keep accurate and complete books and records of its business or activity,
including original source documents, such as purchase orders, invoices and receipts, and other documents listing, summarizing or pertaining to the
transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to the tax liability or exemption that may be claimed. All such books, records and accounts shall
be available for inspection by the city at all reasonable times during business hours of the day.
2. The city administrator, the city treasurer or any person designated by either of them as their deputy or representative, may enter the premises of any
place for eating for inspection, examination, copying and auditing of books and records including, but not limited to, Illinois retailers' occupation tax
and Illinois service occupation tax returns filed with the Illinois department of revenue, in order to effectuate the proper administration of this section,
and to assure the enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed by this section. To the extent reasonably possible, said entry shall be done in a
manner that is least disruptive to the business of the place for eating. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with the city
administrator, the city treasurer or their duly designated deputies or representatives in the discharge of their duties in the performance of this
subsection. It shall be the duty of every owner to keep accurate and complete books and records to which the city treasurer, the city administrator or
their deputies or representatives shall at all times have full access, which records shall include a daily sheet showing the amount of gross receipts
received during the day. (Ord. 0-09-04, 2-2-2009)
Chapter 3
LIQUOR CONTROL
2-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this chapter shall be construed according to the definitions given below:
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, including synthetic ethyl
alcohol, but not including denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable
of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured
alcohol produced in accordance with acts of congress and regulations promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent
(0.5%), or less, of alcohol by volume.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
BOWLING ALLEY: Any establishment or building, or part of an establishment or building, as the case may be, wherein the game of bowling is played with
composition balls and ten (10) pins.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building
or space in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 58/470
members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of
servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and their guests; provided, that such club files with the local
liquor control commissioner at the time of its application for a license under this chapter, two (2) copies of a list of names and residences of its members,
and similarly files within ten (10) days of the election of any additional member, his or her name and address; and, provided further, that its affairs and
management are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting and that no
member or any officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from
the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount of such salary as
may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of the club.
CONVEYANCE: Any vehicle, trailer, or watercraft or container operated for the transportation of persons or property.
GATHERING: Any group of three (3) or more persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
HOST: To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or permit a gathering.
HOTEL: Every building or other structure, kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and
consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which
twenty five (25) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms where meals are
served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or buildings in connection therewith and
such building or buildings, structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity.
ILLICIT DRUGS: Any drug, substance, or compound prohibited by law, including drugs prescribed by a physician that are in the possession of or used by
someone other than the person to whom the drug was prescribed.
KEG: Any original package container capable of holding more than one gallon of beer.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or other receptacle or container whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed
and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any alcoholic liquor.
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile as natural, adoptive, or stepparent, as a legal guardian, as a person to whom legal custody has
been given by order of the court, or any other person over twenty one (21) years of age who is in loco parentis of a minor.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any publicly owned property, streets, highways, schools, parks as well as the common areas of apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, parks, businesses, or parking lots.
REASONABLE STEPS: Controlling access to alcoholic beverages at a gathering, controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present at the gathering,
verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by inspecting driver's licenses or other government issued identification cards to ensure that minors do
not consume alcoholic beverages while at the gathering, supervising the activities of minors at the gathering, and calling for police assistance in the event
underage persons are in possession of alcohol at the gathering or advising law enforcement in advance of departing one's residence that the owner will be
away and no underage person is authorized to be present and consume alcohol at the owner's residence.
RELIGIOUS CEREMONY: The possession, consumption, and dispensation of alcohol or an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of conducting any bona
fide rites or religious ceremony.
RESIDENCE OR PREMISES: Any home, yard, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room,
park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or
specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Any person which hosts a gathering or having custody or control of private property where a gathering occurs.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals
actually are served and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations; such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining
room equipment and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its
guests.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD: A self-service establishment selling a limited number of prepared food items which are served in containers and with utensils
that are disposable and which are dispensed for consumption on or off the premises.
RETAIL SALE: The sale for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
RETAILER: A person who sells or offers for sale alcoholic liquor for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
SALE OF A KEG: Any sale of beer in a keg, even though the keg is to be returned by the purchaser to the seller.
STATE COMMISSION: The Illinois liquor control commission.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual under twenty one (21) years of age.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of "alcohol" as defined in this section. (Ord. 0-94-04, 6-6-1994; amd. Ord. 0-95-44, 10-16-1995; Ord. 0-10-13, 6-28-2010)
2-3-2: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The mayor of the city shall be the local liquor control commissioner and shall be charged with the administration within the city of the appropriate
provisions of the state and of this chapter. He may appoint a person or persons to assist him in the exercise of the powers and the performance of the
duties of said office. The city council may fix and pay compensation to the local liquor control commissioner of the city and compensation to such deputies,
assistants or employees as may be deemed necessary for the proper performance of the duties vested in him. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 59/470
shall have the following powers, functions and duties with respect to licenses, other than licenses to manufacturers, importing distributors, distributors,
nonbeverage users, railroads, airplanes and boats:
A. To grant and/or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke for cause all local licenses issued to persons for the premises within his jurisdiction
in the manner provided in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-5.
B. To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officers to enter at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of this Chapter or any rules or regulations adopted by him or by the State Commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to
examine said premises of said licensee in connection therewith.
C. To notify the Secretary of State where a club incorporated under the "General Not for Profit Corporation Act1", or a foreign corporation functioning as a
club in this State under a certificate of authority issued under said Act has violated this Chapter by selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic liquors
without a retailer's license.
D. To receive complaints from any citizen within his jurisdiction that any of the provisions of this Chapter, or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant
hereto, have been or are being violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter provided.
E. To receive local license fees and pay the same forthwith to the City Treasurer.
F. To levy fines in accordance with Section 2-3-24 of this Chapter.
When, in this Chapter, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall be referred to, it shall include any committee or other agency appointed by such
Local Liquor Control Commissioner. (Ord. 0-95-44, 10-16-1995)
2-3-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the City any alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license, or in violation of the terms of
such license. (Ord. 0-95-44, 10-16-1995)
2-3-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for new and renewed licenses shall be made to the Mayor in writing, signed by the applicant or applicants, if an individual or individuals, or by
a duly authorized agent thereof, if a club or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit. All applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application
fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) which shall be separate and distinct from the annual license fee. New applications shall contain the following
statements and information:
A. The name, age and address of each applicant in the case of individuals; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits
thereof and the percentage ownership held by each; and in the case of a corporation for profit, or a club, the date of incorporation, the objects for which
it was organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors and stockholders owning five percent (5%) or more of the outstanding stock of
such corporation.
B. The citizenship of each applicant, the place of birth of each, and in the case of a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization.
C. The character of business of each applicant; and in case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed; and the length of time each applicant has
been in business of that character, or in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was issued.
D. The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under the license being applied for; such description shall
include a general layout of the premises with appropriate dimensions and identification of the area or areas in which liquor will be stored, sold, served,
consumed or handled.
E. A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar or other license or premises other than described in this application, and the
disposition of such applications.
F. A statement whether any of the applicants have ever been convicted of a felony and thus not qualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or
thing contained in this Chapter, laws of this State, or other ordinances of the City.
G. Whether license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the Federal Government, has been revoked and the reasons therefor.
H. A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the State, or of the United States, or any ordinance of the City in the conduct of his
place of business.
I. The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time the application is made or, equivalently, the monetary value of current inventory.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 60/470
J. Any other information or guarantees that the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or the City authorities shall require.
Applications for renewal shall contain either a statement that all of the above statements and information are and remain true and valid, or appropriate
statements describing any changes in or to any such information or statements contained in the original or any previous application. Each renewal
application shall, however, require reaffirmation of the type and division of ownership contained in subsection A of this Section and of the intent of each
applicant to comply with subsection H of this Section. (Ord. 0-97-02, 1-20-1997, eff. 1-30-1997)
2-3-5: RESTRICTION ON LICENSES:
No such license shall be issued to:
A. A person who is not a resident of the City.
B. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides.
C. A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
D. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or State law, if the Commissioner determines, after investigation, that such person has
not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust.
E. A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
F. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is keeping a house of ill fame.
G. A person whose license under this Chapter has been revoked for cause.
H. A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first application.
I. A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited partnership thereof owning more than five percent (5%) of the aggregate, limited
partner interest in such copartnership, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than residence within the City.
J. A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders, owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the
stock of such corporation would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the City.
K. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
L. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or who
shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
M. A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease agreement therein for the full period for
which the license is to be issued.
N. Any law enforcing public official, including members of local liquor control commissions, or any Mayor, or member of the City Council; and no such
official shall be interested directly in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that license may be granted to such official in
relation to premises which are not located in territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of such license is approved by the State
Liquor Control Commission.
O. A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee.
P. A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by any of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1(a)(3) through (a)(10) or 5/28-3, of
the Criminal Code, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions.
Q. A person to whom a Federal wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal government for the current tax period.
R. A copartnership to which a Federal wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal government for the current tax period, or if any of the partners have
been issued a Federal wagering stamp by the Federal government for the current tax period.
S. A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than twenty percent (20%) of the stock of
such corporation has been issued a Federal wagering stamp by the Federal government for the current tax period.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 61/470
T. A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation Act to
transact business in Illinois.
U. Any premises for which a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal wagering stamp has been issued for the current tax period.
V. No classification exists for businesses operated as petroleum filling stations. (Ord. 0-95-44, 10-16-1995)
2-3-6: EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT:
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right to examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local license or for a
renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served as provided by statute, and to examine or cause to be
examined the books and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for his information in the performance of his duties,
and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this State. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner under this section, he may authorize his agent to act on his behalf, as provided by statute. (Ord. 0-95-44, 10-16-
1995)
2-3-7: FINGERPRINTS; FEE:
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right to require fingerprints of any applicant for a local license or for a renewal thereof other than an
applicant who is an air carrier operating under a certificate or a foreign air permit issued pursuant to the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, 49 USCA section
1301. For purposes of obtaining fingerprints under this section, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall collect a fee and forward the fee to the Police
Department of the City, which shall submit the fingerprints and the fee to the Illinois Department of State Police. (Ord. 0-95-44, 10-16-1995)
2-3-8: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES:
A. Class A Licenses: Class A licenses which shall authorize the retail sale on the premises specified of alcoholic liquor only for consumption on the
premises. If the premises is a hotel, packaged liquor may be sold to guests of the hotel.
Class A-1 Licenses: Class A-1 licenses shall authorize the retail sales on the premises of beer and wine only for consumption on the premises in a
bowling alley only.
Class A-2 Licenses: Class A-2 licenses shall authorize the retail sale on the premises specified of alcoholic liquor only for consumption on the
premises.
Class A-3 Licenses: Class A-3 licenses shall authorize the retail sale on the premises specified of alcoholic liquor only for consumption on the premises
during the hours set forth in section 2-3-9 of this chapter. The holder of a Class A-3 license may petition the Local Liquor Commissioner for a temporary
extended hours permit to allow extended hours not later than four o'clock (4:00) A.M. on any one day Sunday through Thursday. Said petition must be
in writing and delivered to the Local Liquor Commissioner not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date on which the licensee desires extended
hours. An extended hours permit granted under this section shall be valid only for the single date specified on the permit. Extended hours under this
subsection may be granted in the sole discretion of the Local Liquor Commissioner and shall not be deemed a right of the licensee. (Ord. 0-17-03, 3-
27-2017, eff. 4-1-2017)
B. Class B Licenses: Class B licenses which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, but not for consumption on the premises where sold.
1. If said sale of alcoholic liquor is carried out on premises which are utilized primarily for other retail sales activities, the sale of such liquor shall be
confined to an area which is separated from the other retail sales activity.
2. The sale of such liquor shall be confined to an area which is separated from the other retail portions of the premises by a suitable enclosure or
partition of such design and construction as may be approved by the local liquor control commissioner. No class B license outstanding on the
effective date of this section shall be renewed upon its expiration unless such approved enclosure or partition has been constructed.
C. Class B-1, B-2, And B-3 Licenses:
1. Class B-1 Licenses: Class B-1 licenses which shall authorize the retail sale of wine and beer, but not for consumption on the premises where sold.
The said sale of alcoholic liquor is carried out on premises which are used primarily for the sale at retail of packaged foods and/or convenience items
to be carried out from the premises.
2. Class B-2 Licenses: Class B-2 licenses which shall authorize the retail sale of wine and beer, but not for consumption on premises where sold. The
said sale of alcoholic liquor is carried out on premises which are used primarily for the sale at retail of packaged foods and/or convenience items to
be carried out from the premises, during hours of operation which differ from the B-1 classification.
3. Class B-3 Licenses, Grocery Stores: Class B-3 licenses which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor by grocery stores not for consumption
on the premises where sold. The said sale of alcoholic liquor is carried out on premises which are used primarily for the sale of groceries and related
goods to be carried out from the premises.
4. Separate Area For Sales: If said sale of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer is carried out on premises which are utilized primarily for other retail sales
activities, the sale of such liquor shall be confined to an area which is separated from the other retail sales activity. The sale of such wine or beer
shall be confined to an area which is separated from the other retail portions of the premises by a suitable enclosure or partition of such design and
construction as may be approved by the local liquor control commissioner. No class B-1, B-2, or B-3 license outstanding on the effective date of this
section shall be renewed upon its expiration unless such approved enclosure or partition has been constructed. (Ord. 0-16-09, 3-28-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 62/470
D. Class C Licenses: Class C licenses which shall authorize the retail sale, in restaurants only, of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where
sold. Such licenses may be issued to and retained by those establishments which:
1. Have a seating capacity at tables for a minimum of thirty (30) persons for food services; and
2. Offer their patrons full and complete meals, including a dinner menu.
No such license shall be granted to or retained by any establishment in which the facilities for food preparation and service are not primarily those of
a restaurant or are operated as a "fast food restaurant" as defined in this chapter. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, limited food service,
such as provided by lounges, luncheonettes, diners, coffee shops, drive-ins, etc., do not satisfy the requirements for this license classification.
E. Class C-1 Licenses: Class C-1 licenses which shall authorize the retail sale of wine and beer in restaurants only, for consumption on the premises
where sold. Such licenses may be issued and retained by those establishments which:
1. Have a seating capacity at tables for a minimum of thirty (30) persons for food services; and
2. Offer their patrons meals.
No such license shall be granted to or retained by any establishment in which the facilities for food preparation and service are not primarily those of
a restaurant.
F. Class C-2 Licenses: Class C-2 licenses which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in restaurants only, without a bar or cocktail lounge area
for consumption on the premises where sold. Such licenses may be issued and retained by those establishments which:
1. Are located within the boundaries of the area commonly referred to as the Prospect Crossing TIF area and have a square footage of not less than
seven thousand (7,000) square feet; and
2. Meet all the requirements set forth in subsection D of this section for class C licenses.
G. Class C-3 Licenses: Class C-3 licenses be the same as class C-1 licenses in all respects except for the hours of operation which shall be as set forth in
section 2-3-9 of this chapter.
H. Class D Licenses: Class D licenses which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on public golf course premises.
I. Daily Permits: The local liquor control commissioner may grant a daily permit which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption
only on the premises where sold, to any company, organization or group, authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at any picnic, carnival or similar
function given by said organization.
Daily permits may be issued for not more than five (5) consecutive days to any one organization. The application for a daily permit shall specify the
name of the organization, the person or persons responsible for custody and sale of alcoholic beverages, the dates, and hours of service, and shall
indicate the nature of the organization (e.g., charitable, civic) and the character of the event or events to which the permit applies. No such permits,
however, shall be issued or granted except upon proof of adequate dramshop (host liquor liability) insurance provided by the insurance carrier or a
bona fide agent of the carrier.
Prior to the issuance of a daily permit to any applicant, such applicant shall place on deposit with the local liquor control commissioner the sum of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the exact amount to be determined by the local liquor control commissioner for each
day of the event for which a permit is required. At the discretion of the local liquor control commissioner, such deposit shall be refundable to such
applicant provided that the event for which the daily permit was issued, was conducted without justifiable complaints from nearby residents and without
disruption of nearby business activities or traffic flow. No such deposit shall be refunded in the event that any violation of this section occurred at the
event for which the daily permit was issued.
J. Special Permits: The local liquor control commissioner may grant modified hours for special events with no more than three (3) such permits to be
approved per applicant per year. Such special permits shall be restricted to holders of class A and class C licenses. Requests for the permit for
modified hours shall be made to the local liquor control commissioner in writing, signed by the applicant, including name of responsible supervisor to
the special event, client for whom the special event will be held and any other information deemed necessary by the local liquor control commissioner.
Each application for a permit for modified hours shall include a nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) which shall be separate and distinct
from the annual license fee.
K. Sunday Brunch Permits: The local liquor control commissioner may grant to holders of class A and class C licenses a special Sunday brunch SB permit
to serve alcoholic beverages on Sundays between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon. The SB permit shall be an
addendum to the annual license; and, in no way, shall it be regarded as a license. Holders of such permits shall pay the fees established in section 2-3-
9 of this chapter.
The SB permits shall be effective and concurrent with the licenses to which they apply. No such permit shall be valid in the absence of or during the
revocation or suspension of the license to which it applies.
SB permits shall be issued subject to the same rules and restrictions with respect to holder qualifications, terms and conditions, and to the general
requirements of this chapter which apply to the licenses. Additional restrictions are as follows:
1. SB permits shall apply only to the service of alcoholic beverages at the licensed establishment.
2. All licensed establishments holding an SB permit may provide additional alcoholic beverage service during the period between the hours of nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays only in connection with meal service.
No person or persons shall be served alcoholic beverages in any area where meal service is not offered and available, and no person or persons
shall consume alcoholic beverages during such period except in connection with a meal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 63/470
3. Service of alcoholic beverages under the SB permit is strictly prohibited in cocktail lounges, bar areas, coffee shops and other rooms or areas where
complete meals are not offered and served. (Ord. 0-13-07, 4-8-2013)
2-3-9: LICENSES; CLASSES, FEES, LIMITATIONS ON NUMBER AND HOURS OF OPERATION:
A. For the annual license classification as described in section 2-3-8 of this chapter, the annual fee, the limitation on the outstanding number of such
licenses and the hours of operation for each license shall be as provided in the following schedule:
A $3,300.00 7 8:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M.
following
8:00 A.M. to 3:00 A.M.
Saturday
8:00 A.M. to 3:00 A.M.
Sunday
12:00 noon to 2:00 A.M.
following
A-1 1,650.00 0 12:00 noon to 12:00
midnight
12:00 noon to 12:00
midnight
12:00 noon to 12:00
midnight
A-2 4,400.00 1 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 A.M.
following1
8:00 A.M. to 4:00 A.M.
Saturday
8:00 A.M. to 4:00 A.M.
Sunday
12:00 noon to 3:00 A.M.
following
A-3 4,000.00 1 8:00 A.M. to 3:00 A.M.
following
8:00 A.M. to 4:00 A.M.
Saturday
8:00 A.M. to 4:00 A.M.
Sunday
12:00 noon to 3:00 A.M.
following
B 2,200.00 7 8:00 A.M. to 12:00
midnight
8:00 A.M. to 12:00
midnight
8:00 A.M. to 12:00
midnight
9:00 A.M. to 12:00
midnight
B-1 1,925.00 1 11:00 A.M. to 12:00
midnight
11:00 A.M. to 12:00
midnight
8:00 A.M. to 12:00
midnight
9:00 A.M. to 12:00
midnight
B-2 2,200.00 1 8:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M.
following
8:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M.
Saturday
8:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M.
Sunday
12:00 noon to 2:00 A.M.
following
B-3 2,200.00 1 7:00 A.M. to 12:00
midnight
7:00 A.M. to 12:00
midnight
7:00 A.M. to 12:00
midnight
7:00 A.M. to 12:00
midnight
C 3,300.00 2 8:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M.
following
8:00 A.M. to 3:00 A.M.
Saturday
8:00 A.M. to 3:00 A.M.
Sunday
12:00 noon to 2:00 A.M.
following
C-1 1,650.00 6 8:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M.
following
8:00 A.M. to 3:00 A.M.
Saturday
8:00 A.M. to 3:00 A.M.
Sunday
12:00 noon to 2:00 A.M.
following
C-2 3,300.00 1 8:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M.
following
8:00 A.M. to 3:00 A.M.
Saturday
8:00 A.M. to 3:00 A.M.
Sunday
12:00 noon to 2:00 A.M.
following
C-3 1,650.00 3 8:00 A.M. to 12:00
midnight
8:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
Saturday
8:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
Sunday
8:00 A.M. to 12:00
midnight
D 0.00 1 8:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M.
following
8:00 A.M. to 3:00 A.M.
Saturday
8:00 A.M. to 3:00 A.M.
Sunday
11:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M.
following
Daily $55.00 fee plus $100.00 to
$1,000.00 deposit2
SB $440.00 1 9:00 A.M. to 12:00 noon
Notes:
1. The hours of operation for Class A-2 licenses are 8:00 A.M. through 3:00 A.M. following on Mondays, notwithstanding the above schedule.
2. Daily liquor license deposit may be refunded subject to the discretion of Local Liquor Control Commissioner per subsection 2-3-8I of this
chapter.
(Ord. 0-17-03, 3-27-2017, eff. 4-1-2017; amd. Ord. 0-17-12, 5-22-2017; Ord. 0-17-13, 5-22-2017; Ord. 0-17-16, 6-26-2017)
B. Hours of operation for holidays are permitted as follows:
1. On the mornings of July 4, Memorial Day, Labor Day and Thanksgiving, the sale of alcoholic beverages is permitted as follows in the following
classifications:
Class A Until 3:00 A.M.
Class A-2 Until 4:00 A.M.
Class C Until 3:00 A.M.
Daily Until 1:00 A.M.
Class
Of
License
Annual Fee
Limitation
On Number
Monday
Through
Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 64/470
2. On December 31, the sale of alcoholic beverages is permitted as follows:
Class A Until 3:00 A.M. January 1
Class A-2 Until 4:00 A.M. January 1
Class C Until 3:00 A.M. January 1
Daily Until 3:00 A.M. January 1
(Ord. 0-17-03, 3-27-2017, eff. 4-1-2017)
C. All patrons and customers shall leave the premises not later than ten (10) minutes following the closing hours stipulated above, excepting in
establishments which are full service restaurants in which the service of alcoholic beverages is incidental and complementary to the service of meals;
in such establishments all alcoholic beverages must be removed from all service areas, tables, counters, bars, etc., within ten (10) minutes following
the closing hours stipulated. (Ord. 0-16-09, 3-28-2016)
2-3-9-1: FEES FOR VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS:
An annual fee for each video gaming terminal shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per terminal which shall be paid to the City Clerk at the same time the
fee for an application or renewal of the establishment's liquor license is due. (Ord. 0-12-21, 6-11-2012)
2-3-10: TERMS OF LICENSE AND PRORATED FEES:
All licenses shall be effective from May 1 or from the date of issuance, whichever is later, and shall terminate on April 30, the next following said date or
earlier as provided in section 2-3-13 of this chapter. No license shall be issued to be effective prior to the date of application. Annual fee for a license
issued to be effective on or after November 1 shall be sixty percent (60%) of the annual fee given in the schedule of section 2-3-9 of this chapter, and such
fee reduction shall apply only to the annual fee; all other fees, including application fees and special brunch permit fees, shall apply. (Ord. 0-95-44, 10-16-
1995)
2-3-11: DISPOSITION OF FEES:
The amount of such fee as hereinbefore provided for licenses shall be paid to the mayor at the time application is made either for the issuance of a license
or the renewal thereof and shall be forthwith turned over to the treasurer. In the event the license applied for is denied, such payment shall be returned to
the applicant; if the license is granted, said payment shall be deposited in the general corporate fund or in such other funds as the city council may by
appropriate action direct. (Ord. 0-95-44, 10-16-1995)
2-3-12: LIST OF LICENSES KEPT:
The mayor shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such licenses issued by him. (Ord. 0-95-44, 10-16-1995)
2-3-13: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Transfer Of License: A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as in this
chapter provided; and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee and
shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution; provided, that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and
the trustees of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor may continue the business of the sale or
manufacture of alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt
licensee after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license but not longer than six (6) months after
the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee.
A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from operating under such license
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
B. Renewal Of License: Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof; provided, he is then qualified to receive a license and the premises
for which such renewal license is sought are and remain suitable for such purpose; provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall
not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the city council from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within its
jurisdiction.
C. Special Conditions: In addition to all other conditions which licensees must meet under provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes and of this chapter,
the local liquor control commissioner may impose such special conditions as he deems necessary and reasonable to promote the safety and welfare of
the public and to ensure compliance with local and state laws. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, designation of specific areas of the
premises for the sale, service and the consumption of alcoholic beverages, restriction of the type or form of such beverages, and designation of
physical, administrative or procedural security measures to prevent unauthorized access to facilities for storing and dispensing of such beverages and
to prevent other activities prohibited by this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 65/470
D. Displaying License: Every licensee shall cause his license or licenses to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises.
E. Sales On Credit: No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any person on credit or on a passbook, or order on a store, or in exchange for
any goods, wares or merchandise, or in payment for any services rendered; and if any person shall extend credit for such purpose, the debt thereby
attempted to be created shall not be recoverable at law; provided, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent any club from permitting
checks or statements for alcoholic liquor to be signed by members or bona fide guests of members and charged to the account of such members or
guests in accordance with the bylaws of said club; and provided further, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent any hotel from
permitting checks or statements for liquor to be signed by regular guests residing at said hotel and charged to the accounts of said guests; and
provided further, that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent payment by credit card or other credit device for the purchase of liquor in the original
package or container for consumption off the premises.
F. Refilling Original Packages: No licensee or officer, associate, member or representative of such licensee shall fill or refill, in whole or in part, any original
package of alcoholic liquor with the same or any other kind or quality of alcoholic liquor for purposes of sale at retail, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to have in possession for sale at retail any bottles, casks, or other containers containing alcoholic liquor, except in original packages.
G. Minimum Size Of Container For Unmixed Whiskey, Gin Or Rum: No unmixed whiskey, gin or unmixed rum shall be sold or offered for sale or at retail for
consumption on the premises, except in a container having a minimum capacity of at least one fluid ounce and which contains at the time of sale at
least one fluid ounce of the of the beverage being sold.
H. Happy Hours Prohibited:
1. All retail licenses shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed
premises or in any room or part thereof. Whenever a hotel or multiuse establishment which holds a valid retailer's license operates on its premises
more than one establishment at which drinks of alcoholic liquor are sold at retail, the hotel or multiuse establishment shall maintain at each such
establishment a separate schedule of the prices charged for such drinks at that establishment.
2. No retail licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall:
a. Serve two (2) or more drinks of alcoholic liquor at one time to one person for consumption by that person, except selling or delivering wine by the
bottle or carafe;
b. Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at
private functions not open to the general public;
c. Sell, offer to sell or serve any drink of alcoholic liquor to any person on any one date at a reduced price other than that charged other purchasers
of drinks on that day where such reduced price is a promotion to encourage consumption of alcoholic liquor, except as authorized in subsection
H3g of this section;
d. Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the price
regularly charged for the drink on that day;
e. Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic
liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises; or
f. Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsections H2b through H2e of
this section.
3. Nothing in subsection H2 of this section shall be construed to prohibit a licensee from:
a. Offering free food or entertainment at any time;
b. Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package;
c. Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
d. Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract between a hotel or multiuse establishment and another group for the holding of any
function, meeting, convention or trade show;
e. Providing room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel;
f. Selling pitchers (or the equivalent, including, but not limited to, buckets), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in such
manner and delivered to two (2) or more persons at one time; or
g. Increasing prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in whole or in part, a cover charge to offset the cost of special entertainment not regularly
scheduled.
I. Books And Records: It shall be the duty of every retail licensee to make books and records available upon reasonable notice for the purpose of
investigation and control by the local liquor control commissioner. Such books and records need not be maintained on the licensed premises, but it
must be maintained in the state. (Ord. 0-95-44, 10-16-1995)
J. Duty To Report Certain Illicit Activity: All licensees and their agents and employees shall have the affirmative duty to report the following activity at the
licensed premises to the Prospect Heights police: fights, violence, transaction and use of illegal substances and drug paraphernalia, gang activity,
prostitution, the presence of firearms or the unlawful use thereof, or any activity which results in a breach of the peace.
K. Duty To Cooperate With Law Enforcement Personnel: All licensees and their agents and employees shall have the affirmative duty to cooperate with
law enforcement personnel in their investigation of crime and enforcement of state law and Prospect Heights ordinances. (Ord. 0-05-05, 3-21-2005, eff.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 66/470
4-22-2005)
2-3-14: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. General: No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school, hospital, home for
the aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or children or any military or naval stations; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to
hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the
principal business carried on, if such place of business so exempted shall have been established for such purposes prior to the taking effect of this
section.
The prohibition of this section shall not extend to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within one hundred feet
(100') of any church or school where such church or school has been established within such one hundred feet (100') since the issuance of the original
license. In the case of a church, the distance of one hundred feet (100') shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship services
or educational programs and not to property boundary.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales are limited to
periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic
liquor.
B. Change Of Location: A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application and license.
Such location may be changed only upon a written permission to make such change issued by the mayor of the city. No change of location shall be
permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of the state and the ordinances of the
city. (Ord. 0-95-44, 10-16-1995)
C. Residential Property: No class A-2 license shall be issued for a premises any part of which is located within five hundred feet (500') of any residentially
zoned property. (Ord. 0-03-52, 12-1-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
2-3-15: STORES SELLING SCHOOL SUPPLIES, LUNCHES, ETC:
No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of customers
are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such minors.
(Ord. 0-95-44, 10-16-1995)
2-3-16: ACCESS FROM LICENSED PREMISES TO DWELLING QUARTERS:
Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail upon any premises which has any access which leads from such premises
to any other portion of the same building or structure used for dwelling or lodging purposes and which is permitted to be used or kept accessible for use by
the public. This provision shall not prevent any connection between such premises and such other portion of the building or structure which is used only by
the licensee, her family and personal guests. (Ord. 0-95-44, 10-16-1995)
2-3-17: SANITARY CONDITIONS; EMPLOYMENT OF NONAGE PERSONS:
A. Premises: All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for sale, shall be kept in full compliance with the
ordinances regulating the condition of premises for the storage and sale of food for human consumption.
B. Employees: No licensee holding a license permitting the sale of alcohol liquor for immediate consumption shall employ or permit any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years to attend bar, or to pour, draw, mix, or otherwise prepare alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, provided that
nothing herein shall prohibit an employee of such a licensee who is over the age of eighteen (18) but under the age of twenty one (21) years from
performing waitstaff functions or carrying alcoholic liquor to and from tables as part of the licensee's service. (Ord. 0-14-08, 6-23-2014)
2-3-18: SALES TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY ONE YEARS OF AGE AND PERSONS IN NEED OF MENTAL TREATMENT:
No licensee or officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person
under the age of twenty one (21) years, except as noted below, or to any intoxicated person or to any person known by him to be under legal disability or
in need of mental treatment. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another
person under the age of twenty one (21) years except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service. It shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years to misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any tavern or other place in the
city where alcoholic liquor is sold.
In every tavern or other place in the city where alcoholic liquor is sold there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed card which shall
be supplied by the city clerk and which shall read substantially as follows:
Warning: You are subject to a fine up to $500.00 under the Ordinances of the City of Prospect Heights, if you purchase alcoholic liquor, or misrepresent
your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor.
It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor license, or his agent or employee, to suffer or permit any individual under the age of twenty one (21) to
be or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or situated in the room or place where such licensed premises is located; provided that
this section shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or to any licensed premises which derives its principal
business from the sale of services or other commodities other than alcoholic liquor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 67/470
In addition to all other fines and penalties, the mayor may suspend or revoke the retail dealer's license for any violation of this section.
It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any minor child of which he or she be parent or guardian to violate any provision of this section.
(Ord. 0-95-44, 10-16-1995)
2-3-19: PURCHASE OR ACCEPTANCE BY PERSONS OF NONAGE; IDENTIFICATION CARDS:
Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase, or accept a gift of alcoholic liquor or have
alcoholic liquor in his possession.
If a licensee or his agents or employees believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the age of the
prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification, containing proof of age,
issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties. No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification card; use the identification
card of another, carry or use a false or forged identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false information.
No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of alcoholic liquor in violation of this section. The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any
person under twenty one (21) years of age is forbidden.
A. Presumption Of Knowledge: Whenever a person is present within any motor vehicle, conveyance, vessel, house, apartment, room, shed, yard,
premises, or other area of which such person is the owner, lessee, permittee, bailee, legal possessor or occupier thereof at the time that a violation of
the provisions of this section occurs therein, it shall be prima facie evidence that such person had knowledge of such violation.
B. Unlawful Assembly By Minors: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to remain in any motor vehicle, conveyance,
vessel, house, apartment, room, hotel room, shed, yard, premises, or other area when said person knows, or reasonably should know, that one or
more other persons under the age of twenty one (21) years located in such motor vehicle, conveyance, vessel, house, apartment, room, hotel room,
shed, yard, premises, or other area are:
1. In possession of any cannabis or controlled substance prohibited by Illinois statute;
2. In possession of any alcoholic beverages, except that a person under the age of twenty one (21) years may be in possession of or consume
alcoholic beverages in the performance of a bona fide religious service or ceremony.
C. Responsibility Of Owner Or Occupant Of Any Premises For Unlawful Assembly By Minors: It shall be unlawful for any person who has ownership or
control of any premises to knowingly suffer, permit or allow two (2) or more persons under the age of twenty one (21) years to assemble or be
assembled on such premises. The possession and dispensing or consumption by a person under twenty one (21) years of age of alcoholic liquor in the
performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the consumption by a person under twenty one (21) years of age under the direct supervision and
approval of the parents or parent or those persons standing in loco parentis of such person under twenty one (21) years of age in the privacy of a
home, is not prohibited. (Ord. 0-97-55, 9-15-1997, eff. 9-25-1997)
2-3-20: PEDDLING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the city. (Ord. 0-95-44, 10-16-1995)
2-3-21: GENERAL CONDUCT AND CONDUCT OF EMPLOYEES IN LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS:
A. Definitions: The following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
EMPLOYEE: Any agent, manager, employee, entertainer, barkeeper, host, hostess, waiter, waitress or other such person employed on any contractual
basis by such an establishment, or receiving any remuneration for services in such an establishment. Except as expressly allowed in this chapter, all
such defined individuals must be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT: Any of those places of business which are issued liquor licenses from the local liquor control commissioner of the city.
PATRON: Any person, customer or visitor of a licensed establishment who is not employed by such establishment. (Ord. 0-95-44, 10-16-1995; amd.
Ord. 0-14-08, 6-23-2014)
B. Employee Conduct Prohibited: No licensee or any employee of a licensee shall:
1. Solicit, induce or request any patron of the licensed establishment to purchase any alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage for himself or any other
employee of the licensed establishment; or
2. Knowingly serve to any employee any alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage which was purchased by any patron.
3. Permit any person in a class A and C licensed establishment to serve or sell alcoholic beverages unless that person has completed a state certified
beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and training program (BASSET) (TIPS), hereinafter referred to as "The Program", as required in
section 2-3-22 of this chapter or employ a manager in a class B, B-1, or D licensed establishment unless that person has completed the BASSET
training program as required in section 2-3-22 of this chapter.
C. General Conduct Prohibited: No licensee or any employee of a licensee shall:
1. Permit the performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual
acts which are prohibited by law;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 68/470
2. Permit the actual or simulated displaying of the breasts at or below the areola thereof, buttocks, pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals;
3. Permit any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes to public view any portion of his or her breasts at or below the areola
thereof, buttocks, genitals, vulva or anus;
4. Permit the displaying of films or pictures depicting acts, a live performance of which are prohibited by the regulations quoted above;
5. Permit any employee to remain on the premises of the licensed establishment who solicits, induces or requests a patron to purchase an alcoholic or
nonalcoholic beverage for any employee, except where the patron and employee are related by blood or marriage;
6. If any one or more of the provisions of this subsection C is declared unconstitutional or the application thereof is held invalid, the validity of the
remainder of this subsection C and the application of such provisions to other persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 0-95-
44, 10-16-1995)
2-3-22: ALCOHOL AWARENESS TRAINING REQUIREMENTS:
A. For licenses effective on or after May 1, 1990, the original or renewal application for a class A and C license shall be accompanied with proof of
completion of the program for all persons who serve or sell alcoholic beverages pursuant to that license.
B. For licenses effective on or after May 1, 1990, the original or renewal application for a class B, B-1, and D license shall be accompanied with proof of
completion of the program for the manager of the licensee.
C. After May 1, 1990, new employees or managers of a licensee, who are required to complete the program, shall within ninety (90) days from the
beginning of their employment with that licensee complete the program, and shall until completion of the program work under the supervision of a
person who has completed the program.
D. A photocopy of the certificate of completion of the program must be filed with the city clerk and maintained in the manager's office on the premises of
the licensee. (Ord. 0-95-44, 10-16-1995)
2-3-23: REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
All appeals to the state liquor control commission by a city liquor licensee of a decision, order of action by the local liquor control commissioner or
designee, having the effect of fining a licensee, suspending or revoking the city liquor license shall be limited to review of the official record of the formal
proceedings before the commissioner.
Mayor may suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke for cause any liquor dealer's license for any violation of any provision pertaining to the
sale of alcoholic liquor, as provided and in the manner provided in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-5.
When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, the licensee of the affected establishment shall not be granted a license for the period of one
year thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling alcoholic liquor in the premises described in such revoked license or in any other business
establishment within the city. Such revocation, however, shall not affect or apply to new or different owners of those premises, provided that the person or
persons whose license has been revoked is (are) or do (does) not remain a beneficial owner or owners or any operator or operators of said premises.
(Ord. 0-95-44, 10-16-1995)
2-3-24: SALE OF KEGS:
A. A licensee who sells a keg shall affix to each keg sold a tag, furnished by the liquor control commissioner, containing an identification number enabling
the purchaser to be identified in accordance with subsection B of this section.
B. The licensee shall keep a logbook of all kegs sold, showing the identification number on the tag affixed to each keg, and the purchaser's name,
address, telephone number, driver's license/state identification number, date of birth, and signature. The logbook shall be available for inspection by the
Prospect Heights police department during normal business hours.
C. The licensee shall require the purchaser to deposit twenty five dollars ($25.00) at the time of the sale of a keg, and the deposit shall be refunded only
upon the return of the keg with the tag properly affixed. This deposit shall be in addition to any other deposit required by the licensee in connection with
the sale of the keg.
D. The licensee shall require the purchaser, at the time of the sale, to sign a form to be provided by the liquor control commissioner, setting forth the
provisions of this section and informing the purchaser that the deposit will be forfeited if the keg is not returned with the tag intact. The licensee shall
retain this form for ninety (90) days after the sale.
E. Any keg not returned within ninety (90) days following the date of sale shall be considered lost, and the deposit shall be forfeited. The licensee shall
notify the Prospect Heights police department on a quarterly basis of all deposits that are forfeited.
F. A licensee may retain five dollars ($5.00) of any forfeited deposit and shall remit the balance to the city to be used to defray the cost of substance abuse
prevention programs and related alcohol/drug programs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 69/470
G. It shall be unlawful to possess a keg within the city which does not have a proper tag affixed or, if the keg was purchased outside the city, without proof
of purchase for the keg, including the name and address of the seller. (Ord. 0-94-04, 6-6-1994)
2-3-25: CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES:
A. Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for anyone holding a liquor license under this chapter to allow customers to consume alcoholic liquor on a
licensed premises which was not purchased from the licensee.
B. Except as otherwise provided in section 2-3-8 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for anyone having a class B or class B-1 license which limits the sale
of alcoholic liquor to original packages, unopened, not for consumption on the premises, to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the licensed premises; or to permit alcoholic liquor to be consumed on such premises.
C. Except as otherwise provided in section 2-3-8 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person operating or employed by any public accommodation
which is not licensed to sell alcoholic liquor in the city pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, to permit alcoholic liquor to be consumed by any
customers on the business premises. For purposes of this section, "public accommodation" means a refreshment, entertainment, or recreation facility
of any kind, whether licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, or advantages are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made
available to the public. (Ord. 0-05-27, 7-18-2005, eff. 7-31-2005)
2-3-26: PENALTIES:
A. The penalties for a violation of any licensing provision of this chapter or any condition of a license issued under this chapter shall be the maximum
allowed under section 7-5 of the Illinois liquor control act of 1934, as amended, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-5.
B. The penalty for violation of the social host provisions of this chapter shall be a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 0-10-13, 6-28-
2010)
2-3-27: COSTS OF HEARINGS BEFORE LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The local liquor control commissioner, in his discretion, may impose against a licensee found to have violated any provision of this chapter, the costs
incurred by the city in any hearing before the local liquor control commissioner including, but not limited to, court reporter fees, and attorney fees for the
local liquor control commissioner's counsel. (Ord. 0-05-05, 3-21-2005, eff. 4-22-2005; amd. Ord. 0-05-27, 7-18-2005, eff. 7-31-2005)
2-3-28: SOCIAL HOST RESPONSIBILITY:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, allow, host or fail to take reasonable steps to prevent an event or gathering at his or her place of residence
or other private property, public place, any other premises under his or her control, or in any conveyance where illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages have
been consumed by an underage person, if such person either knows or reasonably should know that an underage person has consumed any illicit
drugs or alcoholic beverages.
B. A person who permits, allows or hosts an event or gathering shall be deemed to have known or should have known that an underage person has
consumed illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages if the person has not taken reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of illicit drugs or alcoholic
beverages by underage persons.
C. This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs at a religious ceremony or exclusively between an underage
person and his parent or legal guardian as permitted by Illinois state law.
D. It is the duty of any person who permits, allows or hosts an event or gathering at his or her place of residence or other private property, public place,
any other premises under his or her control, or in any conveyance, where underage persons will be present to take all reasonable steps to prevent the
consumption of illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages by any underage person at the event or gathering.
E. A person who hosts any event or gathering does not have to be present at the event or gathering to be liable under this section.
F. A person who hosts an event or gathering shall not be in violation of this section if that person has requested assistance from the police department or
other law enforcement agency to remove any person who refuses to abide by the host's performance of the duties imposed by this section or
terminated the event or gathering because the host has been unable to prevent underage persons from consuming illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages
despite having taken all reasonable steps to do so, provided such action is taken before any other person makes a complaint about the event or
gathering.
G. Each underage person present at a premises which causes a violation of this section shall be deemed a separate violation of this section. (Ord. 0-10-
13, 6-28-2010)
Chapter 4
AMUSEMENTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 70/470
2-4-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter, except as to licensing and fees, shall apply to all public shows, theatricals, circuses and other amusements in the City
whether specifically licensed in another chapter of this Title or not. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-4-2: LICENSES REQUIRED, APPLICATION:
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which is open to the public and for admittance to which a fee is charged, without first securing a
license therefor. The application for such license shall comply with Section 2-1-2 of this Title. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-4-3: LICENSE FEES:
For such licenses, the following fees shall be paid:
Menageries $25.00 per day
Carnivals 25.00 per day
Exhibitions of inanimate objects 25.00 per day
Other amusements 25.00 per day
Circuses 25.00 per day
(Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-4-4: RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSES:
A. Street Shows: No permit shall be granted or given for any carnival, exhibition, show or other amusement to be given on any public street or sidewalk or
in such place that the only main accommodation for the public or the audience will be in a public place, except upon the order of the City Council.
B. Exhibition Of Criminals: It shall be unlawful for any person to present or exhibit any criminal or the body of any criminal or any person who shall have
become notorious because of the commission of a crime in any theatrical, exhibition, carnival or other public place.
C. Order, Crowding: The audience of any amusement, show or theatrical must be orderly at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any person attending
such amusement, show or theatrical to create a disturbance in the audience.
It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any such amusement or show as to create a dangerous condition because of fire or
other risks.
D. Riots: It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of any kind which tends to or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or
disturbance. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-4-5: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Building Official and the person in charge of the Police Department serving the City to see that every exhibition, amusement,
theatrical or other public show or amusement is inspected to ensure conformity with all ordinances and laws concerning such amusements. (Ord. 0-77-24,
11-7-1977)
2-4-6: BILLIARD AND POOL TABLES:
A. License Required: No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard, pool or bagatelle or pigeon hole table open to the public without having first
obtained a license therefor as is herein required. All applications for such licenses shall be in accordance with the general regulations of the city
relating thereto. The application shall also state the number of tables to be used therein.
B. Fees: The annual fee for such license shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) for the first table, and an additional fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each additional
table. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-4-7: BOWLING ALLEYS:
A. License Required: No person shall operate or maintain a bowling alley open to the public without first having secured a license therefor as is required
herein. Applications for such licenses shall comply with the general regulations for the city ordinances relating thereto. The application shall further
state the number of alleys to be used. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
B. Fee: The annual fee for such licenses shall be thirty three dollars ($33.00) for each alley. (Ord. 0-02-09, 4-1-2002, eff. 4-11-2002; amd. Ord. 0-09-07, 3-
13-2009)
2-4-8: MOTION PICTURES AND THEATRICALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 71/470
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful to give, present or conduct motion pictures or theatricals, for admission to which a fee is charged, excepting
performances given solely for the benefit of and under the supervision of a religious, educational, governmental, civic or charitable organization, without
having first secured a license therefor as is herein provided.
B. Applications For License: Applications for such licenses shall be made in conformance with the general provisions relating to such applications, and
shall state in addition to the other information required the place for the intended performance and the seating capacity thereof.
C. License Fees: Any person securing an annual license for motion pictures or theatricals, naming a specific place or building where the performances are
to be presented, may present therein any number of performances, including theatricals, during the year for which the license was secured without
having to pay an additional fee.
The annual fee for a license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for performances inside a building and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for outdoor
motion picture establishments.
D. Motion Pictures And Theatricals On Unlicensed Premises: For motion pictures or theatricals, which are to be presented in premises which are not
covered by such license fees, the fee to be paid shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per day; provided, that no such motion picture or theatrical shall be
presented in or on any premises or building which does not fully comply with the requirements of the ordinances for the construction or maintenance of
buildings for this purpose.
E. Crowding, Order: During the time of the performance it shall be unlawful to permit any person, excepting ushers or other theater employees, to remain
standing in a hall or room in which a motion picture is presented in such location that would impede ingress or egress from the theater or interfere with
the patron's or customer's view of the motion picture, and it shall be unlawful to admit to any such hall more persons than can be accommodated by the
seating arrangements for the premises.
F. Scenery: It shall be unlawful to use any scenery in any theater other than nonflammable scenery or such as shall have been rendered nonflammable by
the application of fire preventive coatings.
G. Building Requirements: It shall be unlawful to present any public motion picture in any building or structure which does not contain the number of exits
required by the ordinances of the city and by the statutes of the state concerning buildings or places intended for motion picture performances, or in
premises in which the electric wiring does not fully comply with the ordinances of the city. All places used for the exhibition of theatricals must be kept
adequately ventilated during the performance and for so long a time as the audience remains therein.
H. Exits: It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any aisles, corridors or exits leading from the room or enclosures in which a motion
picture performance or theatrical is being given or in which an audience for such a performance is gathered.
I. Outdoor Theaters: Outdoor theaters, where the audience is not housed in a building, shall be conducted in full compliance with all applicable provisions
of this chapter. Each outdoor theater shall be equipped with washrooms separate for men and women.
J. Inspections: Premises in or on which motion pictures or theatricals are presented shall be inspected or caused to be inspected by the building official as
often as is necessary to comply with the provisions of this section and any other ordinance provisions relating thereto. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-4-9: MUSIC DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful to offer or maintain for public use any coin operated device, machine or mechanism to procure or reproduce music or singing without
having first obtained a permit therefor. The annual fee for such permit shall be fifty five dollars ($55.00) per device. Governmental bodies are exempted
from this section. (Ord. 0-98-50, 11-16-1998, eff. 11-26-1998; amd. Ord. 0-02-09, 4-1-2002, eff. 4-11-2002; Ord. 0-09-07, 3-13-2009)
2-4-10: ATHLETIC EXHIBITIONS:
It shall be unlawful to conduct, operate or exhibit any race between persons, animals or vehicles, or any baseball games, boxing or wrestling matches, or
any other athletic contest or exhibition for admission to which a fee is charged without first having procured a license therefor.
The proprietor of such exhibition shall submit to the city clerk a statement verified under oath of the number of persons attending each such game, contest
or race, within one week after such exhibition. At the same time the proprietor or person exhibiting or operating such exhibition shall pay to the clerk a sum
equal to fifty dollars ($50.00) or five cents ($0.05) for each person attending the exhibition, whichever is greater.
Sufficient members of the police department serving the city shall be admitted free of charge to all such exhibitions for the purpose of preserving and
maintaining order; and the clerk may post a person or any number of persons at the box office of each such performance; and may examine all the books
pertaining to such performance showing or tending to show the number of persons attending each such exhibition. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-4-11: CONDITION OF PREMISES:
A. The term "amusement facility" shall mean commercial facilities used for public shows, theatricals, circuses and other amusements, pool and billiard
halls, bowling alleys, and game rooms in which electronic games and other amusement devices are located.
B. All amusement facilities shall be kept in a clean condition and free of litter and rubbish. Refuse containers shall be provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 72/470
C. In all amusement facilities with a capacity to accommodate in excess of fifty (50) persons, one toilet facility shall be provided for use by the general
public. In all amusement facilities with a capacity to accommodate in excess of one hundred (100) persons, at least two (2) toilet facilities will be
provided for use by the general public. Where two (2) toilets are required, they should be designated "men" and "women". Toilet facilities shall include a
commode, an adequate supply of toilet tissues and easily cleanable receptacles for other waste material. In addition, sinks and hot and cold running
water and towels shall also be provided. The doors of all toilet rooms shall be self-closing. Toilet rooms shall be kept in a clean condition, in good
repair, and well lighted and ventilated.
D. No permit shall be issued to conduct any activity at an amusement facility unless toilet facilities are provided in accordance with the terms of this
section. The health officer may from time to time inspect any amusement facility to ensure that toilets are in operating condition and available to the
general public.
E. Any person found to have violated the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each day upon which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 0-82-22, 7-19-1982)
ARTICLE A. AMUSEMENT TAX
2-4A-1: TAX IMPOSED; AMOUNT:
A. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons participating in or viewing or witnessing all amusements within the city of Prospect Heights, payable upon
each admission, in an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the admission fees, participation fees, viewing or other charges paid for the privilege to
participate in the amusements or to gain admittance or access for viewing or witnessing the amusements. The tax herein imposed is in addition to all
other taxes imposed by the county of Cook, the state of Illinois or any political subdivision of any of the foregoing.
B. Amounts charged for a luxury suite or luxury club seat shall not be subject to tax; provided, however, that if tickets to one or more amusements are
included within the purchase price of the luxury suite or luxury club seat, then the tax under subsection A of this section shall be imposed upon the
imputed ticket price of each such ticket at the time the ticket is used to gain admittance to the amusement.
C. For the purpose of determining the amount of the amusement tax due under this section, admission fees or other charges shall be computed exclusive
of any federal, state or municipal taxes imposed upon the amusement patron and any separately stated charges for nonamusement services or for
sales of tangible personal property.
D. It is unlawful for any person to produce, present, conduct or resell tickets to any amusement, without collection of the tax, except as provided in section
2-4A-3 of this article. (Ord. 0-02-23, 9-16-2002, eff. 9-26-2002)
2-4A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated below:
AMUSEMENT: Any exhibition, performance, presentation or show for entertainment purposes, including, but not limited to, any theatrical, dramatic,
musical or spectacular performance, promotional show, carnival, theme or amusement park, motion picture show, flower, poultry or animal show, animal
act, circus, rodeo, athletic contest, sport, game or similar exhibition, such as boxing, wrestling, skating, dancing, swimming, riding on animals or vehicles,
baseball, basketball, softball, soccer, football, tennis, golf, hockey, track and field games, weightlifting or bodybuilding, bowling, billiard and pool games,
roller hockey, indoor football, indoor soccer, indoor cycling, volleyball, lacrosse, rugby, gymnastic performances and competitions, juggling, acrobatics and
magic shows, ice skating shows and competitions, pageants, shows for special collector interests or hobbies such as antiques, kennel clubs and classic
cars; or any paid television programming, whether transmitted by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar means; provided,
however: amusement shall not mean raffles, as defined in 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 15/1, as now or hereafter amended or intertrack wagering
facilities, as defined in the 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/3, as now or hereafter amended, or coin operated devices (as defined in section 2-5-1
of this title).
DIRECTOR: The finance director of the city of Prospect Heights.
IMPUTED TICKET PRICE: The price imputed to a ticket that is furnished to the owner of a luxury suite or luxury club seat and used to gain admittance to
an amusement shall be the average price charged for all tickets sold for such amusement.
LUXURY CLUB SEAT: A seat that is located in the main seating area of the auditorium, theater or other space where the amusement is offered which is
sold as part of a package for a specified period of time and that confers the purchaser with certain privileges, including, for example, but not limited to,
access to a private club, tickets without charge to certain events, priority rights to purchase tickets to other events and parking.
LUXURY SUITE: A suite that includes: a) a private deck with seats facing the entertainment surface of the auditorium, theater or other space where the
amusement is offered, and b) an adjacent, furnished, enclosed business or lounge area, and that which is sold as part of a package for a specified period
of time and which confers the purchaser with certain privileges, including, for example, but not limited to, access to a private club, tickets without charge to
certain events, priority rights too purchase tickets to other events and parking.
MAXIMUM CAPACITY: The number of persons that an auditorium, theater or other space may accommodate as determined by the local fire department or
other appropriate governmental agency; provided, however, that "maximum capacity" shall not exceed the maximum number of tickets or admissions that
may be made available for sale to a performance as stated in any binding written agreement relating to that performance. If the number of tickets or
admissions actually sold to a performance exceeds the legally permissible limit, then, for purposes of determining the applicable tax, "maximum capacity"
shall mean such greater number.
OWNER: A. With respect to the owner of a place where an amusement is being held, any person who has an ownership or leasehold interest in a building,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 73/470
structure, vehicle, boat area or other place who presents, conducts or operates an amusement in such place or who allows, by agreement or otherwise,
another person to present, conduct or operate an amusement in such place;
B. With respect to the owner of an amusement, any person who has an ownership or leasehold interest in such amusement or any person who has a
proprietary interest in the amusement so as to entitle such person to all or a portion of the proceeds, after payment of reasonable expenses, from the
operation, conduct or presentation of such amusement, excluding proceeds from nonamusement services and from sales of tangible personal
property. (Ord. 0-02-23, 9-16-2002, eff. 9-26-2002)
2-4A-3: EXEMPTIONS:
A. The tax imposed by section 2-4A-1 of this article shall not apply to the following persons or privileges:
1. The privilege of witnessing any stock show or business show that is not open to the general public, or
2. The privilege of participating in or witnessing any amateur production or activity, such as amateur musicals, plays and athletic events conducted by a
not for profit organization operated exclusively for charitable, educational or religious purposes, or
3. Subject to satisfying the requirement contained in subsection B of this section, the privilege of participating in or witnessing any amusement
sponsored or conducted by, and the proceeds of which, after payment of reasonable expenses, inure exclusively to the benefit of:
a. Religious, educational and charitable institutions, societies or organizations, including elementary, junior high and high schools, park districts and
libraries within the city;
b. Societies or organizations for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals;
c. Societies or organizations conducted and maintained for the purpose of civic improvement;
d. Fraternal organizations, legion posts, social and political groups which conduct amusements, sponsored occasionally but not more often than
twice yearly;
Provided, however, that the entities described in subsections A3a to A3d of this section are governmental or not for profit institutions,
organizations, groups or societies, where no part of the net earnings inure to the benefit of any private shareholder or person;
e. Organizations or persons in the armed services of the United States, or national guard organizations, reserve officers' associations, or
organizations or posts of war veterans, or auxiliary units or societies of such posts or organizations, if such posts, organizations, units or societies
are organized in the state of Illinois, and if no part of their earnings inure to the benefit of any private shareholder or person;
f. Organizations or associations created and maintained for the purpose of benefitting the members, or dependents or heirs of members, of the police
or fire departments of any political subdivision of the state of Illinois;
Provided that the exemptions contained in subsections A3a through A3f of this section shall apply only to benefits or other fundraising events and
shall not apply to more than two (2) events per calendar year, and such events shall not exceed a total of fourteen (14) calendar days.
B. None of the exemptions contained in subsection A3 of this section shall apply to a person or privilege unless a written application for exemption is filed
with the director at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the amusement. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the director and shall
contain all information and materials necessary to permit the director to determine whether the exemption claimed by the applicant is applicable.
C. The tax imposed in section 2-4A-1 of this article shall not apply to or be imposed upon:
1. The admission fees to witness in person any amusement that takes place in any auditorium, theater or other venue in the city, whose maximum
capacity, including all balconies and other sections, is not more than two thousand (2,000) persons; provided, however, if such venue is in a building
or a complex of buildings designed for viewing, witnessing or participating in amusements (for example, with multiple screening rooms or
performance spaces), the aggregate number of seats in the entire complex shall be counted as a single venue for purposes of determining the
maximum capacity and the applicability of the tax imposed in section 2-4A-1 of this article.
2. Initiation fees and membership dues paid to a health club, racquetball club, tennis club or a similar club or organization, when such club or
organization is organized and operated on a membership basis and for the recreational purposes of its members and its members' guests, shall be
exempt from the tax imposed in section 2-4A-1 of this article. This exemption shall not be construed to apply to any fees paid or based upon, a per
event or a per admission basis.
3. Fees or other charges paid by a patron for the privilege of witnessing, viewing or participating in an amusement, solely within the confines of such
patron's home, shall be exempt from the imposition of the tax imposed in section 2-4A-1 of this article. For purposes of this exemption, a "home"
means the permanent dwelling residence of the patron. For patrons who live in condominium buildings, apartment buildings or other multiple-unit
structures, the individual dwelling unit the patron occupies shall be considered the patron's home. (Ord. 0-02-23, 9-16-2002, eff. 9-26-2002)
2-4A-4: REGISTRATION:
Every owner, manager or operator of an amusement or of a place where an amusement is being held in the city, shall apply for registration as a tax
collector with the director no later than thirty (30) days after, commencing such business or thirty (30) days after the effective date of this article, whichever
occurs later. Application for registration shall be made to the director by use of the form furnished by the director for such purpose and shall contain such
information as the director may reasonably require. (Ord. 0-02-23, 9-16-2002, eff. 9-26-2002)
2-4A-5: COLLECTION, PAYMENT AND ACCOUNTING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 74/470
A. It shall be the joint and several duty of every owner, manager or operator of an amusement or of a place where an amusement is being held to secure
from each patron the tax imposed by this article and to remit the tax to the director not later than the last day of each calendar month for all admission
fees or other charges received during the immediately preceding calendar month; provided, however, that a reseller of tickets shall be required to
collect and remit tax to the city only on that portion of the ticket price that exceeds the original or face amount of the tickets. A verified statement of
admission fees or charges in a form prescribed by the director shall accompany each remittance. Acceptance by the city of any amount tendered in
payment of the tax shall be without prejudice to any claim, demand or right on account of any deficiency.
B. Canceled admission tickets and complete and accurate records, books and accounts in detail of all receipts shall be kept at the place of amusement or
such other place in the state of Illinois as may be designated in writing by the person liable for collection of the tax. All such books, records and
accounts shall be open to inspection by the director at all reasonable times during business hours.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, in order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the city, no person shall be entitled to a
refund of, or a credit for, the tax imposed by this article unless the person files a claim for refund or credit within one year after the date on which the tax
was paid or remitted to the city. (Ord. 0-02-23, 9-16-2002, eff. 9-26-2002)
2-4A-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The director is authorized to adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article. (Ord. 0-
02-23, 9-16-2002, eff. 9-26-2002)
2-4A-7: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. Every day such violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 0-02-23, 9-16-2002, eff. 9-26-2002)
Chapter 5
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES
2-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES: Any amusement machine or device operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token or similar object for
the purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged. The term does not include vending machines in which are not
incorporated gambling or amusement features, nor does the term include any coin operated mechanical musical devices1. This term does not include
gambling devices that fully comply and are licensed pursuant to the provisions of the video gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq.
OPERATOR: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who sets up for operation by another, any device as herein defined, whether such
setting up for operation, leasing or distributing be for a fixed charge or rental, or on the basis of a division of the income derived from such device, or
otherwise.
PRIMARY SOURCE OF REVENUE: More than one-half (1/2) the gross revenue received from all business conducted within a single establishment or
premises.
PROPRIETOR: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or club, who, as the owner, lessee or proprietor has under his or its control any
establishment, place or premises in or at which such device is placed or kept for use or play. (Ord. 0-77-37, 9-19-1977; amd. Ord. 0-12-21, 6-11-2012)
2-5-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
A. City: No person shall engage in the business of an "operator" or "proprietor" of coin operated amusement devices as the terms are herein defined,
without first having obtained the proper license therefor. Governmental bodies are expressly exempted from the provisions of this chapter.
B. State: No coin operated amusement device not licensed by the state shall be permitted on any licensed premises.
C. Identification Sticker: Each machine shall have an identification sticker clearly exhibited thereon, which sticker shall be supplied by the city. (Ord. 0-77-
37, 9-19-1977)
2-5-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; NONTRANSFERABLE:
Application for license hereunder shall be filed in writing with the city clerk, on a form to be provided by the city, and shall specify:
A. The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation, partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses.
B. The address of the premises where the licensed device or devices are to be operated, together with the character of the business carried on at such
place.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 75/470
C. General description of the device or devices to be on the licensed premises and the maximum number of devices to be on the licensed premises.
D. Sufficient information to determine if the devices are or will be the primary source of revenue from the premises.
E. The name and address of the operator, if other than the proprietor. The proper license fee shall accompany such application.
F. The license shall be approved by the mayor and issued by the clerk, and the clerk shall remit the fee to the finance department. If the license is denied,
the fee shall be returned to the applicant. All licenses under this section shall expire on April 30, following their issuance. The license shall be posted in
a conspicuous place in the establishment of the licensee. Such license shall be nonassignable and nontransferable, and in the case of a proprietor
shall apply only to the premises for which such license is issued. (Ord. 0-98-60, 12-21-1998, eff. 12-31-1998)
2-5-4: OPERATOR'S LICENSE FEES:
The license fee for each operator shall be four hundred ninety five dollars ($495.00) per year. All operator's licenses shall expire on April 30 of each year.
In no case shall any portion of said license fee be refunded to the licensee. The application for each license shall comply with section 2-1-2 of this title.
(Ord. 0-98-48, 11-16-1998, eff. 11-26-1998; amd. Ord. 0-02-09, 4-1-2002, eff. 4-11-2002; Ord. 0-09-07, 3-13-2009)
2-5-5: CLASSIFICATION OF PROPRIETOR'S LICENSES; NUMBER:
A. Class I: That license which shall authorize any person to engage in the business of being a proprietor of premises at which coin operated amusement
devices are installed and from such premises said devices are or are expected then to be the primary source of revenue. No more than forty (40) coin
operated amusement devices shall be installed on or in such premises licensed under this subsection. Identification stickers for each machine shall be
transferable. There shall be issued in the city no more than one such class I license. (Ord. 0-80-13, 4-7-1980)
B. Class II: That license which shall authorize any person to engage in the business of being a proprietor of premises at which coin operated amusement
devices are installed which are not the primary source of revenue from the premises and for which premises a class A, class A-1, class B or class C
liquor license has been issued pursuant to the provisions of chapter 3 of this title. No more than six (6) coin operated amusement devices shall be
installed on or in such premises licensed under this subsection. Identification stickers for each machine shall be transferable. There shall be issued in
the city no more than eight (8) such class II licenses. (Ord. 0-82-13, 5-17-1982)
C. Class III: That license which shall authorize any person to engage in the business of being a proprietor of premises at which coin operated amusement
devices are installed which are not the primary source of revenue from the premises and for which premises no class A, class A-1, class B or class C
liquor license has been issued. No more than two (2) coin operated amusement devices shall be installed on or in such premises licensed under this
subsection. Identification stickers for each machine shall be transferable. There shall be issued in the city no more than one such class III license. (Ord.
0-80-13, 4-7-1980)
D. Class IV: That license which shall authorize any person operating or engaging in the business of operating a hotel or motel to install coin operated
amusement devices within the hotel or motel structure. No more than twenty (20) coin operated amusement devices shall be installed on or in such
premises licensed under this subsection. Identification stickers for each machine shall be transferable. No signs shall be installed upon the premises
which may be viewed from one or more public rights of way which shall indicate or advertise the location of such coin operated amusement devices.
There shall be issued by the city no more than four (4) such class IV licenses. (Ord. 0-95-16, 6-5-1995)
2-5-6: PROPRIETOR'S LICENSE FEES:
The fee for a proprietor's license for all classes is hereby established at sixty six dollars ($66.00) per machine. (Ord. 0-05-29, 8-1-2005, eff. 8-22-2005;
amd. Ord. 0-09-07, 3-13-2009)
2-5-7: INCREASING NUMBER OF DEVICES:
In case a proprietor licensed under the provisions of this chapter desires, after the expiration of any portion of any license year, to increase the number of
devices to be used or played, or exhibited for use or play in his establishment, he shall surrender his license to the city clerk who, upon approval of the
mayor and city council, shall issue a new license showing the maximum number of devices licensed thereunder, upon payment of the proper license fee
therefor. (Ord. 0-77-37, 9-19-1977)
2-5-8: EVIDENCE OF OWNERSHIP FILED:
Any proprietor who owns such device or devices at the time this chapter becomes effective, shall file with the city clerk evidence of such ownership prior to
the issuance of a license; and any proprietor purchasing a device or devices after the effective date hereof shall file with the city clerk evidence of
ownership thereof before exhibiting or placing said device or devices for use or play. (Ord. 0-77-37, 9-19-1977)
2-5-9: REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
The mayor may suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke for cause any coin operated amusement device license for any violation of any
provision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 76/470
When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, the licensee of the affected establishment shall not be granted a license for the period of one
year thereafter for the conduct of the business in the premises described in such revoked license or in any other business establishment within the city.
Such revocation, however, shall not affect or apply to new or different owners of those premises, provided that the person or persons whose license has
been revoked is (or are) or do (or does) not remain a beneficial owner or owners or any operator or operators of said premises. (Ord. 0-98-61, 12-21-1998,
eff. 12-31-1998)
2-5-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00); and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day an offense occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-98-61, 12-21-1998, eff. 12-31-1998)
Chapter 6
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS
ARTICLE A. AUCTIONEERS
2-6A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED, APPLICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct an auction in the City or to do business as an auctioneer, whether the goods sold are owned by the
auctioneer or not, without first having obtained a license therefor as is herein provided. Applications for auctioneer's licenses, or for a single auction, shall
comply with the general regulations of the City ordinances relating thereto1; and such applications shall give the names of any employees, not to exceed
two (2), who are to be authorized to conduct auctions under the authority of the license. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-6A-2: FEES:
The fees for auctioneers' licenses shall be:
A license for one day $10.00
An annual license 50.00
(Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-6A-3: CHARACTER OF APPLICANT:
No license shall be issued to any but a person of good character. The person in charge of the Police Department serving the City shall investigate the
character of each applicant before the license shall be issued. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-6A-4: EMPLOYEES:
Every person licensed as an auctioneer may designate not to exceed two (2) employees who may be authorized by him to conduct auctions. The
employer shall be liable for any violation of the City ordinances committed by such employee in conducting an auction. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-6A-5: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be held to apply to any public auction or sale made or conducted by a public officer by virtue of any judicial order or process
or by virtue of any power or authority contained in a mortgage or trust deed. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
ARTICLE B. MEDICINE SHOWS
2-6B-1: PERMITS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to give or conduct any medicine show or performance in connection with or for the purpose of attracting prospective buyers of, or
crowds for the purpose of lectures on or demonstrations of any tonic, medicine, remedy or alleged specific for human ailments without first having secured
a permit therefor. Applications for such permit shall state thereon the name, nature and contents of the article to be promoted or offered for sale; such
application shall be referred to the Police Department and no permit shall be issued for such tonic, medicine or remedy which is harmful for use without the
advice of a physician or consists in whole or in part of harmful habit-forming drugs or narcotics. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-6B-2: PERMIT FEES:
The fee for such permits shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 77/470
ARTICLE C. PAINT AND OIL DEALERS
2-6C-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have or store for sale any paint, shellac, varnish, kerosene, turpentine, acetone, linseed or other oils, in excess of five
(5) gallons without first securing a license therefor. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-6C-2: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fees for such licenses shall be sixty six dollars ($66.00) per year for each such paint and oil dealer whose store or other place of business
occupies two thousand (2,000) square feet or less of area. For paint and oil dealers whose stores or other place of business occupy in excess of two
thousand (2,000) square feet of area, an additional fee of forty four dollars ($44.00) shall be added for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of area or
part thereof; provided, however, that the license fee shall in no case exceed the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00). In computing square foot area,
storage, office, basement and loft spaces shall be included in such computation. (Ord. 0-02-09, 4-1-2002, eff. 4-11-2002; amd. Ord. 0-09-07, 3-13-2009)
2-6C-3: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
All such premises shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and all dirt, refuse and debris shall be removed at least once every twenty four (24) hours.
(Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-6C-4: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the building official to make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter and
the provisions of all ordinances relating to fire and health hazards applicable to such premises. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
ARTICLE D. TOBACCO DEALERS AND VENDORS
2-6D-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, give away, deliver, possess with intent to sell at wholesale or retail,
possess with intent to give away or deliver for promotional purposes, either retail or wholesale, any tobacco products within the city without first having
obtained a license from the city clerk.
B. Application: A written application for a license hereunder shall be made in writing to the city clerk and shall be processed in accordance with the
requirements set forth in section 2-1-2 of this title.
C. License Fee: The license fee for a tobacco dealer/vendor license shall be one hundred sixty five dollars ($165.00).
D. Tobacco Products Defined: For purposes of this title, "tobacco products" shall mean loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes,
vaporizers which are intended to simulate smoking tobacco, electronic cigarettes (a.k.a. e-cigs or e-cigarettes), or any electronic nicotine delivery
system and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories. (Ord. 0-15-02, 1-26-2015)
2-6D-2: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this article by any officer, director, manager, or other agent or
employee of any licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be punished in the same manner as if such act
or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally. (Ord. 0-02-04, 3-18-2002, eff. 3-28-2002)
2-6D-3: SALES TO MINORS PROHIBITED:
A. Prohibited Sales Or Delivery: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, offer for sale, give away, or deliver tobacco products to any
person under eighteen (18) years of age.
B. Signage Prohibiting Sales To Minors: Signs informing the public of age restrictions shall be posted by every licensee within one foot (1') of each display
of tobacco products, on every vending machine which offers tobacco products for sale and at each cash register or other point of purchase on the
premises. Each such sign shall state:
The sale of tobacco products to persons under eighteen (18) years of age is prohibited by law. A photo identification showing proof of age shall be
required of everyone under 27 desiring to purchase tobacco products. Violations shall be reported to the Code Enforcement Director (847) 398-6070.
Said sign(s) shall be plainly visible and shall measure at least eight and one-half inches (81/2") in height and eleven inches (11") in width. Lettering on
said sign shall be at least one-half inch (1/2") in height. Said signs shall also inform the public that the code enforcement director is to be contacted
should the law be violated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 78/470
C. Proof Of Age Required: No tobacco products shall be sold to any person under eighteen (18) years of age and is hereby prohibited unless that person
has provided, at the point of purchase, a photo identification showing date of birth. (Ord. 0-02-04, 3-18-2002, eff. 3-28-2002)
2-6D-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
A. Certain Distributions Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing, promoting or
advertising tobacco products, or any employee or agent of any such licensee or persons in the course of such licensee's business, to deliver tobacco
products to any person on any right of way, playground, park, other property owned by the city, any school district, any park district or any public library.
B. Home Deliveries; Consent Form, Person To Person Delivery:
1. It shall be unlawful to deliver tobacco products to a residence in the city, unless the delivering agency has, on file at the time of delivery, an original
consent form, executed by a person eighteen (18) years of age or older in the presence of an employee of the delivering agency.
2. It shall be unlawful to make a home delivery of a tobacco product except by face to face delivery into the hands of an individual providing proof that
he or she is eighteen (18) years of age or older.
C. Self-Service Displays: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, give away, deliver or to keep tobacco products with the intention of
selling, giving away, or delivering such products by use of self-service display. (Ord. 0-02-04, 3-18-2002, eff. 3-28-2002)
2-6D-5: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE, FINES, COSTS:
A. The fine imposed shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first violation and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent violation.
B. Any licensee who requests a hearing on a violation of this article, and for which the mayor upholds the finding of a violation, shall pay to the city the
costs of the hearing on such violation. The mayor shall determine the costs incurred by the city for said hearing, including, but not limited to: court
reporter fees, the cost of transcripts or records, attorney fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders, and all other miscellaneous
expenses incurred by the city. These costs shall be in addition to any fine assessed against the licensee.
C. The licensee shall pay said costs to the city within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the mayor. Failure to pay said costs within thirty (30)
days of notification shall be cause for immediate revocation of the license. No hearing as set forth in this article shall be necessary for revocation for
failure to pay hearing costs. (Ord. 0-02-04, 3-18-2002, eff. 3-28-2002)
2-6D-6: USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION:
When any license shall have been revoked for any reason, no subsequent license shall be granted for that premises or to the licensee or any principal
agent or manager of that licensee for a period of six (6) months thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling "tobacco products" as defined in this
article in the premises of the revoked license. (Ord. 0-02-04, 3-18-2002, eff. 3-28-2002)
2-6D-7: PENALTIES:
Nothing herein shall prevent the city from proceeding against a licensee in the circuit court in lieu of administrative proceedings. Any person found guilty of
violating any provisions of this article shall be fined an amount set forth under section 2-6D-5 of this article for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed to have been committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-02-04, 3-18-2002, eff. 3-28-2002)
ARTICLE E. PAWNBROKERS
2-6E-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
LICENSE: City of Prospect Heights' pawnbroker's license.
PAWNBROKER: Every individual or business entity which lends money on the deposit or pledge of physically delivered personal property, other than
property the ownership of which is subject to a legal dispute, securities, printed evidence of indebtedness or printed evidence of ownership of the personal
property, or who deals in the purchase of such property on the condition of selling the property back again at a stipulated price, shall be held and is hereby
declared and defined to be a pawnbroker. The business of a pawnbroker does not include the lending of money on deposit or pledge of title to property.
(Ord. 0-12-30, 9-24-2012)
2-6E-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. No individual or business entity shall engage in the business of a pawnbroker within the city without a license.
B. No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferable.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 79/470
C. No license shall be issued until the applicant obtains and provides a valid state of Illinois pawnbroker's license as required by the pawnbroker regulation
act1 and the pawnbrokers administrative rules (38 Ill. adm. code 360.10 et seq.). (Ord. 0-12-30, 9-24-2012)
2-6E-3: APPLICATION; APPLICATION FEE:
A. Application for a license within the city shall be made in writing to the city clerk on a form provided by the city clerk for that purpose and must state
thereon the following information:
1. The name of applicant.
2. The permanent business address of the applicant.
3. The permanent business telephone number of the applicant.
4. In the case of a firm, limited liability company, or corporation, the names, permanent residence addresses, and permanent residence telephone
numbers of the partners or officers and all shareholders owning more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of stock. If a listed
shareholder is a firm, limited liability company, or corporation, the above information shall be provided for that entity and other such entities in the line
of ownership.
5. The location of the property for which the license is requested.
6. Whether the applicant, partners, officers, or listed shareholders have been convicted of any criminal offense in any jurisdiction and, if so, a list of
such convictions with the date and prosecuting jurisdiction.
7. Any other information deemed required and pertinent by the city clerk.
B. Each application for a license to do business as a pawnbroker within the city from an applicant who at the time of application does not hold a valid
license to do business as a pawnbroker within the city shall be accompanied by an applicant fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). This application
fee shall be in addition to all other fees set forth in this article and shall not be refunded in the event that the application for a license to do business as
a pawnbroker within the city is denied. (Ord. 0-12-30, 9-24-2012)
2-6E-4: DURATION OF LICENSE:
All licenses to do business as a pawnbroker within the city granted under this article shall be effective from May 1 or from the date of issuance, whichever
is later, and shall terminate on April 30. (Ord. 0-12-30, 9-24-2012)
2-6E-5: LICENSE FEE:
No license to do business as a pawnbroker within the city shall be issued until the applicant shall pay to the city clerk a license fee of one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00). (Ord. 0-12-30, 9-24-2012)
2-6E-6: SIGNAGE:
A. Every pawnbroker shall at all times have and keep section 2 of the pawnbroker regulation act2 printed in the English language and framed and posted
in a prominent and conspicuous position at the business location.
B. Every pawnbroker shall at all times have and keep the license framed and posted in a prominent and conspicuous position at the business location.
(Ord. 0-12-30, 9-24-2012)
2-6E-7: ADVANCEMENTS AND LOANS:
All advancements and loans made by any licensee shall be done in the manner prescribed by the pawnbroker regulation act3 and the pawnbrokers
administrative rules (38 Ill. adm. code 360.10 et seq.). (Ord. 0-12-30, 9-24-2012)
2-6E-8: MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS:
A. Every licensee shall keep a book in which there shall be typed or printed in ink, which may include a computer printout, in the English language,
containing the following information for each and every loan or taking of a pledge made by the licensee:
1. An accurate account and description of the goods, articles or things pawned or pledged including, the serial number and/or identification number of
the items received which bear such number(s);
2. The amount of money, value or thing loaned thereon;
3. The date and time of pledging the same;
4. The rate of interest to be paid on the loan;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 80/470
5. Name and residence of the person pawning or pledging the said goods, article or thing;
Except for items purchased from dealers possessing a federal employee identification number who have provided a receipt to the licensee, every
licensee shall also record in his book, an accurate account and description in the same manner described above, of all goods, articles and other
things purchased or received for the purpose of resale or loan collateral by the licensee, not in the course of a pledge or loan. No entry in such book
shall be erased, mutilated or changed.
B. Every licensee shall require one form of photographic identification by each person pledging or pawning any goods, articles or other things to the
licensee. The form of identification must be photographic identification issued by a federal, state or local governmental entity. Forms of identification
must contain a photograph of the individual and must be: a state driver's license, a state identification card, a passport, or a military identification card.
Required forms of identification shall be copied and maintained for all transactions completed by licensees for a period of three (3) years following each
transaction.
C. If the person pledging or pawning any goods, articles or other things to the licensee does not have a photographic identification card issued by a
federal, state or local governmental entity, the licensee shall photograph the person and require two (2) forms of identification, one of which shall
contain both the person's name and residential address. The photograph shall be in color. On the reverse side of the photograph the licensee shall
record the person's name, residence address, date of birth, social security number, gender, height and weight. If the person has no social security
number, the licensee shall record this fact.
D. Whenever any licensee shall buy any article of pawned or pledged property, the same shall be recorded in the same manner as a pledge and the
record shall show all information required for a pawn or pledge. (Ord. 0-12-30, 9-24-2012)
2-6E-9: REPORT TO POLICE:
A. It shall be the duty of every licensee to make out and deliver to a designated e-mail account or facsimile designated by the chief of police, before the
hour of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon, a legible and exact copy from the books required by state law and this article of all personal property and other
valuable thing received on deposit or purchased during the preceding day.
B. It shall be the duty of every licensee to immediately report to the chief of police, or his designee, any article sought to be deposited, pawned or pledged
with the licensee, if it is reasonably believed that the said article was stolen or lost and found by the person attempting to deposit, pawn or pledge the
said article. (Ord. 0-12-30, 9-24-2012)
2-6E-10: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
The book, the photographs required under this section and every article or other thing of value pawned or pledged shall at all times during the licensee's
business hours be open to the inspection of any member of the city's police department. (Ord. 0-12-30, 9-24-2012)
2-6E-11: MEMORANDUM TO PLEDGER:
Every licensee shall, at the time of each loan, deliver to the person pawning or pledging any goods, article or thing, a memorandum or note signed by
licensee containing an accurate account and description, in the English language, of all goods, articles or other things pawned or pledged, the amount of
money, value of things loaned thereon, the time of pledging the same, the rate of interest to be paid on the loan, the name and residence of the person
making the pawn or pledge, and the amount of any fees. (Ord. 0-12-30, 9-24-2012)
2-6E-12: REMOVAL OF IDENTIFYING MARKS PROHIBITED:
No licensee shall remove, alter or obliterate any manufacturer's make, model, or serial number, personal identification number, or identifying marks
engraved or etched upon an item of personal property that was purchased or received in pledge until such time that the licensee becomes the legal owner
of the property. In addition, an item shall not be accepted for pledge or purchase where the manufacturer's make, model, or serial number, personal
identification number or identifying marks engraved or etched upon an item of personal property has been removed, altered or obliterated. (Ord. 0-12-30,
9-24-2012)
2-6E-13: HOURS OF BUSINESS:
No licensee shall receive on deposit or pledge any personal property or other valuable thing, or be open for business before the hour of nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. or after the hour of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. (Ord. 0-12-30, 9-24-2012)
2-6E-14: SALES AND REDEMPTIONS REGULATED:
No personal property received on deposit or pledge by any licensee shall be sold or permitted to be redeemed or removed from the place of business of
the licensee for a period of forty eight (48) hours after the delivery of the copy and statement required by state law and this section. If the pawner or
pledger fails to repay the loan during the period specified on the pawn ticket, the licensee shall automatically extend a grace period of thirty (30) days from
the default date on the loan during which the licensee shall not dispose of or sell the personal property pledged. The parties may agree to extend or renew
a loan upon terms agreed upon by the parties. (Ord. 0-12-30, 9-24-2012)
2-6E-15: PROHIBITED PLEDGES OR PURCHASES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 81/470
A. No licensee shall take or receive in pawn or pledge for any advancement or loan, any property from a minor, or the ownership of which is in, or which is
claimed by, any minor, or which may be in the possession or under the control of any minor.
B. No licensee shall take or receive any article in pawn or buy from any person appearing to be intoxicated or under the influence of any drug, nor from
any person known to be a thief or to have been convicted of theft or burglary, and when any person is found to be the owner of stolen property which
has been pawned or bought, the property shall be returned to the owner thereof without the payment of the amount advanced by the licensee thereon
or any costs or charges of any kind which the licensee may have placed upon the same. (Ord. 0-12-30, 9-24-2012)
2-6E-16: HOLD ORDER:
A. For the purposes of this section, "hold order" means a written legal instrument issued to a licensee by any member of the city of Prospect Heights police
department ("department"), ordering the licensee to retain physical possession of pledged goods in the possession of the licensee or property
purchased by and in the possession of the licensee and not to return, sell, or otherwise dispose of such property as such property is believed to be
misappropriated goods.
B. Upon written notice from the department indicating that property in the possession of a licensee and subject to a hold order is needed for the purpose of
furthering a criminal investigation and prosecution, the licensee shall release the property subject to the hold order to the custody of the department for
such purpose and the department shall provide a written acknowledgment that the property has been released to the department. The release of the
property to the custody of the department shall not be considered a waiver or release of the licensee's property rights or interest in the property. Upon
completion of the criminal investigation, the property shall be returned to the licensee who consented to its release; except that, if the department has
not completed the criminal investigation within one hundred twenty (120) days after its release, the department shall immediately return the property to
the licensee or obtain and furnish to the licensee a warrant for the continued custody of the property.
C. The licensee shall not release or dispose of the property except pursuant to a court order or the expiration of the holding period of the hold order,
including all extensions.
D. In cases where criminal charges have been filed and the property may be needed as evidence, the prosecuting attorney shall notify the licensee in
writing. The notice shall contain the case number, the style of the case, and a description of the property. The licensee shall hold such property until
receiving notice of the disposition of the case from the prosecuting attorney. The prosecuting attorney shall notify the licensee and claimant in writing
within fifteen (15) days after the disposition of the case. (Ord. 0-12-30, 9-24-2012)
2-6E-17: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
A. In addition to the provisions of this article, every pawnbroker shall operate in a manner prescribed by this article and by the pawnbroker regulation act4
and the pawnbrokers administrative rules (38 Ill. adm. code 360.10 et seq.).
B. Every act or omission constituting a violation of any provision of this article by any officer, director, manager, agent or employee of any licensee shall be
deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee and the employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or
omission had been committed or omitted by him or her personally.
C. Any licensee violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a business offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an
amount not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day that such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
D. In addition to the imposition of a fine as established in subsection C of this section, any licensee deemed to be found guilty of business offense for a
violation of this article or found guilty of a misdemeanor for violation of the pawnbroker regulation act5 and the pawnbrokers administrative rules (38 Ill.
adm. code 360.10 et seq.) may also result in the suspension, cancellation or revocation of a license. (Ord. 0-12-30, 9-24-2012)
Chapter 7
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
ARTICLE A. BEAUTY CULTURE ESTABLISHMENTS
2-7A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
BARBERSHOPS, HAIR SALONS, NAIL SALONS: Any establishment within the city engaged in the work, business or art of hair dressing (thinning,
shaping, finger waving, old methods of curling, marcelling); permanent waving; hair coloring (tinting, dyeing, bleaching), scalp and hair conditioning;
electric devices for hair treatment and removal; and facials (massage, basic up and arching, hand and arm molding) or nail preparations. (Ord. 0-97-14, 4-
7-1997, eff. 4-17-1997)
2-7A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, APPLICATION1:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 82/470
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a beauty culture establishment in the city who does not possess an unrevoked license from the city. Such
license shall be posted in a conspicuous place and persons who comply with the requirements of this article shall receive and retain such license.
B. All persons engaged as a beauty culture operator must display their certificate of registration from the department of education and registration of the
state, in a conspicuous place. (Ord. 0-97-14, 4-7-1997, eff. 4-17-1997)
2-7A-3: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for a barbershop license shall be one hundred thirty two dollars ($132.00). Public restroom inspection is an additional forty nine dollars fifty
cents ($49.50). (Ord. 0-02-09, 4-1-2002, eff. 4-11-2002; amd. Ord. 0-09-07, 3-13-2009)
2-7A-4: HANDLING OF IMPLEMENTS:
A. Combs, hairbrushes, razors, shears, clippers and applicators, cups or other instruments shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times and shall be
cleansed and shall be subjected to an approved germicidal treatment before further use.
B. Only unused freshly laundered towels including dry towels, steam towels and washcloths shall be used for each patron. All clean towels shall be kept in
a closed cabinet until used. In cutting the hair of any patron, a newly laundered towel or fresh paper neck strip shall be placed around the neck to
prevent the haircloth or rubber apron from touching the skin.
C. All creams, lotions and other cosmetics used for patrons shall be kept in clean, closed containers. All jars and bottles shall be securely closed and
labeled. Creams and other semisolid substances shall be dipped from container with a sterile article or spatula. Removing such substances with fingers
is prohibited. (Ord. 0-97-14, 4-7-1997, eff. 4-17-1997)
2-7A-5: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Walls and ceilings of all rooms shall be kept clean and in good repair.
B. Floors of all rooms in which beauty culture is done shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned, shall be smooth, and shall be kept clean and in
good repair.
C. Beauty culture establishments shall be well lighted and properly ventilated.
D. Beauty culture establishments must be located in rooms separate from other lines of business, except those incident thereto.
E. Beauty culture establishments shall be equipped with smoking stands, ashtrays or sand jars, all of which shall be cleaned daily.
F. Each beauty culture establishment shall have sufficient amounts of hot and cold running water as may be necessary to operate in a sanitary manner. All
bowls, basins, jars and like receptacles shall be cleaned immediately after using. (Ord. 0-97-14, 4-7-1997, eff. 4-17-1997)
2-7A-6: OPERATORS AND EMPLOYEES:
A. Every operator and employee shall thoroughly cleanse his hands immediately before and after serving each patron.
B. No operator or employee having an infectious or contagious disease shall be permitted to work in a beauty culture establishment, and no owner or
manager of a beauty culture establishment shall permit any person suffering from a communicable disease or from any venereal disease in a
communicable form to be employed nor shall any service be performed on any person known to have an infectious or contagious disease. Each
operator and employee of a beauty culture establishment shall have a chest X-ray yearly, with proof of same made available to the health inspector.
C. No operator or employee shall massage any person when the surface to be massaged is inflamed or broken out, or contains pus. (Ord. 0-97-14, 4-7-
1997, eff. 4-17-1997)
2-7A-7: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the health inspector to inspect every establishment licensed under this chapter as often as may be necessary to ensure compliance
with this chapter and all other ordinances of the city relative thereto. (Ord. 0-97-14, 4-7-1997, eff. 4-17-1997; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
ARTICLE B. DRY CLEANERS
2-7B-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 83/470
DRY CLEANING: The process of cleaning fabric by immersion and agitation, or by immersion alone, in volatile solvents of petroleum distillate type, the
coal tar distillate type, and the chlorinated hydrocarbon type and processes incidental thereto including, but without limitation, spotting, cleaning, wet
cleaning and finishing.
DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT: Any structure, store, building or other place where the service of dry cleaning, wet cleaning as a process incidental to
dry cleaning, dyeing, spotting and/or finishing any fabric is rendered for hire, or is sold, resold or offered for sale or resale.
FABRIC: Any article of wearing apparel, household furnishings, rugs, textiles, fur and leather.
FINISHING: The process of pressing and/or reshaping any fabric, which is designed to restore as nearly as possible the shape, contour and dimensions of
said fabric. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-7B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, APPLICATION:
No person shall operate or conduct a dry cleaning establishment in the city without having first obtained a license therefor. Application for such license
shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of the city relating thereto. At the time of filing such application, the applicant shall also file an
affidavit specifying the type of cleaning solvent to be used, and stating that no cleaning solvent other than that specified in the affidavit will be employed. If
at any time subsequent to the filing of the application and affidavit, the applicant desires to change the type of solvent specified in the affidavit, he may do
so only upon the filing of an amendment to his application and affidavit describing the proposed change; provided, that compliance is made with all laws
and city ordinances relating to the use of such solvent. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-7B-3: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for a dry cleaning license shall be sixty six dollars ($66.00). (Ord. 0-02-09, 4-1-2002, eff. 4-11-2002; amd. Ord. 0-09-07, 3-13-2009)
2-7B-4: BUILDING AND PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
No dry cleaning establishment shall be operated in a frame building. Such establishment shall be kept free from flammable wastes so far as possible, and
it shall be unlawful to maintain or permit a stove or open flame of any kind in the premises. Smoking in such premises is hereby prohibited, and
appropriate signs to that effect shall be posted in conspicuous places in the establishment. The premises must be kept free from rats, mice and vermin. No
person afflicted with a contagious disease or a venereal disease shall be employed in any dry cleaning establishment. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-7B-5: INVESTIGATION:
In addition to that required by other ordinances of the city, the health inspector and building official shall make or cause to be made such investigations to
determine whether the provisions of all ordinances and laws regulating health, safety and sanitation relating to dry cleaning establishments have been
complied with. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
ARTICLE C. LAUNDRIES AND LAUNDROMATS
2-7C-1: LAUNDRIES:
A. License Required: No person shall operate or conduct a laundry in the city without first having obtained a license therefor; provided, that establishments
licensed as dry cleaning establishments need not obtain a laundry license in addition to the dry cleaning license. Application for such license shall be
made in accordance with the general regulations of the city ordinances relating thereto. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
B. License Fee: The annual fee for a laundry license shall be sixty six dollars ($66.00). Public restroom inspection is an additional one hundred fifteen
dollars fifty cents ($115.50). (Ord. 0-02-09, 4-1-2002, eff. 4-11-2002; amd. Ord. 0-09-07, 3-13-2009)
C. Sanitation Requirements: Premises used for laundries must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. No refuse of any kind shall be permitted to
accumulate on such premises; and the premises must be kept free from rats, mice and vermin. It shall be unlawful to employ any person afflicted with a
venereal disease or any contagious disease in a laundry. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-7C-2: LAUNDROMATS:
A. Definition: The term "laundromat" as used in this section shall mean any establishment in which coin operated facilities are available for washing clothes
or for drying clothes, or both, and which is open and available to the general public for use. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
B. License Required; Fee: It shall be unlawful to establish or operate any laundromat in the city without first having secured a license therefor as herein
provided. Applications for such license shall comply with the general provisions relating to applications for licenses and permits. The annual fee for
such permit shall be sixty six dollars ($66.00). Public restroom inspection is an additional one hundred fifteen dollars fifty cents ($115.50). (Ord. 0-02-
09, 4-1-2002, eff. 4-11-2002; amd. Ord. 0-09-07, 3-13-2009)
C. Hours: It shall be unlawful to keep any such establishment open for business between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. unless there is an adult attendant in charge of the premises during such hours.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 84/470
D. Equipment Installation: Installation of all equipment in such establishments shall be in conformity with the ordinances of the city relating to such
installations. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
Chapter 8
CONTRACTORS
ARTICLE A. BUILDING CONTRACTORS
2-8A-1: DEFINITION:
The term "building contractor" shall mean and include anyone engaged in the business of cement or concrete contracting, either flat, form or wall work; or
as a masonry contractor; or as a carpenter contractor; or as a general building contractor; and any person engaged in the construction, alteration or repair
of buildings or other structures, or sidewalk or street pavements.
Engaging in the construction, repair or alteration of any building, structure or street or sidewalk pavement in the city for which a permit is required under
the ordinances of the city shall be construed as doing business as a contractor in the city. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-8A-2: REGISTRATION REQUIRED; FEES:
A. It shall be unlawful to engage in business in the city as a building contractor doing work requiring a permit under the building provisions of this code
without first having registered as a building contractor as herein provided.
B. The registration of all contractors performing work for which a building permit is required is a condition of any such building permit. Registrations shall
be valid for a period of one year.
C. The annual fee for such registration shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 0-09-06, 3-2-2009)
2-8A-3: SUBCONTRACTORS:
Any person doing business as a subcontractor shall be construed as engaged in the business of a building contractor for which a registration is required by
this article. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-09-06, 3-2-2009)
2-8A-4: REGULATIONS:
It shall be the duty of all building contractors to comply with all ordinances of the city relating to the construction of buildings or other structures, to the
construction of street or sidewalk pavements, and all laws or ordinances pertaining to or regulating the activities engaged in. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-8A-5: INSURANCE; BOND REQUIREMENTS:
No permit shall be issued for the construction of a building or structure in the city, or for the repair or alteration of the exterior of any building or structure,
unless a certificate or other proof is filed showing that the contractor carries workers' compensation insurance and public liability insurance and fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) on property damage liability.
Before any contractor doing any work for the city on any street or highway or on any building or premises owned by the city commences work, he shall file
with the city clerk a certificate or other proof showing that he carries workers' compensation and public liability insurance as required by the ordinances of
the city and the terms of his contract. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-8A-6: REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION:
Any building contractor's registration under section 2-8A-2 of this article may be revoked by the mayor or his or her designee for repeated violations of any
city ordinance relating to the construction of buildings, the use of streets, or the replacing of streets, sidewalks or parkways, or any other ordinance relating
to the work performed by such contractor. Such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed for violating this chapter or any other ordinance of the
city. (Ord. 0-09-06, 3-2-2009)
ARTICLE B. ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS
2-8B-1: DEFINITION:
The term "electrical contractor" as used in this Chapter is hereby defined and shall be construed to mean any person engaged in the business of installing
or altering by contract, equipment and electrical appliances, for the utilization of electricity supplied by light, heat or power, not including radio apparatus or
equipment for wireless reception of sounds and signals, and not including apparatus, conductors and other equipment installed for or by public utilities,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 85/470
including common carriers, which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission for use in their operation as public utilities, but the term
"electrical contractor" does not include employees employed by such contractor to do or supervise such work. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-8B-2: REGISTRATION REQUIRED; FEES:
No person shall engage in the business of electrical contractor in the City without first having obtained a certificate of registration therefor as herein
required. Applications for such certificates shall be made in accordance with the general regulations of the City ordinances relating thereto. No person
shall obtain a certificate of registration unless they provide the City with a certified copy of their Illinois State Electrical License, verifying that they are a
State licensed electrician. The annual fee for registering as an electrical contractor shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00). The register year shall correspond
with the license year. (Ord. 0-88-66, 12-19-1988)
2-8B-3: REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to install any electrical appliances, wiring or fixtures without strict compliance with the City ordinances relating to such
fixtures, and it shall be unlawful for any such person to do any such work without first having obtained such permits as may be required. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-
7-1977)
2-8B-4: OUT-OF-TOWN CONTRACTORS:
Any electrical contractor who has registered as such in any other city or village in this State shall not be required to pay a fee for being registered in this
City; but every person doing business in this City as an electrical contractor shall secure a certificate of registration. Such certificate shall be issued without
charge to electrical contractors registered as such under ordinances of another city or village in this State, so long as said contractor complies with the
provisions of this Section of the Code. (Ord. 0-88-66, 12-19-1988)
ARTICLE C. HEATING, AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION CONTRACTORS
2-8C-1: DEFINITIONS:
AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEM: Any air conditioning unit designed to cool the atmosphere of any building or rooms therein used for human occupancy,
which unit has a rated heat removal capacity in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) British thermal units per hour; and also any such unit regardless of
size or rating that is installed in such a manner that it projects from a building where pedestrian traffic will pass below it.
HEATING, AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION CONTRACTOR: A. Any person engaged in the business of installing, altering or servicing
heating, air conditioning or refrigeration systems.
B. Any private or municipally owned public utility if such public utility installs heating, air conditioning or refrigeration systems.
The term "heating, air conditioning and refrigeration contractor" does not include: 1) any private or municipally owned public utility, fuel supplier or
dealer that supplies fuel and services or repairs heating or air conditioning appliances or equipment in connection with or as part of their business of
supplying the fuel used in such appliances or equipment; or 2) any liquefied petroleum gas dealer subject to "an act to regulate the storage,
transportation, sale and use of liquefied petroleum gases", approved July 11, 1955, as now or hereafter amended, and the rules and regulations of
the department of law enforcement promulgated pursuant to such act; or 3) any electrical contractor registered or licensed as such under the
provisions of said act or any other statute1.
HEATING SYSTEM: Any heating unit intended to warm the atmosphere of any building or rooms therein used for human occupancy.
REFRIGERATING SYSTEM: Any refrigerating unit, other than an "air conditioning system" as defined in this section, which is to be used in conjunction
with or as an aid to any commercial enterprise but does not include a refrigerating unit used for family household purposes. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-8C-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES:
No person shall engage in the business of heating, air conditioning and refrigeration contractor without first having obtained a license therefor. The annual
fee for such license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 0-09-06, 3-2-2009)
2-8C-3: REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter to install, alter or service heating, air conditioning or refrigerating systems
as defined herein without strict compliance with the ordinances of the city relating thereto, and it shall be unlawful for any such person to do any such work
without first having obtained such permits as may be required. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-8C-4: OUT-OF-TOWN CONTRACTORS:
Any heating, air-conditioning and refrigeration contractor who is licensed as such in another city or village in this State shall not be required to pay a fee for
being licensed in this City; but every person doing business in this City as a heating, air-conditioning and refrigeration contractor shall secure a license.
Such license shall be issued without charge to such contractors licensed as such under the ordinances of another city or village of this State. (Ord. 0-77-
24, 11-7-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 86/470
Chapter 9
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
ARTICLE A. PEDDLERS
2-9A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED, APPLICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of hawker or peddler in the City without first having obtained a license therefor as provided
herein. Applications for peddlers' and hawkers' licenses shall be made to the secretary of the Chief of Police, and shall state thereon the number of
vehicles, if any, intended to be operated; the kind of article or merchandise to be peddled; and a permanent address of the peddler. Said application shall
further conform to the requirements of the general ordinances of the City relating thereto. (Ord. 0-97-80, 12-15-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
2-9A-2: LICENSE FEES:
A. The fee for a peddler or hawker using a cart, wagon, auto or any other vehicle shall be as follows, for each cart or other vehicle used:
Yearly license $25.00
Monthly license 5.00
Daily license 2.00
B. The fees for peddlers or hawkers not using any vehicle shall be as follows:
Yearly license $50.00
Monthly license 10.00
Daily license 5.00
(Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-9A-3: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of Section 2-9A-1 of this Article, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Any person cited under the provisions of Section 2-9A-1 of this Article, not paying the fine within ten (10) days shall face an additional penalty of twenty
five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 0-97-80, 12-15-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
ARTICLE B. SOLICITORS
2-9B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter the following words as used herein shall be construed to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto:
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has obtained a valid certificate of registration as hereinafter provided, and which certificate is in the
possession of the solicitor on his person while engaged in soliciting.
RESIDENCE: Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.
SOLICITING: Any one or more of the following activities:
A. Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description whatever, for
any kind of consideration whatever; or
B. Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or character; or
C. Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or
D. Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit
association, organization, corporation or project. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-9B-2: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 87/470
Every person desiring to engage in "soliciting" as herein defined from persons in residences within the City, is hereby required to make written application
for a certificate of registration as hereinafter provided. This Chapter shall not be applicable to persons under the age of sixteen (16). (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-
1977)
2-9B-3: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a form provided by the Chief of Police or person designated by the Chief of Police and filed
with the Chief of Police. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application, as follows:
A. Name and address of present place of residence and length of residence at such address; also business address if other than residence address; also
social security number.
B. Address of place of residence during the past three (3) years if other than present address.
C. Age of applicant and marital status; and if married, name of spouse.
D. Physical description of the applicant.
E. Name and address of the person whom the applicant is employed by, or represents; and the length of time of such employment or representation.
F. Name and address of employer during the past three (3) years if other than the present employer.
G. Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting which the applicant will engage in.
H. Period of time for which the certificate is applied.
I. The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for certificate under this Chapter, if any.
J. Has a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under this Chapter ever been revoked.
K. Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or the ordinance of any other Illinois municipality regulating
soliciting.
L. Has the applicant ever been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the State or any other state or Federal law of the United States.
M. Also such additional information as the Chief of Police or person designated by the Chief of Police may deem necessary to process the application.
All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath.
The Chief of Police or person designated by the Chief of Police shall require every applicant to submit to fingerprinting by the Police Department of the
City in connection with the application for certificate.
The Chief of Police shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with all other
information and data pertaining thereto and all certificates of registration issued under the provisions of this Chapter, and of the denial of applications.
Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every certificate issued, and any renewal thereof, shall be identified
with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued.
No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the State or any
other state or Federal laws of the United States, within five (5) years of the date of the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a
violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, nor to any person whose certificate of registration issued hereunder has previously been revoked as
herein provided. (Ord. 0-94-03, 3-7-1994)
2-9B-4: REGISTRATION FEE:
Accompanying applications for certificates of registration shall be a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per certificate; provided, however, that no fees
shall be required by solicitors seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, newspapers, periodicals or other publications or to solicitors for
charities, civic organizations, governmental bodies or political candidates. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-9B-5: ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE:
The Chief of Police or person designated by him, after consideration of the application and all information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the
application if the applicant does not possess the qualifications for such certificate as herein required, and that the issuance of a certificate of registration to
the applicant would not be in accord with the intent and purpose of this Chapter. Endorsement shall be made by the Chief of Police or designated person
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 88/470
upon the application of the denial of the application. When the applicant is found to be fully qualified, the certificate of registration shall be issued forthwith.
Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by the Chief of Police if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a violation of any
provisions of this Chapter, or has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of
registration under the terms of this Chapter. Immediately upon such revocation written notice thereof shall be given by the Chief of Police to the holder of
the certificate in person or by certified U.S. mail addressed to his residence address set forth in the application.
Immediately upon the giving of such notice the certificate of registration shall become null and void.
The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date thereof. (Ord. 0-94-03, 3-7-1994)
2-9B-6: CITY POLICY ON SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the governing body of the City that the occupants of the residences in the City shall make the determination of
whether solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-9B-7: NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING:
A. Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this Chapter shall comply
with the following directions:
1. Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to solicitors, or the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence, shall be given in
the following manner:
2. A weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches (3" x 4") in size shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words, as follows:
NO SOLICITORS INVITED
B. The letters shall be at least one-third inch (1/3") in height. For the purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the secretary of the Chief of
Police to persons requesting, at the cost thereof.
C. Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the information
contained thereon. (Ord. 0-94-03, 3-7-1994)
2-9B-8: SOLICITOR REGULATIONS:
A. Duty Of Solicitors: It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises in the City upon which a "residence" as herein defined is located
to first examine the notice provided for in Section 2-9B-7 of this Article, if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the notice. If
the notice states "No Solicitors Invited", then the solicitor, whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
B. Uninvited Soliciting Prohibited: It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the
doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the
purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in "soliciting" as herein defined, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the
residence in accordance with the provisions of Section 2-9B-7 of this Article.
C. Time Limit On Soliciting: It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether registered under this Article or not,
to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any
sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in "soliciting" as herein defined, prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. of any weekday, or at
any time on a Sunday or on a State or national holiday. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-9B-9: CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS:
A. Charitable solicitations on streets or roads within the City are hereby permitted subject to the provisions of Public Act 81-291. All of the provisions of
said Public Act 81-29 regarding the regulation of persons soliciting on highways, streets and roadways are hereby incorporated by reference and are
found to be specifically applicable to any and all charitable solicitors in the City.
B. Any and all charitable solicitors that qualify as a charitable organization as required in subsection A of this Section, will also be required to post
evidence of financial responsibility or show evidence of liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), and will be required to
indemnify the City and any and all of its officials from any liability incurred as a result of allowing such organization to solicit under the provisions of this
Section.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense. (Ord. 0-80-20, 6-2-1980)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 89/470
ARTICLE C. ITINERANT MERCHANTS
2-9C-1: LICENSE REQUIRED, APPLICATION:
It shall be unlawful to do business in the City as an itinerant merchant without having first secured a license as is herein provided. For the purpose of this
Section, any merchant engaging or intending to engage in business as a merchant in the City for a period of time not exceeding one hundred (100) days
shall be considered as an itinerant merchant; provided, that peddlers shall not be considered itinerant merchants1. Every application for such license shall
be in conformity with Section 2-1-2 of this Title, and in addition such applications shall set forth the commodities to be sold, and the place intended to be
occupied or used for the business. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-9C-2: LICENSE FEES:
The fee for an itinerant merchant's license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for one month and ten dollars ($10.00) per day. Art fairs and similar fairs
or shows shall be considered as being "one itinerant merchant" for the purpose of this fee schedule. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
Chapter 10
LIVERY VEHICLES
2-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this Chapter, the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Section:
COMMISSIONER: The person having supervision over operations of livery vehicles in the City.
LICENSED DRIVER: Any person who shall have been properly identified by a licensee and authorized to drive the licensee's vehicles for hire under a
livery license in accordance with the terms of this Chapter.
LICENSEE: Any person in whose name a livery license shall have been issued by the City for the operation of livery vehicles.
LIVERY VEHICLE: A public passenger vehicle for hire only at a charge or fare for each passenger per trip or for each vehicle per trip fixed by agreement
in advance. (Ord. 0-78-23, 7-3-1978)
2-10-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, APPLICATION:
It shall be unlawful to operate a livery vehicle business in the City without first having secured a license therefor. It shall be unlawful to drive a livery vehicle
while carrying paid passengers without having secured a license therefor.
A. Any application for a livery license shall contain the following information submitted to the City Clerk:
1. The name and address of the applicant and if a corporation, firm, association or partnership, the name and address of all officers, partners and
shareholders owning more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares thereof.
2. Identification data of all vehicles which the applicant proposes to operate as livery vehicles, including:
a. Make, model and year of manufacture.
b. Engine number.
c. Serial number.
d. State certificate of title number and license number.
e. Number of passengers capable of being accommodated therein at one time.
f. City vehicle sticker number.
3. Whether there are any liens, mortgages or encumbrances on such vehicle, and if so, the amount and character thereof.
4. A statement by the applicant as to where and for what period of time he has previously engaged in the livery vehicle business, including any
revocations of livery vehicle licenses from this City or any other governmental body.
5. Conviction of felony record, if any.
B. Any application for a license to drive a livery vehicle shall be submitted to the City Clerk with the following information:
1. Name and address of applicant.
2. Address for three (3) years past.
3. Age, race, height, weight, color of hair and eyes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 90/470
4. Citizenship and marital status.
5. Date and place of any convictions of felonies or misdemeanors, if any, and a statement of the nature of the offense and for which convicted.
6. State of Illinois chauffeur's license number.
7. Whether he has ever been previously licensed as a driver of a livery vehicle or taxicab; if so, when, and by what authority, and whether his license
has ever been revoked or suspended; if so, for what cause.
8. The fingerprints of each applicant shall be submitted to the Police Department. Each applicant shall file with his application four (4) recent
photographs of himself of a size which may be easily attached to his license. (Ord. 0-78-23, 7-3-1978)
2-10-3: LICENSE FEES:
The fee for the issuance of a livery license shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) plus ten dollars ($10.00) for each vehicle to be included under the livery
license, which shall be paid to the City Clerk upon making of the application for said license. Said fee shall be returned to the applicant if the issuance is
refused. The fee for a license to drive a livery vehicle shall be five dollars ($5.00). (Ord. 0-78-23, 7-3-1978)
2-10-4: SPECIFICATIONS FOR OPERATION OF BUSINESS:
A. No vehicle shall be licensed as a livery vehicle unless it has two (2) doors on each side, and no vehicle having seating capacity for more than eight (8)
adult passengers shall be so licensed unless it has at least two (2) doors with fixed aisle space for access to said doors.
B. Each livery vehicle licensee shall maintain or cause to be maintained all brakes, horns, lights, safety belts or harnesses, mufflers, tires, steering gear,
speedometer and windshield wipers; and all livery vehicles licensed under the name of the licensee shall be maintained in satisfactory condition to
ensure safe operation.
C. All mechanical equipment installed in or as part of any livery vehicle may be inspected by the Commissioner or his authorized representative at any
time. Whenever the Commissioner finds any such equipment to be in unsatisfactory condition, he may, by written notice to licensee, require specific
adjustments or repairs to be made at the licensee's expense.
D. It shall be unlawful for a passenger to fail or refuse to pay the lawful fare at the termination of a trip.
E. It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit any livery vehicle to be used in perpetration of a crime or misdemeanor.
F. No livery license shall be issued until the applicant submits to the City Clerk a policy of liability insurance covering all vehicles to be licensed under the
livery license, or evidence satisfactory to the City Attorney that such a policy shall be issued by a company licensed to do business in the State of
Illinois and shall insure the licensee against loss from liability to the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for the injury or death of
one person or any one accident; and to the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for the injury or death of more than one person in
any accident; and to the amount of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for damage to the property of others for any one accident due to the negligent
operation of such vehicle. The policy of insurance shall be approved by the City Attorney as to conformity with the terms of this Section and shall
contain a provision that the same may not be cancelled before the expiration of its term except upon ten (10) days' written notice to the City.
G. Livery licenses shall expire on April 30 of each year. (Ord. 0-78-23, 7-3-1978)
2-10-5: REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO DRIVERS OF LIVERY VEHICLES:
A. Every licensed driver of a livery vehicle, when requested by a passenger, shall issue a receipt for fare showing the date, name of licensee, amount of
fare paid, and signed by the driver.
B. Every driver, upon taking possession and control of the livery vehicle for operation in transportation of passengers for hire, shall exhibit said license for
view by passengers.
C. If any driver licensed hereunder shall violate any traffic laws or regulations or any order, rule or regulation of the Commissioner relating to the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter, the Commissioner may suspend the license for a period not to exceed thirty (30)
days. If any driver licensed hereunder by application in which any material fact was omitted or stated falsely, the Commissioner, at his discretion, may
revoke such license. Upon suspension or revocation of a driver's license issued hereunder, the licensee shall surrender his license certificate to the
Commissioner.
D. It shall be unlawful for any driver to engage in driving a livery vehicle more than twelve (12) hours out of every twenty four (24). A driver shall be
deemed to be driving a vehicle within the terms of this Chapter whenever he is in charge of a vehicle and holding himself in readiness to convey
passengers.
E. Every driver of a livery vehicle shall report to the Police Department within twelve (12) hours after its occurrence, any accident resulting in any injuries to
persons or damage to property wherein a livery vehicle driven by him was involved. (Ord. 0-78-23, 7-3-1978)
2-10-6: COMMISSIONER, DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 91/470
A. The Mayor of the City is hereby designated as the "Commissioner" having supervision over operations of livery vehicles in the City.
B. The Commissioner shall approve each application authorizing the issuance of a livery license upon the finding that all requirements of this Chapter have
been met, unless the applicant is found not to be of good character or has had a livery license previously revoked or suspended for cause other than
abandonment.
C. The Commissioner is hereby authorized to alter, by endorsement, the identification data of licensed vehicles at any time on written request of the
licensee. In the same manner, the Commissioner is further authorized to add or delete the name of any of the licensed drivers; provided, that in the
case of new names being added, each such name shall be followed in the endorsement by the identification data for the new licensed driver.
Identification cards for new licensed drivers shall be provided and identification cards for drivers deleted shall be returned to the Commissioner by the
licensee.
D. The Commissioner may, at any time, revoke and terminate the validity of any livery license for any conduct by the licensee or by any licensed driver
which is prejudicial to the public safety, welfare, morals or good order of the community, or for repeated violation of any provision of this Chapter. Any
licensee or licensed driver whose license has been revoked may, within five (5) days after such revocation, appeal the decision of the Commissioner to
the City Council, who shall hold a hearing within thirty (30) days of the filing of such appeal. The filing of an appeal under the provisions of this
subsection shall stay the Commissioner's order of revocation until such time as the City Council rules upon such appeal. (Ord. 0-78-23, 7-3-1978)
Chapter 11
FILLING STATIONS
2-11-1: DEFINITION:
The term "filling station" as used in this chapter shall be held to mean and is hereby defined as meaning any building, structure, premises, enclosure or
other place within the city where a container or containers, tank or tanks, either portable or stationary, and containing ether, carbon bisulphate, gasoline,
naphtha, benzole, hydrocarbon (gas drips), liquefied petroleum gas, kerosene, turpentine or other flammable liquids, having a flashpoint below one
hundred eighty seven degrees Fahrenheit (187F) are kept or located for the purpose of selling, offering for sale or distributing any such liquids from such
containers, tank or tanks; provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any place where such flammable liquids are kept or sold
for medicinal purposes only. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-11-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, APPLICATION:
No person shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on the business of a filling station without first having obtained a license therefor, as hereinafter
provided. The application for such license for the business of managing, conducting, operating or carrying on a filling station shall conform to the
provisions of section 2-1-2 of this title, and shall specify the location thereto, and shall specify the location of the building, structure, premises, enclosure,
or other place in which it is proposed to keep such filling station, and the capacity or capacities in gallons of the container or containers, tank or tanks.
(Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-11-3: LICENSE FEES:
The annual license fee for each filling station shall be sixty six dollars ($66.00), plus sixty six dollars ($66.00) for each fueling pedestal. (Ord. 0-02-09, 4-1-
2002, eff. 4-11-2002; amd. Ord. 0-09-07, 3-13-2009)
2-11-4: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. License Not Transferable: No license granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be assigned or transferred to any other person other than the
licensee named therein to do business or act under such license.
B. Change Of Location: If any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall, before the expiration of such license, desire to change the
location of the business conducted thereunder, the licensee shall notify the city clerk and shall furnish all the information which was required to be
furnished on an original application for license.
C. Storage Of Flammable Liquids: Except as otherwise permitted by ordinance, storage of flammable liquids shall be outside of buildings.
D. Smoking Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit smoking in any filling stations. No smoking signs should be conspicuously posted.
(Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
2-11-5: INSPECTIONS:
Inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the general provisions of the ordinances of the city relating thereto1. (Ord. 0-77-24, 11-7-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 92/470
Chapter 12
GARAGE SALES
2-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter:
GARAGE SALE: Those occasional sales of used or surplus household goods, wares and other items of personal property owned by the occupier of the
residence premises where such sale is held or owned collectively by a group of persons, including the occupier of the premises where such sale is held,
and such sale shall include sales commonly known as basement sales, house sales, yard sales, attic sales, rummage sales, estate sales or other similar
occasional sales conducted on an infrequent and unscheduled basis from residentially zoned premises.
The term "garage sale" shall not include bulk sales, the sale of multiple new items of the same description, and the sale of consigned merchandise;
nor shall said sale include the sale of junk or antique items as a business activity by a person involved therein as a junk or antique dealer.
PERSON: Any individual, firm or corporation, except for charitable or religious organizations. (Ord. 0-90-30, 7-16-1990)
2-12-2: LIMIT ON LENGTH AND FREQUENCY OF SALES:
Garage sales shall be permitted for three (3) consecutive days between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and sunset of each day. Not more than three
(3) garage sales shall be conducted on the same premises within any calendar year, and there shall be a minimum of thirty (30) days between each such
sale. (Ord. 0-90-30, 7-16-1990)
2-12-3: SIGNS:
All signs advertising a garage sale shall be removed no later than nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on the third and last day of such sale. The size and location of
signs shall conform with section 10.02(A)(2) of the Zoning Ordinance "Real Estate Signs". (Ord. 0-90-30, 7-16-1990)
2-12-4: LOCATION OF SALE:
A garage sale as provided herein shall be conducted from the residence premises of the person residing thereof. It shall be unlawful for any person to
display for sale or to conduct a sale of any household goods, wares or other items of merchandise and personal property on any public sidewalk or public
right of way. (Ord. 0-90-30, 7-16-1990)
2-12-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day that such a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 0-90-30, 7-
16-1990)
Chapter 13
CONFLICTS WITH CERTAIN ORDINANCES OF COOK COUNTY
2-13-1: MINIMUM HOURLY WAGES; PAID SICK LEAVE:
A. Employers located within the City shall comply with all applicable Federal and/or State laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist
from time to time with regard to both the payment of minimum hourly wages and paid sick leave and employee eligibility for paid sick leave and
minimum hourly wages shall also be in compliance with all applicable Federal and/or State laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may
exist from time to time.
B. No additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave, or minimum hourly wages, including, without limitation, any additional obligations by ordinance
adopted by the County of Cook Board of Commissioners, shall apply to employers located within the City, except those required by Federal and/or
State laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time. (Ord. 0-17-14, 6-12-2017)
2-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "employee" means any individual person permitted and/or hired to work by an employer regardless of the
number of persons the employer employs, and the term "employer" means any person, firm or corporation employing one or more employees, or
seeking to employ one or more employees, if the employer has its principal place of business within the City or does business within the City.
B. For purposes of this chapter, the term "employer" does not mean or include:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 93/470
1. The government of the United States or a corporation wholly owned by the government of the United States;
2. An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian tribe; or
3. The government of the State or any agency or department thereof.
C. For purposes of this chapter, the term "City" shall refer to the "City of Prospect Heights, Cook County, Illinois". (Ord. 0-17-14, 6-12-2017)
Title 3
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
FOOD DEALERS AND ESTABLISHMENTS
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words or terms, for purposes of this chapter, shall have the meanings indicated in this section:
ADULTERATED: The condition of food: a) if it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance in a quantity which may render it injurious to
health; b) if it bears or contains any added poisonous or deleterious substance for which no safe tolerance has been established by regulation, or in
excess of such tolerance if one has been established; c) if it consists in whole or in part of any putrid or decomposed substance, or if it is otherwise unfit
for human consumption; d) if it has been processed, prepared, packed or held under unsanitary conditions, whereby it may have become contaminated
with filth, or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health; e) if it is in whole or in part a product of a diseased animal, or an animal which has
died otherwise than by slaughter; or f) if its container is composed in whole or in part of any poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the
contents injurious to health.
APPROVED: Acceptable to the health inspector based on his determination as to conformance with appropriate standards of good public health practice.
AUTOMATIC FOOD VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical container or device used for the sale of any beverage or article of food, the operation of which
is governed or controlled by the deposit of a coin or token, or a container or device for dispensing prepackaged milk or ice whether operated by the deposit
of a coin or token, self-service by the purchaser or by an attendant.
CLOSED: Fitted together snugly leaving no openings large enough to permit the entrance of vermin.
COMMERCIAL SPACE: Space leased to conduct business by agent, tenant or owner.
CORROSION RESISTANT MATERIAL: Material which maintains its original surface characteristics under prolonged influence of the food, cleaning
compounds and sanitizing solutions which may come into contact therewith.
EASILY CLEANABLE: Readily accessible and of such material and finish, and so fabricated that residue may be completely removed by normal cleaning
methods.
EMPLOYEE: Any person working in a food establishment or food vehicle or employed by any licensee under this chapter, who engages in food
preparation or service, or who comes in contact with any food contact activities.
EQUIPMENT: All facilities in a food establishment used in operations involving food, except that utensils shall not be included as equipment. Equipment
shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, stoves, ranges, hoods, meat blocks, tables, counters, bins, refrigerators, sinks, dishwashing machines,
steam tables, automatic food vending machines and similar items.
FOOD: Any raw, cooked or processed edible substances, beverage or ingredient used or intended for use or sale in whole or in part for human
consumption.
FOOD CONTACT ACTIVITY: Any activity involving the handling of, direct contact with, or close proximity to, either: a) food, except for food in sealed
packages or containers; or b) utensils or equipment used for food; or c) any food contact surface.
FOOD CONTACT SURFACES: Those surfaces of equipment and utensils in a food establishment with which food normally comes in contact, and those
surfaces of equipment and utensils with which food may come in contact and then drain back onto surfaces of equipment and utensils normally in contact
with food.
FOOD DEALER: Every person engaged in conducting or operating any of the following businesses in the City: a) wholesale beverage dealers; b) fruit
stores or establishments conducted or operated for the retail or wholesale sale of fresh fruits and berries; c) grocery stores or establishments conducted or
operated for the sale at retail or wholesale of food; d) candy stores; e) meat markets or establishments conducted or operated for the retail or wholesale
sale of fresh meat, poultry or fish; f) retail or wholesale soft drink dealers; and g) bakeries or any establishments conducted or operated for the mixing,
compounding or baking for sale directly to the general public or to a food service establishment of any bread or breadstuffs, or any food product of which
flour or meal is the principal ingredient; provided, however, that if such foodstuffs are baked in the kitchens of food service establishments or in private
dwellings in ordinary stoves or ranges for consumption on such premises only, such places shall not be considered as bakeries; and provided, further, that
notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary, the term "food dealer" shall not include food processing establishments and food service
establishments as herein defined.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: Any place, establishment or operation where food is manufactured, processed, prepared, displayed, handled, served,
transported, sold or offered for sale either at wholesale or retail, or kept or stored for any of these purposes, including, but not necessarily limited to, food
dealers' operations, food service establishments and food processing establishments, all as defined herein.
FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT: A commercial establishment in which food is processed, manufactured or otherwise prepared and packaged for
human consumption.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 94/470
FOOD REFRIGERATION LOCKER PLANT: Any food establishment wherein compartments are rented, leased or made available to anyone other than the
owner of the establishments for the refrigeration of food, including any beverage used or intended for human consumption.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: Any fixed or mobile restaurant; coffee shop; cafeteria; short-order cafe; luncheonette; grill; tearoom; sandwich shop;
soda fountain; tavern; bar; cocktail lounge; nightclub; roadside stand; industrial feeding establishments; private, public or nonprofit organization or
institution routinely serving food; catering kitchens; commissary or similar places in which food or drink is prepared for sale or for service on the premises
or elsewhere; and any other eating or drinking establishment or operation where food is served or provided for the public with or without charge.
FOOD VEHICLE: Any vehicle, including, but not limited to, wagons, motor vehicles and vehicles propelled by manpower, used for the storage,
transportation, sale or serving of food. Unless otherwise expressly stated, food vehicles shall be subject to all applicable provisions of the regulations
governing food establishments.
FROZEN DESSERT: Ice cream, water ices, frozen puddings or any food made wholly or in part of milk or cream and frozen.
FROZEN DESSERT ESTABLISHMENT: Any food establishment in the city that manufactures, sells, offers for sale or deals in frozen desserts.
KITCHENWARE: All multiuse utensils other than tableware used in the storage, preparation, conveying or serving of food.
MILK DEALER: Any person who processes, prepares, handles, serves, transports or sells milk, or who keeps, stores or offers milk for any of these
purposes.
MISBRANDED: The presence of any written, printed or graphic matter, upon or accompanying food or containers of food, which is false or misleading, or
which violates any applicable federal, state or local labeling requirements.
PERISHABLE FOOD: Any food of such type or in such condition as may spoil.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, company, association or corporation, in his or its own capacity or as administrator, conservator,
executor, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed by the court.
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD: Any perishable food which consists in whole or in part of milk or milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish, shell fish or
other ingredients capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic micro-organisms.
SAFE TEMPERATURES: As applied to potentially hazardous food, "safe temperatures" shall mean temperatures of forty degrees Fahrenheit (40F) or
below, and one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140F) or above.
SANITIZE: Effective bactericidal treatment of clean surfaces by a process which has been approved by the health inspector as being effective in
destroying all microorganisms.
SEALED: Free of cracks or other openings which permit entry or passage of moisture.
SINGLE SERVICE ARTICLES: Cups, containers, lids or closures, plates, knives, forks, spoons, stirrers, paddles, straws, placemats, napkins, doilies,
wrapping materials and all similar articles which are constructed in whole or in part from paper, paperboard, molded pulp, foil, wood, plastic, synthetic or
other readily destructible materials, and which are intended by the manufacturers and generally recognized by the public as for one usage only, then to be
discarded.
TABLEWARE: All multiuse eating and drinking utensils, including flatware (knives, forks and spoons).
TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: Any food service establishment which operates at a fixed location for a temporary period of time, not
to exceed two (2) weeks, in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or similar transitory gathering.
UTENSIL: Tableware and kitchenware used in the storage, preparation, conveying or serving of food.
WHOLESOME: In sound condition, clean, free from adulteration, and otherwise suitable for use as human food. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-01-
36, 12-3-2001, eff. 12-13-2001; Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-1-2: FOOD PROTECTION:
A. All food, while being stored, prepared, displayed, served or sold at food establishments or food vehicles, or during transportation between such
establishments, shall be protected from contamination from dust, flies, rodents and other vermin; from unclean utensils and work surfaces; from
unnecessary handling; from coughs and sneezes; from flooding, drainage, and overhead leakage; and from any other source. No animals or fowls shall
be kept or allowed in any room in which food or drink is prepared or stored.
B. All perishable food shall be stored at such temperatures as will protect against spoiling. All potentially hazardous food shall be maintained at safe
temperatures (40F or below, or 140F or above), except during necessary periods of preparation and service.
C. Containers of food shall be stored above the floor, on clean racks, dollies or other clean surfaces, in such a manner as to be protected from splash or
other contamination. Food not subject to further washing or cooking before serving shall be stored in such a manner as to be protected against
contamination from food requiring washing or cooking. Wet storage of packaged food shall be prohibited. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1-3: FOOD SUPPLIES:
A. Approved Sources: All food in all food establishments shall be from sources approved or considered satisfactory by the health inspector shall be clean,
wholesome, free from spoilage, free from adulteration and misbranding, and safe for human consumption. No hermetically sealed, nonacid and low
acid food which has been processed in a place other than a commercial food processing establishment shall be used, served, sold or offered for sale.
(Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 95/470
B. Shell Fish:
1. All oysters, clams and mussels shall be from sources approved by the state shellfish authority; provided, that if the source is outside the state, it shall
be one which is certified by the state of origin. Oysters, clams and mussels must also be in compliance with provisions of this section.
2. Shell stock shall be identified with an official tag giving the name and certificate number of the original shell stock shipper and the kind and quantity
of shell stock. Fresh and frozen shucked oysters, clams and mussels shall be packed in nonreturnable containers identified with the name and
address of the packer, repacker or distributor, and the certificate number of the packer or repacker preceded by the abbreviated name of the state.
(Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1-4: HEALTH AND DISEASE CONTROLS:
No person, while affected by any disease in a communicable form, or while a carrier of such disease, or while afflicted with boils, infected wounds, sores or
an acute respiratory infection, shall work in any area of a food establishment or engage in any food contact activity or be employed by any licensee under
this chapter in any capacity in which there is a likelihood of such person contaminating food or food contact surfaces with pathogenic organisms, or
transmitting disease to other individuals. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1-5: EMPLOYER'S RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be unlawful to employ any person in any job which he is prohibited from holding by section 3-1-4 of this chapter. If the manager or person in charge
of a food establishment has reason to suspect that any employee has contracted any disease in a communicable form or has become a carrier of such
disease, he shall prohibit further work by this employee and shall notify the health inspector at once. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-
2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-1-6: EMPLOYEE REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS:
A. Medical Examinations: All employees shall permit such medical examinations and submit such laboratory specimens as the health inspector may
require for the purpose of determining freedom from infection. Each such person shall carry, or shall have on file in the establishment where he works,
a card stating that he has had a negative tubercular test or a chest X-ray within the past year, and that this test or X-ray did not show signs of active
tuberculosis. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
B. Cleanliness: All employees shall wear clean outer garments, maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness, and conform to hygienic practices while on
duty. They shall wash their hands in an approved handwashing facility before starting work, and as often as may be necessary to remove soil and
contamination. After visiting the toilet room, no employee shall resume work without first washing his hands. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
C. Use Of Tobacco: Employees shall not use tobacco in any form while engaged in food contact activities; provided, that designated locations in areas
containing food contact surfaces may be approved by the health inspector for smoking where no contamination hazards will result. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-
1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
D. Head Covering: Hair nets, headbands, caps or other effective hair restraints shall be used by employees engaged in food contact activities to keep hair
from food and food contact surfaces. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1-7: EQUIPMENT AND UTENSILS1:
A. Sanitary Design, Construction And Installation:
1. All equipment and utensils in food establishments and food vehicles shall be designed and of such material and workmanship as to be smooth,
easily cleanable and durable, and shall be in good repair; and the food contact surfaces of such equipment and utensils shall, in addition, be easily
accessible to cleaning, nontoxic, corrosion resistant and relatively nonabsorbent; provided that, when approved by the health inspector, exceptions
may be made to the above material requirements for equipment such as cutting boards, blocks and bakers' tables. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd.
Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
2. All equipment shall be so installed and maintained as to facilitate the cleaning thereof, and of all adjacent areas, and so as not to create any hazards
from congestion or contamination.
3. Equipment in use at the time of the effective date hereof which is in full compliance with all previously existing requirements but does not fully meet
the requirements of this section may be continued in use if it is in good repair, capable of being maintained in a sanitary condition, and if the food
contact surfaces are not toxic.
B. Cleanliness Of Equipment And Utensils: All utensil and food contact surfaces of equipment, exclusive of cooking surfaces of equipment, used in any
food contact activity, and all food storage utensils, shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. Cooking surfaces of equipment shall be cleaned at least
once a day. All utensils and food contact surfaces of equipment used in the preparation, service, display or storage of potentially hazardous foods shall
be thoroughly cleaned and sanitized prior to each use. Nonfood contact surfaces of equipment shall be cleaned at such intervals as to keep them in a
clean and sanitary condition. After cleaning and until use, all food contact surfaces of equipment and utensils shall be so stored and handled as to be
protected from contamination. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1-8: BUILDING REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 96/470
A. Sewage Disposal: All sewage from food establishments shall be disposed of in a public sewage system or, in the absence thereof, in a manner
approved by the health inspector. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
B. Garbage And Rubbish Disposal: All garbage and rubbish of food establishments or food vehicles containing food wastes shall, prior to disposal, be kept
in leakproof nonabsorbent containers, which shall be kept covered with tightfitting lids when stored or filled, or when not in continuous use; provided,
that such containers need not be covered when stored in a special vermin proofed room or enclosure, or in a good waste refrigerator. All other rubbish
shall be stored in containers, rooms or areas in an approved manner. The rooms, enclosures, areas and containers used shall be adequate for the
storage of all food waste and rubbish accumulating on the premises. Adequate cleaning facilities shall be provided, and each container, room or area
shall be thoroughly cleaned after the emptying or removal of garbage or rubbish. Food waste grinders, if used, shall be installed in compliance with
state and local standards and shall be of suitable construction. All garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of with sufficient frequency and in such
manner as to prevent a nuisance.
C. Plumbing: All plumbing in food establishments shall be so sized, installed and maintained as to carry adequate quantities of water to required locations
throughout the establishment; to prevent contamination of the water supply; to convey properly sewage and liquid wastes from the establishment to the
sewerage or sewerage disposal system; and to prevent unsanitary conditions, nuisances and contamination of food, equipment and utensils. (Ord. 0-
77-13, 5-2-1977)
D. Toilet Facilities: Each food establishment shall be provided with adequate, conveniently located toilet facilities for its employees. Toilet fixtures shall be
of sanitary design and readily cleanable. Toilet facilities shall be installed in accordance with applicable state and local laws, ordinances and
regulations, or in the absence thereof, as approved by the health inspector. Toilet facilities, including rooms and fixtures, shall be kept clean and in
good repair, and free of objectionable odors. Doors of all the toilet rooms shall be self-closing and tightfitting. Such doors shall not be left open except
during cleaning or maintenance. If vestibules are provided, they shall be kept clean and in good repair. Toilet tissue shall be provided. Easily cleanable
receptacles shall be provided for waste materials, and such receptacles in toilet rooms for women shall be covered. Such receptacles shall be emptied
at least once a day, and more frequently when necessary to prevent excessive accumulation of waste material. Where the use of nonwater carried
sewerage disposal facilities has been approved by the health inspector, such facilities shall be separate from the establishment. When toilet facilities
are provided for patrons, or for the public, such facilities shall meet the requirements of this section. Where food is eaten on the premises, separate
toilets for men and women shall be provided in all buildings which are constructed or substantially remodeled or rebuilt after the effective date hereof.
This subsection shall not apply to food vehicles. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
E. Floors, Walls And Ceilings:
1. The floor surfaces in kitchens and in all other rooms and areas in which food contact activities are carried on in food establishments, walk-in
refrigerators, dressing or locker rooms and toilet rooms shall be of smooth nonabsorbent materials, and so constructed as to be easily cleanable;
provided, that the floors of nonrefrigerated dry food storage areas need not be nonabsorbent. All walls of rooms or areas in which food contact
activities are carried on or utensils or hands are washed shall be easily cleanable, smooth and light colored, and shall have washable surfaces up to
the highest level reached by splash or spray. All exterior areas where food is served or sold shall be kept clean and properly drained, and surfaces in
such areas shall be finished so as to facilitate maintenance and minimize dust.
2. The walls and ceilings of all rooms shall be kept clean and in good repair. All floors in food establishments shall be kept clean and in good repair.
Floor drains shall be provided in all rooms where floors are subjected to flooding type cleaning or where normal operations release or discharge
water or other liquid waste on the floor.
F. Lighting: All areas in food establishments in which food contact activities are carried on or in which utensils are washed, and washing areas, dressing or
locker rooms, toilet rooms, and garbage and rubbish storage areas shall be well lighted. During all cleanup activities, adequate light shall be provided in
the area being cleaned, and upon or around equipment being cleaned.
G. Ventilation: All rooms or areas in food establishments in which food contact activities are carried on, all dressing or locker rooms, all toilet rooms, and all
garbage and rubbish storage rooms or areas shall be well ventilated. All ventilation hoods and devices shall be designed to prevent grease or
condensate from dripping into food or onto food contact surfaces. All filters, where used, shall be readily removable for cleaning or replacement. All
ventilation systems shall comply with applicable state and local fire prevention regulations and shall, when vented to the outside air, discharge in such a
manner as not to create a nuisance. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1-9: SANITARY REQUIREMENTS2:
A. Hand Washing Facilities: Each food establishment shall be provided with adequate, conveniently located hand washing facilities for its employees,
including a lavatory or lavatories equipped with hot and cold or tempered running water, hand cleansing soap or detergent, and approved sanitary
towels or other approved hand drying devices. Such facilities shall be kept clean and in good repair. Signs shall be posted near all toilet facilities used
by employees instructing employees not to return to work after using the toilet facilities without washing their hands. This subsection shall not apply to
food vehicles used only for the transportation of food, or in which no food contact activities are carried on except loading or unloading of food.
B. Vermin Control: Effective measures shall be taken to protect against the entrance into all food establishments and the breeding or presence on the
premises of vermin.
C. Clothes, Storage: Adequate facilities shall be provided for the orderly storage of employees' clothing and personal belongings in all food
establishments. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
Where employees routinely change clothes within the establishment, one or more dressing rooms or designated areas shall be provided for this
purpose. Such designated areas shall be located outside of areas used for food contact activities, including, but not limited to, utensil washing or
storage; provided, that when approved by the health inspector such an area may be located in a storage room where only completely packaged food is
stored. Designated areas shall be equipped with adequate lockers, and lockers or other suitable facilities shall be provided in dressing rooms. Dressing
rooms and lockers shall be kept clean. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 97/470
D. Housekeeping: All parts of a food establishment and its premises shall be kept neat, clean and free of litter and rubbish. Cleaning operations shall be
conducted in such a manner as to minimize contamination of food and food contact surfaces. None of the operations connected with a food
establishment shall be conducted in any room used as a living or sleeping quarters. Soiled linens, coats and aprons shall be kept in suitable containers
until removed for laundering. No live birds or animals shall be allowed in any area used for the conduct of food establishment operations, except that
guide dogs accompanying blind persons may be permitted in areas open to customers or the public. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1-10: EXEMPTIONS:
The health inspector may exempt any food establishment that deals only in completely sealed and packaged foods, or in which no food contact activities
are carried on, from any of the requirements of this chapter which, in his judgment, would serve no health purpose as applied to such food establishment.
(Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-1-11: INSPECTION OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS:
A. The health inspector shall inspect each food establishment located in or food vehicle operated in the city as often as is necessary for the enforcement of
this chapter.
B. The health inspector, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter at any reasonable time, any food establishment or vehicle in the city for the
purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this chapter. He shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment and
operator to obtain pertinent information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received or used, and persons employed.
C. Whenever the health inspector makes an inspection of a food establishment or food vehicle, he shall record his findings in writing, and shall furnish the
original of such inspection report to the licensee or operator.
D. Whenever the health inspector makes an inspection of a food establishment or food vehicle and discovers that any of the applicable requirements of
this chapter has been violated, he shall notify the licensee or operator of such violation by means of an inspection report or other written notice. In such
notification, the health inspector shall: 1) set forth the specific violations found; 2) establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of
the violations found; 3) state that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may result in immediate
suspension of the license; and 4) state that an opportunity for appeal from any notice or inspection findings will be provided if a written request for a
hearing is filed with the public safety committee within the period of time established in the notice for correction.
E. Notices provided for under this chapter shall be deemed to have been properly served when the original of the inspection report or other notice has
been delivered personally to the licensee or person in charge of the food establishment or food vehicle, or such notice has been sent by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the license holder; a copy of such notice shall be filed with the records of the health
inspector. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-1-12: EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD:
A. Food may be examined or sampled by the health inspector as often as may be necessary to determine freedom from adulteration or misbranding.
B. The health inspector may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge, place a hold order on any food which he determines or has probable
cause to believe to be unwholesome or otherwise adulterated, or misbranded. Under a hold order, food shall be permitted to be suitably stored. It shall
be unlawful for any person to remove or alter a hold order, notice or tag placed on food by the health inspector, and neither such food nor the
containers thereof shall be relabeled, repacked, reprocessed, altered, disposed of or destroyed without permission of the health inspector, except by
order of a court of competent jurisdiction. After the owner or person in charge has had a hearing as provided in this chapter and on the basis of
evidence produced at such hearing, or on the basis of his examination in the event the written request for a hearing is not received within ten (10) days,
the health inspector may vacate the hold order, or may by written order direct the owner or person in charge of the food which was placed under the
hold order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this chapter; provided, that such order of the health
inspector to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be stayed if the order is appealed to a
court of competent jurisdiction within three (3) days. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-1-13: PLANNED REVIEW OF FUTURE CONSTRUCTION:
When a food establishment is hereafter constructed or extensively remodeled, or when an existing structure is converted for use as a food establishment,
properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling, alteration, showing layout, arrangement and construction materials of work
areas, and the location, size and type of fixed equipment and facilities, shall be submitted to the health inspector for approval before such work is begun.
(Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-1-14: PROCEDURE WHEN INFECTION IS SUSPECTED:
When the health inspector has reasonable cause to suspect the possibility of disease transmission from any food establishment employee or food vehicle
employee, the health inspector shall secure a health history of the suspected employee, or make such other investigation as may be indicated, and take
appropriate action. The health inspector may require any or all of the following measures: (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-
2005)
A. The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food establishments and vehicles. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 98/470
B. The immediate closing of the food establishment concerned or suspension of use of the vehicle concerned until, in the judgment of the health inspector,
no further danger of disease outbreak exists. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
C. Adequate medical and laboratory examinations of the employee, or other employees, and of his and their bodily discharges. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
D. Contagious Diseases: No person affected with or carrying tuberculosis or any disease in a communicable form or affected with boils, infected wounds,
sores or acute respiratory infections or intestinal disorders shall work in any area of a food establishment in any capacity in which there is a likelihood
of that person contaminating food contact services with pathogenic organisms or transmitting disease to other persons.
1. It shall be unlawful to employ any person known or suspected of being infected with any such disease or condition in such an area of capacity and if
the person in charge of any such food establishment suspects that any employee has contracted any diseases in a communicable form or has
become a carrier of such disease, he/she shall notify the department of health immediately.
2. All persons employed by processing or service of any food must have an annual tuberculosis exam, and proof of a current series of vaccinations for
hepatitis A or a blood test indicating need for hepatitis A vaccinations on file with the food establishment, in accordance with the rules and regulations
of the board of health. Such results of such exams and the evidence of a current series of vaccinations for hepatitis A vaccinations must be made
available by the food establishment to the department of health upon demand and must be available during all business hours of the establishment.
Failure to provide the necessary exams and immunizations shall subject the owner of the food establishment to a fine of no less than fifty dollars
($50.00) and no more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense and/or revocation of the business license of the food establishment
pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 0-99-26, 10-18-1999)
3-1-15: CONFLICTS:
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all food establishments within the city and all food vehicles operated within the city, except that where a
provision of this chapter conflicts with any applicable provision of any other chapter of this code, the provisions of such other chapters shall prevail.
B. Any person who has obtained a license under any of the provisions of this chapter, and has paid the appropriate fee, may conduct on the same
premises and in connection with the licensed business any other business licensed by this chapter without paying any additional fee therefor; provided,
that the fee paid for the licensed business is at least as great in amount as the fee required for the other business so conducted, and provided that this
subsection shall not be so construed as to relieve any such applicant from the regulatory requirements for such additional business. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-
1977)
3-1-16: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
ARTICLE A. LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
3-1A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of food dealer or milk dealer; conduct or operate a food service establishment, frozen dessert establishment, food
refrigeration plant, or food processing establishment; install, maintain or use automatic food vending machines (including milk or ice dispensers operated
as self-service or by an attendant); or use, operate or cause to be used or operated in the city a food servicing vehicle without first obtaining a license
therefor. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1A-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for any license required by this chapter shall be made in conformance with section 2-1-2 of this code. The application shall also state the
number of employees to be employed by the applicant in his business. The health inspector shall make or cause to be made such investigation as
required by section 2-1-6 of this code. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-1A-3: LICENSE FEES:
A. Food Service Establishments: The annual fee for a license to conduct and operate a food service establishment shall be as follows:
Number Of Employees Fee
1 to 2, inclusive $132.00
3 to 4, inclusive 198.00
5 to 7, inclusive 297.00
8 to 10, inclusive 495.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 99/470
11 or more 660.00
For the purpose of this subsection, the number of employees shall be determined on the basis of the average number of full time and part time employees
employed by the licensee in each calendar month during the twelve (12) calendar month period immediately preceding the month in which this license fee
is paid. The annual license fee to conduct a food service establishment which has no employees or where the help is donated shall be one hundred twenty
dollars ($120.00). (Ord. 0-98-49, 11-16-1998, eff. 11-26-1998; amd. Ord. 0-02-09, 4-1-2002, eff. 4-11-2002; Ord. 0-09-07, 3-13-2009)
B. Food Dealers: The annual license fee for a food dealer's license shall be one hundred thirty two dollars ($132.00).
C. Milk Dealers: The annual license fee for a milk dealer's license shall be one hundred thirty two dollars ($132.00).
D. Food Service Vehicles: The annual license fee for a food service vehicle license for each food service vehicle shall be one hundred thirty two dollars
($132.00). There shall be no more than four (4) licenses issued for ice cream vehicles (whether motorized or nonmotorized) including, but not limited
to, pushcarts and ice cream trucks.
E. Frozen Dessert Establishments: The annual license fee for a frozen dessert establishment shall be one hundred thirty two dollars ($132.00).
F. Food Refrigeration Plants: The annual license fee for a food refrigeration plant shall be one hundred thirty two dollars ($132.00).
G. Food Processing Establishments: The annual license fee for a food processing establishment shall be one hundred thirty two dollars ($132.00).
H. Food Vending Machine: The annual license fee for food vending machines shall be eighty eight dollars ($88.00) per machine, except as otherwise
provided in subsection K of this section.
I. Ice Machine: The annual license fee for an ice machine shall be one hundred thirty two dollars ($132.00).
J. Self-Service Cooler (Walk-In): The annual license fee for a self-service cooler (walk-in) shall be one hundred thirty two dollars ($132.00).
K. Gumball Vending Machines: The annual license fee for gumball vending machines or gumball type vending machines shall be as follows:
Machines Requiring License Fee Per Machine
$0.01 - $0.49 $22.00
0.50 and up 38.50
(Ord. 0-02-09, 4-1-2002, eff. 4-11-2002; amd. Ord. 0-09-07, 3-13-2009)
L. Health And Sanitation Inspections: Professions, occupations, businesses and/or commercial establishments operated within the corporate limits of the
city and subject to health and sanitation regulations of the city are assessed a fee of thirty five dollars ($35.00) (included in the license fee) to cover the
cost of four (4) inspections and one return visit for violation. A fee of thirty five dollars ($35.00) will be assessed for each additional inspection required.
(Ord. 0-98-49, 11-16-1998, eff. 11-26-1998)
3-1A-4: SUSPENSION OF LICENSES:
A. Any license issued under this article may be suspended temporarily by the health inspector for failure of the licensee to comply with the requirements of
this chapter or for violation of any other provision of any city ordinance relating to the conduct of the business, the condition of the premises or vehicle,
the article of food dealt in, or the license required; provided, however, that no license shall be suspended hereunder until notice has been given to the
licensee as provided in section 3-1-11 of this chapter and until a reasonable time has elapsed to enable the licensee to comply with the provisions of
this chapter or other ordinances of the city. Such notice shall state that the licensee is entitled to a hearing before the public safety committee if a
written request for such a hearing is filed by the licensee with the public safety committee.
B. Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary, whenever the health inspector finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of
a food establishment or food vehicle which, in his judgment, constitutes a substantial hazard to the public health, he may without warning, notice or
hearing issue a written notice to the license holder or operator citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and specifying the time
period within which such action shall be taken; and if deemed necessary, such order shall state that the license is immediately suspended, and all food
operations are to be immediately, discontinued. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately therewith, but upon written
petition to the public safety committee, shall be afforded a hearing no later than seventy two (72) hours after receipt of the petition by the committee.
(Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-1A-5: REINSTATEMENT OF SUSPENDED LICENSES:
Any person whose license under this chapter has been suspended may, at any time, make application for reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of
the license. Within ten (10) days following receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by the applicant that in his opinion the conditions
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 100/470
causing suspension of the license have been corrected, the health inspector shall make a reinspection. If the applicant is complying with all applicable
ordinances, the license shall be reinstated. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-1A-6: HEARINGS:
The hearings provided for hereunder shall be conducted by the public safety committee at a time and place designated by them. Based upon the record of
such hearing, the public safety committee shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify or rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing. A
written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the licensee by the public safety committee. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1A-7: CONDITIONAL LICENSE:
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary, when structural, plumbing, electrical, ventilation, or similar such defects exist in an
established food facility that may require significant expenditures to correct, but are not considered to be imminent health hazards, a conditional license
may be granted at the discretion of the health inspector. Under no circumstances will a conditional license be issued for more than two (2) consecutive
twelve (12) month periods. The purpose of the conditional license or permit is to allow a reasonable period of time for correction of existing defects. (Ord.
0-88-13, 4-18-1988; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
ARTICLE B. FOOD DEALERS
3-1B-1: REGULATIONS:
Every licensed food dealer shall comply strictly with all the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to health, sanitation and food establishments
and all other applicable ordinances of the city. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1B-2: INSPECTIONS:
The health inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected as often as he deems necessary the premises and operations of every food dealer in the city to
determine whether all applicable provisions of the ordinances of the city are being complied with. Such inspections shall be conducted in accordance with
the provisions of section 3-1-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
ARTICLE C. FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
3-1C-1: MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS:
A. All milk and milk products, including fluid milk, other fluid dairy products and manufactured milk products, which are used or served in food service
establishments, shall meet the standards of quality established for such products by applicable state and local laws and regulations.
B. Only pasteurized fluid milk and fluid milk products shall be used or served. Dry milk and milk products may be reconstituted in the food service
establishment if used for cooking purposes only. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
C. All milk and fluid milk products for drinking purposes shall be purchased and served in the original individual container in which they were packaged at
the milk plant, or shall be served from an approved bulk milk dispenser; provided, that cream, whipped cream or half and half, which is to be consumed
on the premises, may be served from the original container of not more than one-half (1/2) gallon capacity or from a dispenser approved by the health
inspector for such service, and for mixed drinks requiring less than one-half (1/2) pint of milk, milk may be poured from one quart or one-half (1/2) gallon
containers packaged at a milk plant. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-1C-2: BAKERY PRODUCTS:
All bakery products used shall have been prepared in the food service establishment or in a food processing establishment; provided, that the health
inspector may accept other sources which are in his judgment satisfactory and which are in compliance with the applicable state and local laws and
regulations. Custards, cream fillings or similar products, which are used as puddings or pastry fillings, shall be kept at safe temperatures, except during
necessary periods of preparation and service. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-1C-3: FOOD PROTECTION:
A. Raw fruits and vegetables used shall be washed before use. Stuffings, poultry, stuffed meats and poultry and pork and pork products shall be
thoroughly cooked before being served. Individual portions of food once served to the customer shall not be served again; provided, that wrapped food
which has not been unwrapped and which is wholesome may be reserved.
B. Only such poisonous and toxic materials as are required to maintain sanitary conditions and for sanitation purposes may be used or stored in food
service establishments. Poisonous and toxic materials shall be identified, and shall be used only in such manner under such conditions as will not
contaminate food or constitute a hazard to employees or customers. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 101/470
3-1C-4: MANUAL CONTACT WITH FOOD:
A. Convenient and suitable utensils shall be provided and shall be used by employees to reduce manual contact with food to a minimum during
preparation, display and service. For self-service by customers, similar instruments shall be provided.
B. Self-service openings in counter guards shall be so designed and arranged as to protect food from manual contact by customers. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-
1977)
C. Dispensing scoops, spoons and dippers used in serving frozen desserts shall be stored, between uses, either in an approved running water dipperwell,
or in a manner approved by the health inspector. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
D. Sugar shall be provided only in closed dispensers or in individual packages. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1C-5: EQUIPMENT AND UTENSILS1:
A. All eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned and sanitized after each usage as hereinafter provided.
B. Single service articles shall be made from nontoxic materials. All single service articles shall be stored, handled and dispensed in a sanitary manner,
and shall be used only once.
C. Food service establishments which do not have adequate and effective facilities for cleaning and sanitizing utensils shall use single service articles only.
D. Cloths used by waiters, chefs and other personnel shall be cleaned, and any such cloths used wiping food contact surfaces shall be used for no other
purposes. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1C-6: WASHING AND SANITIZING METHODS, FACILITIES:
A. Prior to washing, all equipment and utensils shall be preflushed or prescraped and, when necessary, presoaked to remove gross food particles and soil.
B. Effective concentrations of a suitable detergent shall be used in both manual and mechanical dishwashing.
C. When manual dishwashing is employed, equipment and utensils shall be thoroughly washed in a detergent solution which is kept reasonably clean, and
then shall be rinsed free of such solution. All eating and drinking utensils and, where required, the food contact surfaces of all other equipment and
utensils shall be sanitized by one of the following methods:
1. Immersion for at least one-half (1/2) minute in clean hot water at a temperature of at least one hundred seventy degrees Fahrenheit (170F).
2. Immersion for a period of at least one minute in a sanitizing solution containing:
a. At least fifty (50) ppm of available chlorine at a temperature not less than seventy five degrees Fahrenheit (75F); or
b. At least twelve and five-tenths (12.5) ppm of available iodine in a solution having a pH not higher than 5.0 and a temperature of not less than
seventy five degrees Fahrenheit (75F); or (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
c. Any other chemical sanitizing agent which has been demonstrated to the satisfaction of the health inspector to be effective and nontoxic under use
conditions, and for which a suitable field test is available. Such sanitizing agents, in use solutions, shall provide the equivalent bactericidal effect of
a solution containing at least fifty (50) ppm of available chlorine at a temperature not less than seventy five degrees Fahrenheit (75F).
Bactericides which, in recommended concentration, produce a 99.999 percent kill of 75-125 million M. pyogenes var. aureus FDA 209 per ml.,
within thirty (30) seconds, at seventy degrees (70) to seventy five degrees Fahrenheit (75F), shall be considered satisfactory. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-
1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
The strength of sanitizing solutions shall be at least twice the minimum strength required for the particular sanitizing solution used.
3. Equipment too large to treat by methods in subsections C1 and C2 of this section may be treated:
a. With live steam from a hose, in the case of equipment in which steam can be confined; or
b. By rinsing with boiling water; or
c. By spraying or swabbing with a chemical sanitizing solution of at least twice the minimum strength required for the particular sanitizing solution
when used for immersion sanitization. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
D. A three (3) compartment sink shall be provided and used wherever washing and sanitization of equipment or utensils are conducted manually;
provided, that establishments where the only utensils to be washed are limited to spatulas, tongs and similar devices, and when the only equipment to
be cleaned is stationary and does not require disassembly for proper cleaning, a one compartment sink may be approved by the health inspector for
this purpose. At least a two (2) compartment sink shall be provided and used for washing kitchenware and equipment which does not require
sanitization. Single compartment utility sinks such as cooks' and bakers' sinks may be used for the rinsing of utensils. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd.
Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 102/470
E. Sinks used for manual washing and sanitizing operations shall be of adequate length, width and depth to permit the complete immersion of the
equipment and utensils, and each compartment of such sinks shall be supplied with hot and cold running water. Dish baskets shall be of such design
as to permit complete immersion of the utensils and equipment components being sanitized therein.
F. When hot water is used as the sanitizing agent in manual operations, thermometers, accurate to three degrees Fahrenheit (3F), shall be provided
convenient to the sink to permit frequent checks of the water temperature.
G. Dish tables and drainboards of adequate size for proper handling of soiled utensils prior to washing and for cleaned utensils following rinsing or
sanitization, shall be provided, and shall be so located or constructed as not to interfere with the proper use of the dishwashing facilities; provided, that
drainboards shall not be required for cooks' and bakers' rinse sinks.
H. Sinks, dish tables and drainboards shall be constructed of galvanized metal or better, suitably reinforced, of such thickness and design as to resist
denting and buckling, and sloped so as to be self-draining.
I. Dishwashing machines shall be of such materials and so designed and constructed as to be easily cleanable, and shall be capable, when operated
properly, of rendering all surfaces of equipment and utensils clean to sight and touch and sanitized.
J. When spray type dishwashing machines are used, the following additional requirements shall be met:
1. Wash water shall be kept reasonably clean, and rinse water tanks shall be so protected by distance, baffles, or other effective means as to minimize
the entry of wash water into the rinse water.
2. The flow pressure shall be not less than fifteen (15) nor more than twenty five (25) pounds per square inch on the water line at the machine, and not
less than ten (10) pounds per square inch at the rinse nozzles. A suitable gauge cock shall be provided immediately upstream from the final rinse
sprays to permit checking the flow pressure of the final rinse water. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3. The wash water temperature shall be at least one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150F) and in single tank conveyor machines shall be at least
one hundred sixty degrees Fahrenheit (160F). When hot water is relied upon for sanitization, the final or fresh rinse water shall be at a temperature
of at least one hundred eighty degrees Fahrenheit (180F) at the entrance of the manifold. When a pumped rinse is provided, the water shall be at a
temperature of at least one hundred seventy degrees Fahrenheit (170F). When chemicals are relied upon for sanitization, they shall be of a class or
type approved by the health inspector, and shall be applied in such concentration and for such a period of time as to provide effective bactericidal
treatment of the equipment and utensils. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
4. Conveyors in dishwashing machines shall be accurately timed to assure proper exposure times in wash and rinse cycles.
5. An easily readable thermometer shall be provided in each tank of the dishwashing machine which will indicate to within an accuracy of three degrees
Fahrenheit (3F) the temperature of the water or solution therein. In addition, a thermometer of equal accuracy shall be provided which will indicate
the temperature of the final rinse water as it enters the manifold.
6. Jets, nozzles and all other parts of each machine shall be maintained free of chemical deposits, debris and other soil. Automatic detergent
dispensers, if used, shall be kept in proper operating condition.
K. When an immersion type dishwashing machine is employed for equipment and utensil washing and sanitizing, the applicable requirements pertaining to
manual dishwashing shall be met; provided, that a two (2) compartment system shall be deemed adequate when the temperature of the wash water is
maintained at or above one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140F) and hot water at a temperature of at least one hundred eighty degrees
Fahrenheit (180F) is used as the sanitizing agent. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
L. Any other type of machine, device or facilities and procedures may be approved by the health inspector for cleaning or sanitizing equipment and
utensils, if it can be readily established that such machine, device or facilities and procedures will routinely render equipment and utensils clean to sight
and touch, and provide effective bactericidal treatment as demonstrated by an average plate count per utensil surface examined, of not more than ten
(10) colonies. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-1C-7: WATER SUPPLY:
A. The water supply in a food service establishment shall be adequate, of a safe, sanitary quality, and from an approved source. Hot and cold running
water, under pressure, shall be provided in all areas where food is prepared, or equipment, utensils or containers are washed.
B. Water, if not piped into the establishment, shall be transported and stored in approved containers, and shall be handled and dispensed in a sanitary
manner.
C. Ice used for any purpose shall be made from water from an approved source, and shall be used only after it has been manufactured, stored,
transported and handled in a sanitary manner. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1C-8: SANITARY REQUIREMENTS2:
A. Toilet Facilities: Toilet facilities shall comply strictly with subsection 3-1-8D of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances of the city.
B. Hand Washing Facilities:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 103/470
1. Lavatories shall be located within or immediately adjacent to all toilet rooms or vestibules. In all new establishments, and establishments which are
extensively altered, lavatories shall also be located within the area where the food is prepared.
2. Lavatories shall be adequate in size and number and shall be so located as to permit convenient and expeditious use by all employees. (Ord. 0-77-
13, 5-2-1977)
3. Lavatories shall be installed in accordance with applicable state and local laws, ordinances and regulations, or in the absence thereof, as approved
by the health inspector. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
4. Each lavatory shall be provided with hot and cold or tempered running water. Where hot and cold running water is provided, a mixing valve or
combination faucet is recommended and shall be required in new installations. Steam mixing valves are prohibited.
5. An adequate supply of hand cleansing soap or detergent shall be available at each lavatory. An adequate supply of sanitary towels, or an approved
hand drying device, shall be available and conveniently located near the lavatory. Common towels are prohibited. Where disposable towels are used,
waste receptacles shall be located conveniently near the hand washing facilities.
6. Lavatories, soap dispensers, hand drying devices, and all other components of the hand washing facilities shall be kept clean and in good repair.
C. Restrictions: Food vehicles are permitted to operate only on streets one block removed from public or parochial school grounds or municipal
playgrounds. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1C-9: TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS:
A temporary food service establishment shall comply with all provisions of this chapter which are applicable to its operation; provided, that the health
inspector may augment such requirements when needed to assure the service of safe food and may prohibit the sale of potentially hazardous food. (Ord.
0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-1C-10: FOOD SERVICE VEHICLES:
A. General:
1. The term "food service vehicle" when used in this section shall mean a food service establishment operated in a vehicle.
2. Food service vehicles shall be subject to the regulations in this section as well as to all other regulations governing food vehicles and food service
establishments.
3. Only single service food utensils shall be used for food service vehicles.
4. No food service vehicle shall stop in any location that is not reasonably clean and sanitary. The operator of such vehicle shall be responsible for
sanitation of the environs of the place of operation. Every food service vehicle shall maintain suitable, tight, nonabsorbent, washable receptacles for
refuse, which shall be attached to but not an integral part of the vehicle.
B. Service Of Food From Vehicles:
1. It shall be unlawful to serve food from a vehicle or for food to be served by a food service vehicle except as provided in subsections B2 through B7 of
this section.
2. Coffee, sugar and cream shall be served only in approved containers. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3. Coffee is to be prepared in a commercial food processing establishment. Cream is to be refrigerated and kept in a covered single service container,
or in an approved cream dispenser. Nondairy creamers are exempt from this requirement. Sugar shall be served only in wrapped individual
packages or in a covered closed pouring spout type container, or in any other manner approved by the health inspector which is effective in
preventing contamination by the customer. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
4. Other bulk soft drinks or beverages shall be dispensed from an approved dispenser and shall be protected from flies, dust and contamination by
customers.
5. All food products shall be completely enclosed, covered and protected while being conveyed, transported or dispensed.
6. Ice cream, ice milk, frozen dessert mix, sodas, sundaes manufactured or processed on or served from the mobile vehicle shall be prepared from
ingredients dispensed from an approved dispenser only. Customers shall be served in single service containers.
7. Except as provided in subsections B2 through B6 of this section, no food other than individual portions that are totally enclosed in a wrapper and that
have been prepared in a commercial food processing establishment shall be served from a vehicle or by a food service vehicle. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-
1977)
3-1C-11: INSPECTIONS:
The health inspector shall inspect the premises of every food service establishment located in the city at least once every six (6) months. More frequent
inspections may be made if the health inspector deems it necessary. Such inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of section 3-1-
11 of this chapter. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-1C-12: STATE LAWS APPLICABLE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 104/470
Whenever the provisions contained in this chapter are less restrictive than the food service sanitation code, 1998 edition, printed by the state of Illinois,
department of public health, such food service sanitation code, as the case may be, shall be applicable to food establishments and food dealers in the city,
and for such purposes said food service sanitation code is hereby adopted by reference of the aforementioned rules and regulations. A minimum of three
(3) copies of such code shall be kept on file by the city clerk. (Ord. 0-00-24, 9-18-2000)
ARTICLE D. RESTAURANTS; ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
3-1D-1: DEFINITION:
A "restaurant", within the meaning of this Chapter, shall be deemed to be any land, building or part thereof, other than a boarding house, where food is
provided for compensation for three (3) or more persons, including a cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, lunchroom, tearoom and dining room, including drive-in
facilities or other establishments wherein prepared and cooked food is dispensed for consumption on or off the premises. For the purpose of preserving
the public peace, health and safety, the entire premises occupied by a restaurant, together with means of ingress and egress, are subject to regulation
under the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1D-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
The following acts or conduct of any person entering any restaurant or premises are hereby declared to be unlawful and any person found guilty of any
such act shall be fined as provided by Section 3-1-16 of this Chapter:
A. No person on the premises of a restaurant shall race the motor of any vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop any motor vehicle, blow any
horn of any motor vehicle or cause to be made any loud or unseemly noise, nuisance, or disturbance whereby the quiet and good order of the premises
of the neighborhood are disturbed.
B. No person shall enter the premises of any restaurant with any motor vehicle of any description, and park such vehicle and leave the premises (thereby
leaving such vehicle parked and unoccupied) without the express consent of the owner or operator of such restaurant; in which event, said motor
vehicle may be subject to a parking citation or may be impounded subject to the usual impounding charges.
C. No person shall enter the premises in or upon a motor vehicle and use said premises for cruising, racing, as a shortcut to another street, or to annoy or
endanger any person or other vehicle lawfully on said premises.
D. No persons shall congregate on the premises and linger or loiter at any location on the premises of any restaurant other than in the restaurant building
or in a legally parked motor vehicle for any purpose other than the prompt consumption of foodstuffs purchased therein, upon the conclusion of which,
such persons shall promptly vacate the premises.
E. No person, while on the premises of any restaurant, shall wilfully discard any trash, litter, paper napkins, cups or remnants of food at any place except in
the trash receptacles as hereinafter provided for. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1D-3: DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS:
A. It is hereby declared to be a duty of the owner or operator of a drive-in restaurant to provide not less than two (2) receptacles for the receipt of trash,
litter, paper, napkins, cups and remnants of food at each exit, available to the patrons as they leave the premises, unless the owner shall provide trash
receptacles inside the lot not more than fifteen feet (15') from any parking space.
B. It shall be the duty of the restaurant operator to exercise due care to keep the premises whereon a restaurant is located, together with the parking area
and that portion of any alley adjoining said restaurant, free from rubbish, waste products and debris, including napkins, straws, paper cups and plates,
and other waste material.
C. Each drive-in restaurant operator shall, at least once in twenty four (24) hours, empty all waste receptacles, and in any event shall empty each waste
receptacle when full. At least once in each twenty four (24) hours, each drive-in restaurant operator shall pick up and remove all waste material from
the ground on the premises of the restaurant. It shall be the duty of the restaurant operator to post on the premises in a conspicuous location one or
more signs bearing the following legend in letters at least two inches (2") or more high and readable:
Cruising in or congregating and loitering on these premises is unlawful. No unoccupied vehicles may be left on the restaurant premises without the
consent of the restaurant operator.
(Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
ARTICLE E. FROZEN DESSERT ESTABLISHMENTS
3-1E-1: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
All persons conducting or operating frozen dessert establishments, whether licensed under the provisions of this chapter or under any other chapters of
this code, shall comply strictly with all the regulations of this article and with all the applicable regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 105/470
3-1E-2: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
All frozen desserts made or sold in the city shall be produced under conditions such that the frozen dessert in the process of production, preparation,
manufacture, packing, storing, sale, distribution or transportation is securely protected from flies, vermin, dogs, cats, dust, dirt and other foreign or injurious
contamination. All refuse, dirt or waste products subject to decomposition and fermentation shall be removed daily from the premises of all frozen dessert
establishments. All trucks, trays, boxes, buckets or other receptacles, and the chutes, platforms, racks, tables, shelves and knives, saws, cleavers or other
utensils or the machinery used in handling, cutting, chipping, mixing, canning or other processes shall be clean at all times. The clothing of operators or
other persons employed in frozen dessert establishments shall be clean; and adequate toilet facilities and soap and clean towels shall be provided for
employees handling frozen desserts and products entering the manufacture of the same. It shall be a violation of this chapter either to make frozen
desserts in conditions not in accordance with these requirements, or to sell frozen desserts not so made. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1E-3: CONTAGIOUS CONDITIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale in the city any frozen dessert which has been produced, prepared or handled by any person infected or
suspected of being infected with any contagious disease. When there is any such condition of contagion or suspected contagion about any place, the fact
shall be reported by the person producing frozen dessert therein and the sale and delivery of frozen dessert manufactured therein in the city shall be
stopped immediately by the health inspector. When the health inspector is satisfied that there is no longer any danger of contagion from the sale of frozen
desserts produced therein, he shall then permit such sale, but not before. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-1E-4: CONDITIONS OF PRODUCT:
A. Ingredients: It shall be unlawful to make frozen desserts, or to deliver in the city frozen desserts, made from substances other than eggs, milk, cream,
condensed milk, fruits, gelatin, nuts, and harmless flavoring and coloring matters. Only such fruits and nuts may be used in the manufacture of frozen
desserts as are sound, clean, mature and nonrancid. All milk and cream used for the manufacture of frozen desserts sold or offered for sale in the city
shall be pasteurized and shall comply in other respects with the standards for milk and cream as defined by the provisions of section 3-1-1 of this
chapter.
B. Milk Fat And Bacteria Content: It shall be unlawful to make, sell or offer for sale in the city any ice cream which contains less than four percent (4%) of
milk fat. Such ice cream shall have a plate count that does not exceed thirty thousand (30,000) colonies per million, provided that bacteria are
nonpathogenic in water.
C. Refreezing Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to refreeze any frozen desserts which have melted and to sell or offer for sale any such frozen desserts which
have been refrozen.
D. Wholesomeness Of Cones: No person shall make, give, deliver, sell or offer for sale in the city any frozen dessert cones which are made under
unsanitary conditions or in any unclean manner or which contain any ingredients which are unwholesome or deleterious to health. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-
1977)
3-1E-5: STORAGE OF CONES AND PAILS:
All frozen dessert cones, fibre pails and other containers used in the sale or delivery of frozen desserts must be kept or stored in such place and manner
as to fully protect them from flies and other sources of contamination. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1E-6: UTENSILS USED IN MANUFACTURE:
All utensils and equipment used in the manufacture, handling or sale of frozen desserts shall be of nonabsorbent material, free from rust or corrosion,
constructed in such a manner that they may be easily cleaned and sterilized and shall be kept clean and sterilized at all times. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1E-7: RECEPTACLES FOR STORAGE AND TRANSPORTATION:
No person shall keep or store frozen desserts for sale or disposal, or transport the same over any street, alley or way in the city, except in a receptacle
which is clean, dustproof and flyproof. Such storage receptacles shall be kept in a location and in a manner which is satisfactory to the health inspector.
(Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-1E-8: INSPECTIONS:
The health inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected as often as he deems necessary every frozen dessert establishment in the city to determine
whether all applicable provisions of the ordinances of the city are being complied with. Such inspection shall be conducted in accordance with section 3-1-
11 of this chapter. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
ARTICLE F. MILK DEALERS
3-1F-1: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 106/470
All milk dealers, whether licensed under the provisions of this chapter or under any other chapter of this code, shall comply strictly with all the regulations
of this article and with all applicable regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1F-2: STANDARDS:
A. General: All milk sold or offered for sale in the city shall meet with applicable state and federal standards. All milk, skim milk, buttermilk and cream sold
or offered for sale in the city shall conform to the standards for these products fixed by state and federal law. The sale or offering for sale of any milk or
milk products in any way not in conformity with state and federal law is prohibited.
No milk or cream shall be sold that contains any artificial preservative, or that comes from cows fed on refuse or slop, mush or food which has been
subject to fermentation, or any food other than good wholesome food.
B. Cream: No cream shall be sold, offered for sale, exchanged, delivered or kept for the purpose of sale in the city that contains less than eighteen percent
(18%) of milk fat, or that is obtained from any impure, diseased or unwholesome milk, or from milk to which any foreign substance has been added, or
from milk containing less than three percent (3%) of butterfat. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1F-3: CONTAINER SPECIFICATIONS:
No milk, except skimmed milk, buttermilk or sour milk shall be peddled or sold at retail in quantities of less than one gallon except in containers bearing the
true name of the product, the name and address of the producer, dealer or distributor, and the net volume of the contents in accordance with the Illinois
dairy statute1. No person shall sell milk or cream in any bottle or container which does not bear the seller's name or to which the seller has not acquired
title as required by law. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1F-4: PREVENTION OF INFECTION:
All milk offered for sale or sold in the city must come from animals under state and federal supervision and proven free from all contagious and infectious
diseases, and shall not contain more than twenty thousand (20,000) bacteria, most probable number per cubic centimeter, with the tolerance level of E.
coli-aerogenes group not exceeding 0-10, most probable number, and shall contain no pathogenic bacteria. It shall be produced under the following
conditions:
A. All persons coming in contact with the milk on farms, in dairies or in any other place shall be free from contagious or infectious diseases, and shall not
have been exposed to anyone having such disease within a period of one week prior to coming in contact with the milk. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
B. No person who is a paratyphoid, typhoid, diphtheria or septic sore throat carrier shall be employed in the production of handling of the milk. It shall be
the duty of every person with knowledge of the facts to notify the health inspector at once of the occurrence of any of the afflictions listed in subsection
A of this section and this subsection in any person living or employed in or about a place where milk is produced, handled or sold. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-
1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-1F-5: QUARANTINED PREMISES:
A. Milk shall not be delivered to quarantined premises except in such manner that there is not contact of any kind between the inmates and contents of the
quarantined premises and the delivery agent.
B. No milk receptacles shall be taken from quarantined premises during the period of quarantine. If milk receptacles are to be taken from such premises
and reused after the quarantine has been lifted, they shall be thoroughly sealed and sterilized before being taken from the formerly quarantined
premises. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1F-6: VEHICLES:
Every vehicle used for the delivery of milk and cream to consumers shall have marked plainly on it the name of the vendor of the milk and his address.
(Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1F-7: INSPECTION:
The health inspector shall conduct periodic inspection of all milk distribution plants, dairies, vehicles and equipment used in the sale or distribution of milk
as well as of the milk itself. Such inspections shall be made every quarter and as often as the health inspector deems necessary. The inspector may, in his
discretion, accept in lieu of inspection the certificate of inspection of any other city with requirements equal to or more rigid than those of this article and
chapter 1 of this title. The licensee shall pay the cost of all bacteriological inspections and tests necessary. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-
5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
ARTICLE G. FOOD REFRIGERATION LOCKER PLANTS
3-1G-1: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 107/470
All persons conducting or operating a food refrigeration locker plant in the city, whether licensed under this chapter or under some other chapter of this
code, shall comply strictly with all the regulations of this article and with all the applicable regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1G-2: BUILDING REGULATIONS:
A. General: No food refrigeration locker plant shall be operated or conducted in a building which is not constructed in full compliance with the building and
zoning regulations of the city. No such plant shall be operated in any frame building, nor in any building the floors of which are not so constructed as to
bear a live load of one hundred fifty (150) pounds per square foot.
B. Wiring: The wiring of every food refrigeration locker plant shall conform to the regulations of the city relative to electric wiring and to the installation of
refrigeration units.
C. Premises: All premises used for the operation of a food refrigeration locker plant shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be thoroughly
cleaned of all refuse, dust and debris at least once in every twenty four (24) hours. It shall be unlawful to store or keep in such plants any
unwholesome, spoiled, contaminated or adulterated food. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1G-3: TEMPERATURE REQUIREMENTS:
No food shall be stored in any food refrigeration locker plant unless such food has been frozen to a temperature of zero degrees Fahrenheit (0F) or below
before being so stored. The lockers or compartments used for the refrigerated storage of food must be kept at all times at a temperature of below fifteen
degrees Fahrenheit (-15F). (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1G-4: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAWS:
No license shall be issued for any food refrigeration locker plant which does not comply with the laws of the state pertaining thereto, and if the health
inspector discovers that a licensed food refrigeration locker plant does not so comply, the license shall be revoked at once. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd.
Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-1G-5: INSPECTIONS:
The health inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected as often as he deems necessary every food refrigeration locker plant in the city to determine
whether all applicable provisions of the ordinances of the city are being complied with. Such inspection shall be made in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
ARTICLE H. FOOD VENDING MACHINES
3-1H-1: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
All persons licensed hereunder to install, keep, maintain or use an automatic food vending machine whether licensed under this chapter or under another
chapter of this code, shall comply strictly with all the regulations of this article and all applicable regulations of this chapter, except that no lavatory or toilet
facilities or clothing storage areas need be provided where employees in food contact activities are not present for more than one hour a day. (Ord. 0-77-
13, 5-2-1977)
3-1H-2: OPERATOR'S PLACE OF BUSINESS:
A. The city clerk shall be notified of any change in the address of his place of business, and the current address along with the operator's name shall be
indicated in some conspicuous place on each of the machines.
B. In addition, there shall be posted in a conspicuous place on each machine the name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for the
maintenance of such machine. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1H-3: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
No automatic food vending machine shall be located in any premises that exposes the food to danger from improper handling, dust, dirt, flies, vermin or
other contamination. No automatic food vending machine shall be installed or kept in any toilet or washroom. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1H-4: INSPECTIONS:
The health inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected as often as he deems necessary every automatic food vending machine and automatic food
vending machine operation located and conducted in the city to determine whether all applicable provisions of the ordinances of the city are being
complied with. Such investigation shall be made in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 108/470
ARTICLE I. FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENTS
3-1I-1: REGULATIONS:
Any person conducting or operating a food processing establishment, whether licensed under this chapter or another chapter of this code, shall comply
strictly with all the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to health, sanitation and food establishments and all other applicable ordinances of the
city. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1I-2: INSPECTIONS:
The health inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected as often as he deems necessary the premises and operations of every person licensed to
conduct and operate a food processing establishment in the city to determine whether all applicable provisions of the ordinances of the city are being
complied with. Such inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of section 3-1-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord.
0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
ARTICLE J. FOOD DELIVERY VEHICLES
3-1J-1: REGULATIONS:
Every holder of a food vehicle license shall comply strictly with all the ordinances of the city relating to health, sanitation and food vehicles and all other
applicable ordinances of the city. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977)
3-1J-2: INSPECTIONS:
The health inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected as often as he deems necessary the vehicle and operations of every food vehicle operated in
the city to determine whether all applicable provisions of the ordinances of the city are being complied with. Such inspections shall be conducted in
accordance with the provisions of section 3-1-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 0-77-13, 5-2-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
Chapter 2
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meanings given herein:
ASHES: The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PROPERLY CONSTRUCTED COMPOST HEAP: Pile of mostly organic matter meant to be decayed and used for fertilizing and conditioning land. A
properly constructed compost heap will not produce obnoxious odors or be an attraction to rats or other vermin or rodents.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans,
yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. (Ord. 0-77-5, 3-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-77-14, 5-16-1977)
3-2-2: PROHIBITED ACCUMULATIONS:
A. Uncovered Garbage: It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to remain anywhere in the City any garbage or other materials subject to
decay other than leaves or grass, excepting in a tightly covered metal or heavy-duty plastic container.
B. Windblown Refuse: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit to accumulate any dust or refuse of such a material that it can be blown away
by the wind anywhere in the City except in a covered container.
C. Deposits On Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle any refuse on any public street or alley in the City;
provided, that this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit placing refuse in a container complying with the provisions of this Chapter preparatory
to having such material collected and disposed of in the manner provided herein. (Ord. 0-77-5, 3-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-77-14, 5-16-1977)
D. Consent Of Owner: It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or place any refuse on any premises in the City without the consent of the owner of such
premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 109/470
E. Violations; Penalties: Any person violating any provision of this Section shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Failure to pay this
fine within ten (10) days will result in an additional penalty of two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 0-97-84, 12-15-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
3-2-3: DUTY TO PROVIDE REFUSE CONTAINERS:
Refuse containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant in charge of all premises within the city and who at all times shall maintain in
good order and repair, one or more receptacles for garbage, waste, ashes and refuse of an aggregate capacity to contain the accumulation from said
premises for at least seven (7) days. (Ord. 0-77-5, 3-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-77-14, 5-16-1977)
3-2-4: DISPOSAL OF REFUSE:
The owner, tenant, lessee or occupant in charge of any premises in the city shall cause all garbage, waste, ashes and refuse to be removed from said
premises at least once every seven (7) days, except for properly constructed compost heaps. (Ord. 0-77-5, 3-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-77-14, 5-16-1977)
3-2-5: LOCATION OF CONTAINERS:
No refuse of any kind or refuse containers shall be placed in any front yard as defined by the zoning regulations applicable to the city, except when placed
in such location for collection. In no event shall such refuse or refuse containers be placed in the front yard earlier than the evening preceding the day of
collection. After collection, refuse containers shall be removed from the front yard not later than the evening of said day of collection. (Ord. 0-77-5, 3-7-
1977; amd. Ord. 0-77-14, 5-16-1977)
3-2-6: REMOVAL OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE:
A. Notice To Remove: It shall be the duty of the health inspector of the city to serve or cause to be served a notice upon the owner, tenant, lessee or
occupant in charge of any premises to remove any garbage, debris or refuse from such premises when such garbage, debris or refuse is allowed to
gather in violation of this chapter, and to demand the abatement of the violation within ten (10) days.
B. Removal By City: If the person so served with notice does not remove such garbage, debris or refuse, the health inspector may proceed to cause the
removal of such garbage, debris or refuse, keeping an account of the expense thereof, and such expense shall be charged to and paid by said person.
C. Lien: The cost of the removal of such garbage, debris and refuse shall be a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all subsequent liens and
encumbrances, except tax liens, if within sixty (60) days after such costs and expense is incurred by the city, or person performing the service by
authority of the city, a notice of lien is filed in the office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County or in the office of the registrar of titles of Cook County if
the real estate affected is registered under the Torrens system. The health inspector may cause such notice to be filed, and said notice shall consist of
a sworn statement setting out: 1) a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, 2) the amount of money representing the cost and
expense incurred or payable for the service, and 3) the date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the city. Upon payment of the cost
and expense by the owner of or persons interested in such property, after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the city or person in
whose name the lien has been filed and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing the notice of lien. (Ord. 0-77-5, 3-7-1977; amd. Ord.
0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
D. Foreclosure Of Lien: The lien provided for in this section may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in cases of mortgages or mechanic's liens.
Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced within two (2) years after the date of filing the notice of lien. (Ord. 0-77-5, 3-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-77-14,
5-16-1977)
3-2-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-94-16, 4-4-
1994)
Chapter 3
NUISANCES
3-3-1: COMMON LAW AND STATUTORY NUISANCES:
In all cases where no provision is herein made defining what are nuisances and how the same may be removed, abated, or prevented, in addition to what
may be declared such herein, those offenses which are known to the common law of the land and in the statutes of the State as nuisances may, in case
the same exist within the City, be treated as such and proceeded against as provided by law1. (Ord. 0-77-18, 6-7-1977)
3-3-2: HEALTH NUISANCES:
No building, vehicle, structure, receptacle, yard, lot, premises or part thereof, shall be made, used, kept, maintained, or operated in the City if such use,
keeping, maintaining, or operating shall be the occasion of any nuisance, or shall be dangerous to life or detrimental to health.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 110/470
Every building or structure constructed or maintained in violation of the building ordinances of the City2, or which is in an unsanitary condition, or in an
unsafe or dangerous condition, or which in any manner endangers the health or safety of any person or persons, is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance. Every building or part thereof which is in an unsanitary condition by reason of the basement or cellar being covered with stagnant water, or by
reason of the presence of sewer gas, or by reason of any portion of a building being infected with disease or being unfit for human habitation, or which by
reason of any other unsanitary condition, is a source of sickness, or which endangers the public health, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord.
0-77-18, 6-7-1977)
3-3-3: OFFENSIVE MATTER AND ODORS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent, occupant or person in control of any lot, building, structure, premises or place within the City to permit or allow the
contents of any tub, or of any receptacle, cesspool, privy, catch basin, vault, sink, water closet, cistern or anything in any room, excavation, vat, building,
premises or place to become a nuisance or offensive so as to be dangerous or prejudicial to health or to become foul, or emit odors prejudicial to public
health. Any act or condition violating this Section is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 0-77-18, 6-7-1977)
3-3-4: WATER POLLUTION:
A. Watercourses: It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to obstruct or pollute any watercourse or source of water supply in the City.
B. Stagnant Water: Any stagnant water or pool of stagnant water in the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Swimming pools are hereby exempted
from this Section. (Ord. 0-77-18, 6-7-1977)
3-3-5: ABANDONMENT OF REFRIGERATORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or discard in any place accessible to children any refrigerator, icebox or ice chest of a capacity of one and
one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more which has an attached lid or door which may be opened or fastened shut by means of an attached latch. It shall be
unlawful for any person being the owner, lessee or manager of any place or premises to knowingly permit such abandoned or discarded refrigerator,
icebox or ice chest to remain there in such condition. Any act or condition maintained in violation of this Section is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance3. (Ord. 0-77-18, 6-7-1977)
3-3-6: CEMETERIES:
It shall be unlawful to establish cemeteries or a cemetery within the City limits without a permit therefor from the City Council; and it shall be unlawful to
bury any person within the City except in an established cemetery. (Ord. 0-77-18, 6-7-1977)
3-3-7: OFFENSIVE PREMISES:
Any factory, yard, building or structure of any kind, or any tallow chandler's shop, soap factory, tannery, distillery, livery stable, cattle yard or shed, barn,
packinghouse, slaughterhouse or rendering establishment which shall become nauseous, foul or offensive, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 0-
77-18, 6-7-1977)
3-3-8: AIR POLLUTION:
A. Dense Smoke: It shall be unlawful within the City for any person, owner, agent or operator to permit to cause, suffer or allow the emission of any smoke
from any source whatever of a density, shade or opacity equal to or greater than that described as Number 2 on the Ringelmann Chart as proposed by
the United States Bureau of Mines; provided, that the following exceptions to the provisions of this Section shall be permitted for fuel burning,
combustion or process equipment:
1. For a period or periods aggregating four (4) minutes in any thirty (30) minutes of a density, shade or opacity equal to but not greater than that
described as Number 2 on the Ringelmann Chart.
2. For a period or periods aggregating four (4) minutes in any sixty (60) minutes of a density, shade or opacity equal to but not greater than that
described as Number 2 on the Ringelmann Chart when building a new fire.
B. Control Of Soot, Cinders, Fly Ash, Dust, Noxious Acids, Fumes And Gases: It shall be unlawful for any person in the City or within one-half (1/2) mile of
the corporate limits thereof to permit or cause the escape of such quantities of soot, cinders, fly ash, dust, noxious acids, fumes or gases, or a
combination of any two (2) or more thereof, in such place or manner as to be detrimental to any person or to the public or to endanger the health,
comfort and safety of any such person or of the public, or in such manner as to cause or have a tendency to cause injury or damage to property or
business. The escape of such matter is declared to be a nuisance and may be summarily abated by the City Council, or by anyone whom the corporate
authorities may designate for such purpose. Provided further that fly ash or dust shall not exceed eighty-three hundredths (0.83) pounds per one
thousand (1,000) pounds of gas of which not to exceed five (5) pounds per one thousand (1,000) pounds shall be of such size as to be retained in a
325 mesh United States Standard. (Ord. 0-77-18, 6-7-1977)
3-3-9: DRINKING CUPS:
It shall be unlawful to maintain any common drinking cup, dipper or other similar utensil for the use of more than one person in any public hall, theater,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 111/470
store or other place frequented by the public. (Ord. 0-77-18, 6-7-1977)
3-3-10: DEPOSITS OF OBJECTIONABLE SUBSTANCES:
No person shall cast, drop or throw any object, missile or any other substance or article in, from or into any public place thereby littering such public place
or which would jeopardize the health, safety or property of others. (Ord. 0-77-18, 6-7-1977)
3-3-11: SPOTLIGHTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, maintain or permit the operation of any spotlights which are directed in such manner as to shine upon the
premises of another without such other person's express consent. (Ord. 0-77-18, 6-7-1977)
3-3-12: BUG KILLER LIGHTS AND DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, maintain or cause to be operated on any premises within the City any bug killer lights and other bug killing
mechanical devices between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. (Ord. 0-77-18, 6-7-1977)
3-3-13: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES:
The Building Official and members of the Police Department serving the City are hereby authorized to abate any nuisance existing in the City, whether
such nuisance is one specifically recognized by ordinance or not. (Ord. 0-77-18, 6-7-1977)
3-3-14: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) for a first offense; not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) for a second offense; and not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for every offense thereafter, and in no event shall such person be fined in excess of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any such offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues. (Ord. 0-77-18, 6-7-1977)
Chapter 4
RAT CONTROL
3-4-1: RAT STOPPAGE REQUIRED; DEFINITIONS:
Every building or structure within the city shall be rat stopped, freed of rats and maintained in a rat stopped and rat free condition. For purposes of this
chapter, the following terms shall have the definitions herein ascribed to them:
HARDWARE CLOTH: Wire screen of such thickness and spacings as to afford reasonable protection against the entrance of rats.
RAT HARBORAGE: Any condition which provides shelter or protection for rats, thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under or
outside a structure of any kind.
RAT STOPPAGE: Applies to a form of ratproofing to prevent the ingress of rats into or under buildings or other structures from the exterior or from one
building or structure to another. It consists essentially of the closing of all openings in the exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements and foundations,
that may be reached by rats from the ground by climbing or by burrowing, with concrete, sheet iron, hardware cloth, or other types of ratproofing material
impervious to rat gnawing, approved by the health inspector. (Ord. 0-77-6, 3-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-77-15, 5-16-1977; Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-
2005)
3-4-2: INSPECTION; NOTICE:
It shall be the duty of the health inspector to cause inspections of the interior and exterior of buildings or other structures to determine evidence of rat
infestation and the existence of new breaks or leaks in the rat stoppage, and when any evidence is found indicating the presence of rats or openings
through which rats may enter such buildings or structures, to serve or cause to be served the owner, agent or occupant of such building or structure with
written notice to abate the conditions found. (Ord. 0-77-6, 3-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-77-15, 5-16-1977; Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-4-3: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
A. Maintenance: The owner, agent or occupant in charge of any building or structure shall maintain it in a rat stopped condition and repair all breaks or
leaks that may occur in the rat stoppage.
B. Unlawful To Remove Rat Stoppage: It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, contractor, public utility company, plumber, or any other person to
remove the rat stoppage from any building or structure for any purpose and fail to restore the same in satisfactory condition, or to make any new
openings that are not closed or sealed against the entrance of rats. (Ord. 0-77-6, 3-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-77-15, 5-16-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 112/470
C. Structural Changes: Whenever conditions inside or under any building or structure provide such extensive harborage for rats that the health inspector
deems it necessary to eliminate such harborage, he may require the owner or occupant in charge of any such building or structure to install suitable
cement floors and basements, or to require such owner or occupant to correct such rat harborage as may be necessary in order to facilitate the
eradication of rats. (Ord. 0-77-6, 3-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-77-15, 5-16-1977; Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
D. Dumping Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to place, leave, dump or permit to accumulate any garbage, trash or refuse in any building,
structure or premises so that the same shall afford food or harborage for rats, or to dump or place on any premises, land or waterway any dead animals
or waste vegetable or animal matter of any kind, except for properly constructed compost heaps. For the purpose of this chapter, a "properly
constructed compost heap" shall mean pile of mostly organic matter meant to be decayed and used for fertilizing and conditioning land. A properly
constructed compost heap will not produce obnoxious odors or be an attraction to rats or other vermin or rodents1.
E. Accumulations Of Materials Or Junk: It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit the accumulation on any open lot or other premises,
any lumber, boxes, barrels, bricks, stones, scrap metal, motor vehicle bodies or parts or similar materials, rubbish or any articles of junk unless the
same shall be evenly piled or stacked. (Ord. 0-77-6, 3-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-77-15, 5-16-1977)
3-4-4: RAT STOPPAGE BY OWNER; NOTICE:
Upon receipt of notice in writing from the health inspector, the owner, agent or occupant in charge of any building, structure or premises specified in such
notice shall take immediate measures for the rat stoppage of such building or structure and for freeing the premises of all rats, and unless said work is
completed in the specified time in the notice, in no event to be less than ten (10) days, or any written extension thereof that may be granted by the health
inspector, then the owner, agent or occupant in charge of said building, structure or premises shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter.
Whenever the owner, agent or occupant in charge of any building, structure or premises, after being served with notices provided in this section, has failed
within the time fixed in the notice to perform all work necessary to prevent the ingress of rats to said building or structure or to exterminate rats from the
premises described in said notice, the health inspector or person duly authorized by him may provide for the extermination of rats and do such work as is
necessary to free said premises from rats and to maintain said premises in a rat stopped condition. The health inspector may charge to and collect from
the owner, agent or occupant in charge of any building, structure or premises the reasonable cost and expense of preventing such ingress of rats to their
property and of rat extermination therein, after notice to such owner or owners, or persons as provided by this chapter, and failure of such owners or
persons to comply. (Ord. 0-77-6, 3-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-77-15, 5-16-1977; Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-4-5: LIEN ON PREMISES:
The cost and expense of rat stoppage and extermination is a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax
liens, if within sixty (60) days after such cost and expense is incurred by the city, or person performing the service by authority of the city, a notice of lien is
filed in the office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County or in the office of the registrar of titles of Cook County if the real estate affected is registered
under the Torrens system. The health inspector may cause such notice of lien to be filed, and said notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: a)
a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof; b) the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
service; and c) the date or dates when such cost and expense were incurred by the municipality. Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of
or person interested in the property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the city or person in whose name the lien has been filed
and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien. (Ord. 0-77-6, 3-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-77-15, 5-16-1977; Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005,
eff. 7-17-2005)
3-4-6: FORECLOSURE OF LIEN:
The lien provided for in this chapter may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in the case of mortgages or mechanic's liens as is provided by
statute. Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced within one year after the date of filing notice of lien. (Ord. 0-77-6, 3-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-77-15, 5-
16-1977)
3-4-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day upon which it continues to occur. (Ord. 0-77-6, 3-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-77-15, 5-
16-1977)
Chapter 5
NOISE CONTROL
3-5-1: PROHIBITED CONDITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise
which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the City. Airport facilities and
aircraft be and are hereby exempted from the terms of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-77-20, 6-7-1977)
3-5-2: NOISE STANDARDS:
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this Chapter, but said enumeration shall not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 113/470
be deemed to be exclusive:
A. Horns, Signaling Devices: The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or public place of
the City, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sounds; and the sounding
of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity;
the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held
up. This paragraph shall not apply to approved signaling or sound devices used by licensed street vendors.
B. Radios, Phonographs: The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio or television receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the
neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume that is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room,
vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument,
phonograph, machine or device between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. in such a manner as to be plainly audible
at a distance of thirty feet (30') from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this Section.
C. Power Lawn Mowers: The use and operation of power lawn mowers between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. within
or adjacent to areas used for residential purposes.
D. Loud Speakers, Amplifiers For Advertising: The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the
public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. This paragraph shall not
apply to political announcements.
E. Yelling, Shouting: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in
any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other types of residences, or of any person in the vicinity.
F. Animals, Birds: The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons
in the vicinity.
G. Steam Whistles: The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to
begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper City authorities.
H. Exhausts: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, or motor vehicle
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
I. Defect In Vehicle Or Load: The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
J. Loading, Unloading, Opening Boxes: The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and
destruction of bails, boxes, crates and containers. (Ord. 0-77-20, 6-7-1977)
K. Construction Or Repair Of Buildings: The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on weekdays or Saturday, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and
safety, and then only with a permit from the Building Official, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three (3) days or less while the
emergency continues, and which permit may be renewed for periods of three (3) days or less while the emergency continues. If the Building Official
shall determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of
streets and highways within the prohibited hours, and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he
may grant written permission for such work to be done upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the
progress of the work. The prohibition contained in this subsection shall not apply to minor erection, demolition, alteration or repair, which work can be
completed within a period of one hour nor shall it apply to volunteer labor between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
(Ord. 0-88-52, 10-3-1988)
L. Schools, Courts, Churches, Hospitals: The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court
while the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly
annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street.
M. Hawkers, Peddlers: The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
N. Drums: The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale.
O. Transportation Of Metal Rails, Pillars And Columns: The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material, over and along streets
and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of
such streets or public places.
P. Pile Drivers, Hammers: The operation between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of any pile driver, steam shovel,
pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise, unless the Building
Official determines that the usage is necessary during such hours.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 114/470
Q. Blowers: The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the
explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient
to deaden such noise. (Ord. 0-77-20, 6-7-1977)
3-5-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). Each hour during which a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 0-77-20, 6-7-1977)
Chapter 6
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY CODE1
(Rep. by Ord. 0-88-48, 10-3-1988)
Chapter 7
PROPERTY RENTAL CODE
3-7-1: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
Every person, individual, firm, owner, corporation or landlord or combination thereof engaged in the business of leasing or renting any apartment building,
multiple-unit, multiple dwelling, dwelling or dwelling units is hereby required to make application to and receive an annual license from the city before
engaging or continuing in such business. The application shall be accompanied by a twenty five dollar ($25.00) annual license fee for each commercial
space leased, rented or to be rented. An application for a license required by this chapter shall be made in conformance with section 2-1-2 of this code.
The city shall issue said license if the following conditions are met:
A. Code Compliance: The applicant's property is not in violation of any ordinance of the city.
B. Designation Of Agent: No operating license shall be issued or renewed for an applicant unless such applicant has first designated an agent for the
receipt of service of complaints for violations of the provisions of this chapter or code and for service of process pursuant thereto when said applicant is
absent from his or her normal place of business. Such a designation shall be made in writing, and shall accompany each application form.
C. Renewal Of License: An application for renewal of an operating license shall be made thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the current operating
license. An application form shall be mailed to owner at least forty five (45) days prior to the expiration of the current operating license.
D. Notice Of Change In Ownership: Every person holding an operating license shall give notice in writing to the building official within ten (10) days after
having transferred or otherwise disposed of legal control of any licensed apartment building, multiple unit, multiple dwelling, dwelling or dwelling units.
Such notice shall include the name and address of the person or persons succeeding to the ownership or control of such apartment building, multiple
unit, multiple dwelling, dwelling or dwelling units.
E. Term Of License: Every license shall be in effect for the current fiscal year (May 1 _ April 30) unless sooner revoked for cause by the city. (Ord. 0-01-35,
12-17-2001, eff. 12-27-2001)
3-7-2: INSPECTIONS:
All one-family and two-family dwelling units, which are rented or leased, or are intended to be rented or leased, all multi-family dwelling units which are
rented or leased or are intended to be rented or leased, and all boarding or lodging houses shall be inspected annually by a city inspector. Fees for such
inspections or reinspections shall be paid by the property owner or landlord prior to the performance of said inspection or reinspection. The fees shall be
levied as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 0-04-28, 6-21-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
3-7-3: INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The building official shall cause the health inspector, enforcement officer or such other appropriate authority as he may designate to make annual
inspections to which an applicant for a license or licenses shall consent, to determine the health and safety conditions of the apartment buildings, multiple
dwellings, rooming houses, dwelling or dwelling units within the city. For the purpose of making such inspections the health inspector, enforcement officer
or the appointed public official shall request permission from the licensee to enter, examine and survey at any reasonable time all apartment buildings,
multiple dwellings, rooming houses, dwelling or dwelling units. (Ord. 0-01-35, 12-17-2001, eff. 12-27-2001; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
If the tenant or person in charge of an apartment building, or a commercial building, multiple dwelling, rooming house, dwelling or dwelling unit shall refuse
such permission to the health inspector, enforcement officer and/or designated official, the city administrator is hereby authorized to seek a warrant from a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 115/470
court of competent jurisdiction to enter the premises and conduct said inspection. Permission by tenant or person in charge to enter the premises is
interpreted as free access to the leased portion of the premises or central facilities serving the premises for the purpose of such inspection, examination
and survey. (Ord. 0-87-26, 8-17-1987; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-7-4: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license or permit may be revoked by the city council during the life of such license or permit for the violation by the licensee or permittee of any
ordinance provisions relating to the license or permit, the subject of the license or permit, or the premises occupied; such revocation may be in addition to
any fine imposed. This section shall not apply to any license or permit for which a specific procedure for revocation of such license or permit is provided by
another ordinance of the city. (Ord. 0-87-26, 8-17-1987)
3-7-5: NOTICE OF REVOCATION AND HEARING:
The city administrator shall cause notice of the revocation of the license to be served on the licensee either personally or by certified United States mail
and the reason or reasons therefor and such licensee may within ten (10) days of the date of such notice, petition the mayor and city council for a hearing
on restoration of license under such conditions as the mayor and city council may deem necessary for the correction of conditions set forth in the
revocation notice. (Ord. 0-87-26, 8-17-1987)
3-7-6: INSPECTION FEES:
When inspections are performed as set forth in section 3-7-2 of this chapter, the owner or landlord shall first pay the following fee:
First inspection $100.00
First reinspection 175.00
All subsequent reinspections in a calendar year 175.00
Rental inspection fee effective date shall be January 1, 2008. (Ord. 0-07-32, 8-20-2007)
Chapter 8
WEED CONTROL
3-8-1: PLANTS DECLARED A NUISANCE:
Certain plants are hereby declared a nuisance, as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 0-87-27, 6-15-1987)
3-8-2: WEEDS:
A. Nuisance Declared: Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a like kind, found growing in any lot or tract of
land in the city are hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful to permit any such weeds to grow or remain in any such place.
B. Lien Against Property: If weeds, referred to in this chapter are cut by the city or by someone directed to cut them on behalf of the city, a notice of lien of
the cost and expense thereof incurred by the city shall be recorded in the following manner: the city or the person performing the service by authority of
the city, in its or his own name, may file notice of lien in the office of the recorder of deeds in the county in which such real estate is located, or in the
office of the registrar of titles of such county, if the real estate affected is registered under the Torrens system. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn
statement setting out:
1. A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof;
2. The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service; and
3. The date or dates when the cost and expense was incurred by the city;
Such notice shall be filed within sixty (60) days after the cost and expense is incurred.
C. Release Of Lien: Upon payment of the cost and expense after the notice of lien has been filed as provided in the preceding subsection, the lien shall be
released by the city or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release shall be filed of record in the same manner as filing notice of lien.
(Ord. 0-87-27, 6-15-1987)
3-8-3: BARBERRY BUSHES:
It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to plant or permit the growth of the bush of the species of tall, common or European barberry, further
known as Barberis vulgaris, or its horticultural varieties within the city. (Ord. 0-87-27, 6-15-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 116/470
3-8-4: HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, plants or grass, other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants to grow to a height
exceeding eight inches (8") anywhere in the city; any such plants or weeds exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 0-87-27, 6-
15-1987)
3-8-5: ABATEMENT; NOTICE:
It shall be the duty of the city administrator to serve or cause to be served a notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which leaves or plants
are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten (10) days. If the person so
served does not abate the nuisance within ten (10) days after such notice, the health inspector may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an account
of the expense of the abatement, and such expense shall be charged to and paid by such owner or occupant. (Ord. 0-87-27, 6-15-1987; amd. Ord. 0-05-
23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-8-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during on or which such nuisance continues unabated after ten (10) days
from receipt of notice. (Ord. 0-87-27, 6-15-1987)
Chapter 9
WASTE DISPOSAL
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
COMPOST: The product resulting from the decomposition of leaves, straw, grasses and other such vegetable matter mixed with inorganic materials
ordinarily forming a part of the soil such as sand, lime or loam, and used, usable or intended to be used as fertilizer and soil conditioner.
CUSTOMER: Any single-family unit or other premises receiving service from a waste disposal contractor or firm.
EXCESSIVE REFUSE: Any or all of the following: sod, bricks, boards, building scraps, tree branches, heavy brush, and abnormal prunings; excluding
discarded household furniture, furnishings, fixtures and appliances of all kinds and tree trunks and roots.
GARBAGE: Any rejected or waste household food, offal, swill or carrion and every accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attends the
preparation, use, cooking and dealing in, or storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables and any other matter of any nature, which are subject to
decay, putrefaction and the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odor, or which during or after decay, may serve as a breeding or feeding material
for rodents, flies or other germ carrying insects or animals.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: All accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs three inches (3") or less in diameter, tree trimmings, brush, and
other materials, accumulated as the result of the care of lawns, bushes, shrubbery, vines and trees.
NEWSPAPER: Newspaper of general circulation or any newspaper duly entered with the postal service of the United States, in accordance with federal
statutes or regulations.
PREMISES: Any house, residence building, flat, apartment, dwelling place or place of abode, commercial or industrial establishment, hotel, church,
school, hospital, club building or meeting hall.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Newspapers, glass, food or beverage bottles, metal food containers, plastic bottles and containers and such other materials
as may be designated by the city to be collected through the recycling program.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals, and solid market and industrial
wastes.
REUSABLE HOUSEHOLD GOODS: Articles of personal property including, but not limited to, clothing, toys, books, linens, tools, cooking utensils,
glassware, dishware, electrical items or appliances placed within a labeled recycling container for pickup in the recycling program.
SENIOR CITIZEN: Any person who is at least sixty two (62) years of age.
SINGLE-FAMILY UNIT: One or more persons occupying any premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, whether or not related to each other by
birth, adoption or marriage, but no unrelated group shall consist of more than five (5) persons as distinguished from a group occupying a duly licensed
rooming house or hotel.
WASTE CONTAINER: A can of galvanized iron or noncorrodible metal or other material, rodentproof and flyproof, durable and leakproof, of the type
commonly sold as a garbage waste container can, of a suitable gauge and construction to ensure durability, with suitable handles on both can and lid and
of a capacity of not less than ten (10) gallons and not more than thirty two (32) gallons or plastic bags of not less than one and five-tenths (15/10) mils of an
inside dimension not less than eighteen inches by eight inches (18" x 8") with ties to secure contents, with the exception of containers available for lease
or sale from the duly licensed waste disposal firms and designed to permit automated dumping.
WASTE DISPOSAL CONTRACTOR: Any contractor with whom the City has contracted for the removal of waste from within the City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 117/470
WASTE DISPOSAL FIRM: Any person engaged in the business of removal and disposal of waste as defined herein. (Ord. 0-90-26, 7-2-1990)
3-9-2: ADMINISTRATION:
The City Administrator or his representative shall be in charge of and responsible for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 0-90-26, 7-2-1990)
3-9-3: ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE:
A. The occupancy of any premises shall be prima facie evidence that refuse is being produced and accumulated on such premises and pickups must be
made. All refuse shall be called for and disposed of by a scavenger service duly licensed by the City except that building or other construction
contractors may remove construction, remodeling and demolition debris, tree trunks, brush and shrubs.
B. It shall be the duty of every person in possession of any premises to cause all refuse produced on the premises to be securely wrapped or bound and
placed in approved refuse receptacles, as specified in this Chapter, in such manner as may be necessary to prevent the same from being scattered,
spilled or blown away. All refuse of a size or nature which renders it unsuitable for deposit in approved refuse receptacles shall be placed on the ground
adjacent to the receptacles in neat and orderly bundles or stacks not to exceed seventy (70) pounds in weight and four feet (4') in length, except as
otherwise provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 0-90-26, 7-2-1990)
3-9-4: WASTE CONTAINERS:
A. Residential With Curbside Pickup: Receptacles for curbside pickup of refuse shall be either a container with a close fitting cover of galvanized iron or
noncorrodible metal or plastic of sufficient strength to hold the weight of refuse placed in them, rodentproof and flyproof, nonabsorbent, durable and
leakproof, of the type commonly sold as a garbage can, of a suitable gauge and construction to ensure durability, with suitable handles on can and
cover, and of a capacity of not less than ten (10) gallons and not more than thirty two (32) gallons, or plastic bags of not less than one and five-tenths
(15/10) mils of an inside dimension not less than eighteen inches by eight inches (18" x 8") with ties to secure the contents.
B. Commercial, Industrial, Institutional And Residential With Other Than Curbside Pickup: Such premises shall conform to the following specifications:
1. Metal containers with covers commonly called "leach" type, with a capacity from one yard to three (3) yards, or equivalent;
2. Metal containers commonly called "trip-savers" with a capacity from three (3) yards to ten (10) yards, not equipped with wheels;
3. Metal enclosed container designed for use with a stationary compaction system; (Ord. 0-90-26, 7-2-1990)
4. The owner, operator, occupant or person in control of any multi-family, commercial or industrial property using receptacles set forth in subsection B1,
B2 or B3 of this section shall construct and maintain an enclosure to screen the receptacle(s) from view and to further ensure that refuse is not
scattered or blown away. The enclosure shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in height and shall be constructed of such material and in a manner
approved by the city building department.
Existing multi-family, commercial and industrial businesses that do not have garbage enclosures that meet the standards herein shall bring their
property or properties into compliance within nine (9) months of the effective date hereof. (Ord. 0-04-47, 10-4-2004, eff. 10-14-2004)
5. When scrap or waste for recycling in commercial, industrial or institutional areas is allowed under this code, the owner shall store the scrap or waste
for recycling in receptacles similar in design and construction to those required in this subsection for garbage, refuse and/or waste. Such recycling
receptacle shall be leakproof to prevent oils or other liquids which may be on the solid waste from leaking into the environment and scrap or waste
stored therein shall be stored so as to prevent the contents from being disseminated by the elements.
The owner, operator, occupant or person in control of the property or a part thereof, shall store the receptacle inside a completely enclosed building
or shall provide a rainproof, weatherproof and waterproof cover on or over the receptacle, and shall not install holes in the receptacle to drain the
water out. The owner, operator, occupant or person in control of the property, or a part thereof, shall maintain such recycling receptacles in good
condition and free of leaks. The owner, operator, occupant or person in control of the property, or a part thereof, shall have the recycling receptacle
emptied, and its contents removed on a schedule or frequency similar to the schedule or frequency on which the contents of the refuse receptacles
is/are removed, but not less frequently than once each month.
C. Requirement:
1. The number and size of receptacles required in subsections A and B of this section shall be sufficient to completely contain all refuse generated at
the premises between scavenger service pick ups. The number and size of receptacles required in subsection B4 of this section shall be sufficient to
completely contain all recyclable materials generated at the premises between recycling service pick ups.
2. The owner, occupant or agent in control of the premises shall increase the number or size of the receptacles when the existing receptacles is/are
inadequate to completely contain all recyclable materials generated at the premises between recycling service pick ups. The owner, occupant or
agent in control of the premises shall increase the number or size of the receptacles when the existing receptacles is/are inadequate to completely
contain all refuse or recyclable materials generated between pick ups. When additional receptacles or larger receptacles are added or installed, the
receptacle enclosure, if any, shall be enlarged to accommodate and screen the new additional or larger receptacle.
D. Curbside Recycling Receptacles: Scrap or waste for recycling in residential areas with curbside pick up shall be stored in receptacles approved by the
city for such use.
E. Landscape Waste Receptacles:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 118/470
1. Residential With Curbside Pick Up: Receptacle for curbside pick up of landscape waste shall be either a container with a close fitting cover of
galvanized iron or noncorrodible metal or plastic of sufficient strength to hold the weight of landscape waste placed in them, rodentproof and flyproof,
nonabsorbent, durable and leakproof, of the type commonly sold as a garbage can of a suitable gauge and construction to ensure durability, with
suitable handles on can and cover, and of a capacity of not less than ten (10) gallons and not more than thirty two (32) gallons, or a paper landscape
waste bag constructed of 2-ply kraft paper with a wet strength of at least fifty (50) pounds with a flat bottom and a capacity of not less than twenty
(20) gallons and not more than thirty two (32) gallons.
2. Plastic Bags Prohibited: Plastic bags of any kind shall not be an approved landscape waste receptacle. Tree trimmings and brush must be tied in
bundles not exceeding four feet (4') long by two feet (2') in diameter and must be tied with string, rope or other biodegradable material.
F. Maintenance: Such waste containers as defined by this section shall be maintained in good order and repair at all times. No other type of container shall
be acceptable. Filthy, leaking or defective receptacles shall be cleaned, repaired or replaced by the person in possession of the premises, and at his
expense, as directed by the city administrator or his representative. All containers shall be disinfected with an effective antiseptic solution as often as is
necessary to maintain them in a sanitary condition. (Ord. 0-90-26, 7-2-1990)
G. Location: It shall be the duty of every person in possession of any premises in the city for which waste containers are provided to place same together
at ground level at the front curb or parkway of the residence or residential unit to be served, and shall be placed on the prescribed location no sooner
than dusk or seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. whichever is earlier, the day before collection. Except as specified herein, it shall be unlawful for any customer to
place such waste containers within any public area or street right of way. All waste containers placed upon public areas or street rights of way in
accordance with regulations for such collection service options shall be so placed no sooner than dusk or seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. whichever is earlier,
on the day before the collection service. Such waste containers shall be returned to their premises location within twelve (12) hours after the collection
service has been performed. (Ord. 0-03-33, 9-2-2003, eff. 9-12-2003)
H. Inspection: All waste containers shall be subject to inspection and approval by the city health inspector under final approval of the city administrator.
(Ord. 0-90-26, 7-2-1990; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
3-9-5: DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE:
A. Preparation Of Garbage: It shall be the duty of every customer in possession of any premises to cause all garbage produced on the premises to be
securely wrapped or bound in such manner as may be necessary to prevent scattering, and shall be deposited in a waste container or otherwise
deposited as prescribed herein.
B. Removal Of Bulky Refuse Items: Bulky refuse items which cannot be lifted and/or transported with ease; e.g., discarded household furniture,
furnishings, fixtures and appliances of all kinds; tree trunks, roots, construction materials, etc., may be removed from the parkway for an additional fee
to be set by the waste disposal firm or contractor. Such items shall not be placed in waste containers, but may be placed on the parkway for prompt
collection and disposal upon private arrangements being made for such service.
C. Other Methods Of Disposal:
1. The open burning of leaves, branches, trunks and roots of trees, bushes and shrubs, rubbish, waste, garbage, paper, carbonaceous materials or any
other combustible materials on any public or private property within the city is unlawful and prohibited; provided, however, that this shall not apply to
the noncommercial cooking of food in outdoor fireplaces or grills, nor to the incineration of refuse in a device approved by the pollution control board
of the state.
2. Garbage and other combustible wastes may be disposed of by grinding or by shredding such waste finely and disposing of it through pipes leading
to a public sanitary sewer; provided, that all garbage or combustible matter so disposed of in such pipes shall have been ground or shredded to such
a degree that all particles are carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in the sewers into which same is disposed. (Ord. 0-90-26, 7-
2-1990)
3-9-6: COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE:
A. License Required: All garbage and refuse shall be collected and disposed of by a waste disposal firm duly licensed by the city or a duly licensed city
waste disposal contractor, except that building and other construction contractors may remove waste resulting from the performance of work done by
such contractor within the city. It shall be the purpose of the city in issuing any such license to seek the highest quality and quantity of service at the
lowest economic cost to each city customer.
B. Disposal Limitations: No garbage shall be burned, dumped, scattered or buried within the city limits, except upon written permit of the city administrator
as he may direct in conformity with recognized sanitation practices.
C. Transport: No person shall transport garbage or refuse, or cause garbage or refuse to be transported, over the streets or other public ways in the city
unless such garbage or refuse being transported is entirely and securely covered. Garbage shall not be transported over or along the streets of the city
or other public property except in a leakproof compaction type body commonly referred to as a "packer" refuse body, approved by the city
administrator. Such equipment may be stored, or kept when not in use in a tightly constructed and closed building or shed within the city, provided such
building or structure shall conform with the requirement of the city zoning ordinance, or in open storage areas approved by the city administrator.
D. Cleanup: The waste disposal contractor or waste disposal firm shall immediately clean up any refuse that he may have caused to spill onto private
premises, parkways, streets, alleys or other public places, in a neat and workmanlike manner and shall replace, at his expense, containers which may
be seriously damaged by carelessness of his employees.
E. Standards Of Scavenger Service:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 119/470
1. Residential, excluding that collected from common collection units such as dumpsters, and excluding planned unit developments that provide
collection of refuse through private disposal contracts: The scavenger service shall provide service in the city limits on a regularly scheduled day at
least twice a week; provided, that where a regularly scheduled service falls on a holiday, service shall be made the following working day. Beginning
on or about April 1 and continuing through November 30 of each calendar year, or on such other dates as the city and the scavenger service
mutually agree in writing, the scavenger service shall provide for the collection of "landscape waste", as defined in this chapter at least once each
week. During the period set forth above, the scavenger service shall also provide for the collection of "refuse", as defined herein at least once each
week. The scavenger service shall remove all refuse and landscape waste when placed in the parkway at the curb in front of said residential dwelling
where it can be seen from the road on scheduled pick up days when deposited in approved receptacles as provided for in this chapter.
2. Commercial, industrial, institutional, residential with other than curbside pick up and planned unit developments that provide collection of refuse
through private disposal contract: Scavenger service must provide removal of all kinds of waste materials except for liquid waste and toxic or
poisonous materials and dead animals.
3. Where an enclosure is provided around a receptacle served by a scavenger service, the scavenger service shall replace the receptacle (after
collection of refuse from the receptacle) in the enclosure and position the receptacle therein so that the gates, if the enclosure is so equipped, can be
closed completely.
4. The scavenger service shall maintain all receptacles provided by the scavenger service free of leaks and in good repair and fully equipped with
covers or lids in good repair and capable of excluding insects and rodents. (Ord. 0-90-26, 7-2-1990)
3-9-7: COMPOSTING:
Properly maintained compost piles may be utilized by single-family units for gardening and landscaping purposes. Such may be located in the side or
backyard, the farthest distance possible on site from neighboring residential structures, patios and swimming pools, a minimum of five feet (5') from the
property line. Compost piles shall not contain household garbage and must be regularly maintained by turning the composing material to permit aeration
and/or by application of chemicals to induce rapid decomposition and prevent offensive odors. (Ord. 0-90-26, 7-2-1990)
3-9-8: CITY CONTRACT:
The city may enter into a contract with a licensed waste disposal firm for the collection of garbage and refuse within the city. It shall be the purpose of any
such contract to provide for the highest quality and quantity of service at the lowest economic cost for each class of customers. Among other things, any
contract entered into by the city with a contractor for the collection of garbage and refuse within the city shall not exceed five (5) years in duration; and
A. Shall provide for cancellation by either party thereto upon ninety (90) days' written notice, or sooner if mutually agreeable;
B. Shall provide that the city reserves the right to direct the contractor as to where he must or must not dump or dispose of the garbage and refuse he
collects under contract with the city;
C. Shall reserve to the city the right to receive pertinent financial information including, but not limited to, contracts and expense detail of the contractor's
operation at his expense, for the purpose of establishing and maintaining fair rates for each class of customer and to provide adequate and sanitary
collection;
D. Shall reserve to the city the right to establish rates and service standards for all residential and special collections within the city;
E. Shall require the posting of a performance bond with adequate surety to carry out the purposes of the contract;
F. Shall require that premises serviced by a city waste disposal contractor shall be served no less often than once each week; and
G. Shall require that a city waste disposal contractor shall have at least one truck operating within the city six (6) days per week, except on legal holidays
and Sundays.
All trucks operating within the city shall carry in the cab the "rules of collection" as provided by the city. The disposal firm shall display its name and
telephone number on both sides of the compactor unit in letters and numerals no less than six inches (6") in height. Every licensee shall have a local
telephone number listed in a telephone directory of general circulation in the city, and answering service shall be provided between nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. Monday through Friday, except legal holidays. (Ord. 0-90-26, 7-2-1990)
3-9-9: WASTE HAULER LICENSING:
A. License Required: No person shall remove "system waste" (as defined in section 3-9A-1 of this chapter), garbage and refuse from any premises in the
city, or transport garbage or refuse through the streets, alleys or public ways of the city, or dump, incinerate or in any other manner dispose of garbage
or refuse originating in the limits of the city, or contract for or permit himself or itself to be employed or engaged for any such removal, transportation or
disposal without first having secured a license for performing such garbage and refuse disposal service from the city. (Ord. 0-04-36, 7-19-2004, eff. 7-
29-2004)
B. Classification Of Licenses:
1. System Waste: Beginning on July 1, 2006, and every year thereafter, one public scavenger license shall be issued for the purpose of performing
waste hauling of system waste as well as collection and disposal of garbage and refuse that is not system waste from all single-family residential,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 120/470
multi-family, commercial, industrial and institutional properties in the city. The license shall be issued to the person, firm or corporation awarded a
contract by the city for such purposes.
2. Covered Electronic Devices: So as to prevent the mixing of covered electronic devices ("CEDs"), as defined in the electronic products recycling and
reuse act ("act"), 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 150/10 as amended from time to time, into the city's municipal waste and to prevent the disposal of
CEDs in landfills, the city may enter into an agreement or agreements which provide for the collection of CEDs at various locations within the city.
Such an agreement or agreements may be a part of the license agreement called for in subsection B1 of this section or may be in addition to the
license called for above. (Ord. 0-12-02, 1-23-2012)
C. Issuance Of Licenses: The single-family, multi-family, commercial, industrial and institutional license shall be issued to the person, firm or corporation
which has been awarded the agreement by the city for waste hauling of system waste as well as collection and disposal of garbage and refuse that is
not system waste and shall also be subject to all conditions established in said agreement and this chapter. (Ord. 0-06-12, 4-3-2006)
D. Conditions Of License: All licenses issued under this chapter are granted subject to the licensee's compliance with the requirements of this chapter and
article A of this chapter, any other applicable ordinances of the city, and the rules and regulations of the "agency" (as defined in section 3-9A-1 of this
chapter) promulgated from time to time. (Ord. 0-04-36, 7-19-2004, eff. 7-29-2004)
E. License Fee: The annual fee for a public scavenger license shall be two thousand five hundred fifty nine dollars ($2,559.00). (Ord. 0-06-25, 7-10-2006;
amd. Ord. 0-09-07, 3-13-2009)
3-9-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such violation continues unabated after ten (10) days
from receipt of notice. (Ord. 0-90-26, 7-2-1990)
ARTICLE A. MUNICIPAL WASTE SYSTEM
3-9A-1: DEFINITIONS:
AGENCY: The solid waste agency of Northern Cook County.
MUNICIPAL WASTE SYSTEM: The waste collection, transportation and disposal system of the municipality operated under license pursuant to section 3-
9-9 of this chapter, including all physical assets of the municipality used for the collection, transportation and disposal of system waste, all amounts on
deposit in the municipal waste system fund and all amounts collected on account of rates and charges imposed by the municipality.
MUNICIPALITY: The city of Prospect Heights.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, or corporation, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PROJECT USE AGREEMENT: The 1992 project use agreement by and between the municipality and the agency, as amended from time to time.
SYSTEM WASTE: A. Garbage and general household waste;
B. Commercial and office waste; and
C. Construction and demolition waste discarded by persons from single-family and multi-family residential units.
System waste does not include institutional waste or industrial lunchroom waste or any waste discarded by persons from real estate not used
primarily for single-family or multi-family purposes. (Ord. 0-92-07, 3-16-1992)
3-9A-2: FINDINGS:
The municipality finds as follows:
A. It is necessary for and in the best interests of the municipality to regulate and control the collection, transportation and disposal of municipal waste in the
exercise of its police power in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of its residents; and
B. The municipality is authorized pursuant to section 11-19-1 et seq., of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-19-1 et seq., and
section 3.2 of the intergovernmental cooperation act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 220/3.2, to provide for the method or methods of collection,
transportation and disposal of municipal waste within its corporate limits and to provide that the method chosen may be the exclusive method to be
used within the corporate limits; and
C. The municipality acting pursuant to article VII, section 10 of the Illinois constitution and section 3.2 of the intergovernmental cooperation act has entered
into an intergovernmental agreement with twenty five (25) other north and northwest suburban Cook County municipalities, thereby creating the agency
to provide an efficient and environmentally sound municipal waste disposal system; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 121/470
D. The municipality has entered into a project use agreement by which the agency will acquire, construct, operate, equip and improve a municipal solid
waste project to provide for the disposal of system waste of the municipality and other members of the agency; and
E. Under the project use agreement, the municipality is obligated to establish a municipal waste disposal system, to cause system waste collected within
its corporate limits to be delivered to the agency and to make certain payments to the agency, all as described in the project use agreement; and
F. It is necessary and in the best interests of the municipality to provide for the environmentally sound and efficient collection, transportation and disposal
of system waste by creating a municipal waste system, by providing for the disposal of system waste by delivery to the agency and to impose the rates
and charges provided for herein. (Ord. 0-92-07, 3-16-1992)
3-9A-3: REQUIRED USE OF MUNICIPAL WASTE SYSTEM:
A. All persons owning, or occupying real estate within the corporate limits of the municipality shall dispose of system waste through the municipal waste
system. All system waste shall be collected by or on behalf of the municipality pursuant to the terms of this article and shall be delivered to a transfer
station as directed by the agency and the municipality under the project use agreement.
B. No person shall dispose of system waste through the municipal waste system unless the system waste complies with all rules and regulations
applicable thereto and established from time to time by either the municipality or the agency.
C. Any person disposing of system waste through the municipal waste system shall pay the rates and charges established from time to time by the
municipality. (Ord. 0-92-07, 3-16-1992)
D. The city administrator or his authorized representative shall be in charge of and responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. (Ord.
0-04-36, 7-19-2004, eff. 7-29-2004)
3-9A-4: PRIVATE COLLECTORS AND HAULERS:
A. No person shall collect, transport or dispose of system waste without a license issued pursuant to section 3-9-9 of this chapter.
B. Any person holding a license to collect, transport or dispose of system waste shall comply with the following obligations as a condition of that license:
1. Comply with all the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to the collection, transportation and disposal of system waste as may be
enacted from time to time by any lawful authority, including the state, this municipality and the agency.
2. Deliver all system waste to the transfer station designated by the agency and the municipality.
3. Maintain all equipment used to collect, transport and dispose of system waste in good repair and working order and operate it efficiently and
effectively.
4. Collect as agent for and promptly pay to the municipality all rates and charges imposed by the municipality on persons using the municipal waste
system.
5. Maintain accurate books and records and make them available to the municipality upon demand.
C. Nothing in this article is intended to impair any license or franchise issued before the effective date of this article to any person which authorizes the
person to collect, transport and dispose of municipal waste which constitutes system waste to a location other than the transfer station designated by
the agency and the municipality. (Ord. 0-92-07, 3-16-1992)
3-9A-5: MUNICIPAL WASTE SYSTEM FUND; RATES AND CHARGES:
A. There is hereby created and established an enterprise fund of the municipality known as the municipal waste system fund, which shall be separate and
apart from all other funds and accounts of the municipality as provided in subsection H of this section.
B. Before the beginning of each fiscal year, the city administrator shall recommend and the municipality shall adopt a budget for the municipal waste
system. The budget shall estimate the revenue required to:
1. Pay all operating and maintenance expenses of the municipal waste system, including all obligations to the agency under the project use agreement;
2. Pay, as they become due, interest on and principal of any revenue bonds or other obligations payable from the revenues of the municipal waste
system;
3. Provide for all unpaid claims; and
4. Maintain appropriate depreciation and reserve funds, including reserves for uncollected charges.
The budget shall estimate the amounts available to pay those obligations from:
a. Taxes levied and anticipated to be collected pursuant to law;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 122/470
b. Other amounts deposited in the municipal waste system fund; and
c. Rates and charges to be imposed on persons disposing of system waste through the municipal waste system.
C. The rates and charges imposed for use of the municipal waste system shall be sufficient, after taking into account monies then on hand in the municipal
waste system fund and the proceeds of taxes levied and to be collected which have been assigned and pledged to the municipal waste system fund:
1. To pay all operation and maintenance expenses of the municipal waste system, including all obligations to the agency under the terms of the project
use agreement;
2. To pay, as they become due, interest on and principal of any revenue bonds or other obligations payable from revenues of the municipal waste
system;
3. To provide for all unpaid claims; and
4. To provide adequate depreciation and reserve funds for the municipal waste system, including reserves for uncollected charges.
D. Rates to be billed by the licensee shall be as determined from time to time by separate ordinance or resolution of the municipality.
E. Licensee shall bill owners and occupants of real estate within the municipality served by the municipal waste system as agent for the municipality.
F. The owners and occupants of real estate within the municipality served by the municipal waste system shall be jointly and severally liable to pay all rates
and charges imposed by the municipality pursuant to the provisions of this section.
G. Penalties with respect to delinquent bills shall be as determined from time to time by separate ordinances or resolution of the municipality.
H. All amounts collected from rates and charges imposed under this section shall be deposited in the municipal waste system fund, and together with all
other amounts deposited in the municipal waste system fund, shall be separate and apart from all other monies of the municipality, except amounts
deposited in the municipal waste system fund may be invested together with other funds of the municipality. (Ord. 0-92-07, 3-16-1992)
3-9A-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such violation continues unabated after ten (10) days
from receipt of notice. (Ord. 0-92-07, 3-16-1992)
3-9A-7: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The provisions of sections 3-9A-1 through 3-9A-6 of this article shall not become effective until May 1, 1995. (Ord. 0-92-07, 3-16-1992)
3-9A-8: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
This chapter and article A of this chapter are intended to be read together and interpreted so as to effect the intent of the city council in establishing the
municipal solid waste system. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and this article A, this article shall control. (Ord. 0-04-36, 7-
19-2004, eff. 7-29-2004)
Chapter 10
SWIMMING POOLS
3-10-1: COMPLIANCE:
It shall be unlawful to construct, install, alter, maintain, or use any swimming pool in the city except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
section 4-8D-2 of this code; all city building and construction codes1; and section 8-2-0 of the Illinois swimming pool ordinance. (Ord. 0-88-27, 7-5-1988)
3-10-2: DEFINITION:
SWIMMING POOLS: As defined in the building code2. (Ord. 0-88-27, 7-5-1988)
3-10-3: LOCATION:
All swimming pools must be located in accordance with the city zoning ordinance and the building code3. (Ord. 0-88-27, 7-5-1988)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 123/470
3-10-4: PERMIT TO OPERATE:
A. Permit Required; Exception: An annual permit to operate a swimming pool is required for all swimming pools except for pools in connection with a
building in R-1 zoning district and available to the family of the household and his private guests.
B. Annual Operation Permit Review: The application shall be made in writing to the Prospect Heights health department. An operation permit shall be
renewed annually in May or whenever a pool is to be reopened for use after being closed down for a period no longer than one month or after any
maintenance that may alter the structure, the equipment, the surfaces or operation of the pool that might also affect the health of the users.
C. Reinstatement: Public pools closed for a period of one year or longer shall obtain approval for opening from the state department of public health. A
copy of such approval letter shall accompany the application to the Prospect Heights health department for a permit to operate.
D. Inspection Schedule: Representatives of the city health department shall make inspections of swimming pools before the annual permit to operate is
granted. An additional inspection shall take place within two (2) weeks after the swimming pool is put into operation.
E. Private Pool Inspection Fee: Subsequent inspection of pools shall be made as desired by the Prospect Heights health department. Inspection of
swimming pools at private residences shall be made upon request of the pool owner or operator and then only after payment of a twenty five dollar
($25.00) inspection fee. (Ord. 0-88-27, 7-5-1988)
3-10-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC POOLS:
Public pools, their equipment and operation, shall comply with the state department of public health's minimum sanitary requirements for swimming pools
and bathing places, and 210 Illinois Compiled Statutes 125/1 through 125/27. (Ord. 0-88-27, 7-5-1988)
3-10-6: INSPECTION FEE:
The annual health inspection fee for swimming pools shall be ninety nine dollars ($99.00). (Ord. 0-02-09, 4-1-2002, eff. 4-11-2002; amd. Ord. 0-09-07, 3-
13-2009)
3-10-7: INSPECTION AND TESTING:
The representatives of the building or health department shall have the right and authority to inspect any swimming pool and to check the operation thereof
during reasonable daylight hours. Such inspections shall be conducted in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 0-88-27, 7-5-1988)
3-10-8: AUTHORITY TO CLOSE:
If a representative of the health department shall find, after inspection, that the operation of a swimming pool does not meet the hygienic, sanitary and
safety requirements of this chapter, he shall direct that the pool will be closed until the sanitary and safety requirements are met. (Ord. 0-88-27, 7-5-1988)
3-10-9: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
All swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and all equipment shall be maintained in a satisfactory operating condition during
periods the pool is in use. No swimming pool shall be used, kept, maintained or operated in the city if such use, keeping, maintaining or operating shall be
the occasion of any nuisance or shall be dangerous to life or detrimental to health. (Ord. 0-88-27, 7-5-1988)
3-10-10: PENALTY:
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a swimming pool in violation thereof, shall be
fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
to have been committed on each day during which or on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the city from instituting such action or proceedings as it may deem necessary to
prevent or restrain the unlawful establishment, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use of a private residential
swimming pool or to restrain, correct or abate any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 0-88-27, 7-5-1988)
3-10-11: ESTABLISHED USE:
Any lawfully established use of a swimming pool, on the effective date of this chapter or of amendments thereto, that does not conform to the provisions
set forth in this chapter, shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming use and may be continued. If a swimming pool is damaged, destroyed or structurally
altered by any means to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its replacement value at that time, the swimming pool can only be rebuilt and/or used
thereafter as a conforming use and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. This section does not exclude swimming pools from complying with
the provisions of section 3-10-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 0-88-27, 7-5-1988)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 124/470
Chapter 11
DISEASED TREES
3-11-1: ADOPTION OF PREAMBLE:
The facts and statements contained in the preamble to ordinance 0-89-35 are hereby found to be true and correct and are hereby adopted as part of this
chapter1. (Ord. 0-89-35, 8-7-1989)
3-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used herein, the following words shall have the following definitions:
ASH TREE: Any tree of the species Fraxinus including any genus, species, varieties and cultivars thereof.
DISEASED TREE: A tree infected with Dutch elm disease or any ash tree (Fraxinus sp.), including any genus, species, varieties and cultivars thereof,
infested with the emerald ash borer.
DUTCH ELM DISEASE: A disease known scientifically as fungus Ceratostomella ulmi, fungus Graphium ulmi, or Phloem necrosis, and also commonly
known as elm blight.
ELM BARK BEETLE: The European elm bark beetle known scientifically as Colytus nuitistriatus.
EMERALD ASH BORER: The beetle Agrilus planipennis Fairmaire.
PREMISES: Any lot or tract of land within the city not owned by the city or dedicated for public use.
TREE: Any tree of the species elm, including any portions thereof, the stumps thereof, and any woodpiles consisting of portions of any such tree. (Ord. 0-
12-12, 4-9-2012)
3-11-3: NUISANCE DECLARED:
A. Any tree found to be infected with Dutch elm disease, as determined by laboratory analysis, located on any premises in the city shall hereby be
declared to be a public nuisance and it shall be removed and burned in accordance with state regulations within ten (10) days (or such longer period of
time as the city administrator may provide) following receipt of the notice for which provision is made herein.
B. Any ash tree found to be diseased is declared to be a public nuisance.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person that owns any premises on which a diseased tree is located to allow such tree to remain on any such premises after
the expiration of ten (10) days (or such longer period of time as the city administrator may provide) after receipt of notice pursuant to section 3-11-6 of
this chapter. (Ord. 0-12-12, 4-9-2012)
3-11-4: BREEDING PLACES OF ELM BARK BEETLES; NUISANCE:
Trees or parts thereof, in a dead or dying condition, including stumps and wood in woodpiles, that may serve as a breeding place or places of the elm bark
beetle are hereby declared to be public nuisances. It shall be unlawful for any person that owns premises on which any such trees, parts thereof, stumps
or woodpiles, are located to permit the same to remain thereon after the expiration of ten (10) days (or such longer period of time as the city administrator
may provide) after receipt of a notice to remove the same pursuant to section 3-11-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 0-04-56, 12-6-2004, eff. 12-16-2004)
3-11-5: ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTION:
A. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the city administrator. The city administrator, or his duly authorized representative, is hereby
authorized, after giving written notice of his intent and purpose, to enter in or upon any premises in the city, at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of
inspecting such premises as he, or his duly authorized representative, has reasonable cause to believe may contain diseased trees or breeding places
of the elm bark beetle or the emerald ash borer.
B. The city administrator, or his duly authorized representative, may remove from such trees such samples, borings or specimens as are required for the
purpose of making a laboratory analysis to determine whether any tree located thereon is a diseased tree or is a breeding place of the elm bark beetle
or emerald ash borer. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the city administrator, or his duly authorized representative, from entering upon such
premises for the purpose of carrying out his duties hereunder or to interfere with the city administrator, or his duly authorized representative, in the
performance of his lawful duties under the provisions of this section.
C. The city administrator shall follow any and all rules and regulations applicable to the removal of diseased trees as may be adopted from time to time by
the United States department of agriculture or the Illinois department of agriculture. (Ord. 0-12-12, 4-9-2012)
3-11-6: NOTICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 125/470
If any tree growing on any premises in the city is found to be a diseased tree, the city administrator shall cause to be served a notice upon the owner or
occupant of the premises on which the said tree is located to remove the said tree within ten (10) days (or such longer period of time as the city
administrator may provide). Such notice shall be served personally on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general
taxes for the last preceding year on the property on which the said infected tree or trees are located and a copy of said notice shall be posted on the
subject property. Such notice shall contain the following information:
A. The identity of the property, by common description.
B. The tree(s) affected.
C. A notice that it is unlawful under this chapter to permit such diseased tree to remain on the property.
D. A demand for the removal of the tree.
E. A notice that if the tree is not removed within ten (10) days (or such longer period of time as the city administrator may provide), the city will remove the
same and charge the cost thereof to the owner or occupant of the property; and
F. A notice that if the cost and expense incurred in the removal of such diseased tree is not paid, then within sixty (60) days after the incurrence of such
cost and expense a notice of lien on the real estate affected will be filed in the office of the recorder of deeds, or registrar of titles, whichever is
applicable, of Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. 0-12-12, 4-9-2012)
3-11-7: ABATEMENT:
If any person served with a notice to remove a diseased tree refuses or neglects to remove said tree, within ten (10) days (or such longer period of time as
the city administrator may provide) of the date that such notice is received, then the city administrator, or his duly authorized representative, agents or
contractors, may enter in or upon the premises where the said diseased tree is located and remove the said tree. The cost and expense of such removal
shall be charged to and paid by the owner or occupant of the lot or premises. (Ord. 0-04-56, 12-6-2004, eff. 12-16-2004)
3-11-8: LIENS:
If a diseased tree is removed by the city administrator, or by someone directed to remove the said tree on behalf of the city, a notice of lien containing the
cost and expense of removal incurred by the city may be recorded in the following manner: The city, or the person or firm authorized by the city to remove
such tree in his or its own name, shall file a notice of lien in the office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County, Illinois, or, where applicable, in the office of
the registrar of titles of Cook County, Illinois. The lien notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out:
A. A description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
B. The amount of the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service; and
C. The date or dates when such cost or expense was incurred by the city.
Such notice shall be filed within sixty (60) days after the cost and expense has been incurred. (Ord. 0-89-35, 8-7-1989)
3-11-9: RELEASE OF LIEN:
Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner or persons interested in the real estate affected, after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be
released by the city or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release may be filed of record in the same manner herein provided for the
filing of a notice of lien. (Ord. 0-89-35, 8-7-1989)
3-11-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each day during or on which a diseased tree is permitted to remain
after thirty (30) days (or such longer period of time as the city administrator may provide) from receipt of notice. (Ord. 0-89-35, 8-7-1989)
Chapter 12
NO SMOKING
3-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 126/470
BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than ten
percent (10%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises. Bar includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail
lounges, adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets as well as a barrier or counter at and over which alcoholic liquors and sometimes food are passed or
served.
CITY: The city of Prospect Heights, a municipal corporation.
EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or
her services for a nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity, that employs the
services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or partially enclosed with: a) solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, or
b) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies and
corridors.
ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion, stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller
rink, ice rink, bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic
competitions or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or other events.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical,
physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for
the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these
professions. Healthcare facility includes all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare facilities.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private employer that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during
the course of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to places of employment, including a minimum distance, as set forth in section
3-12-2 of this chapter, of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and classrooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private residence or
home based business, unless used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, adult care, or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a place
of employment.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The police department of the city of Prospect Heights.
PRIVATE CLUB: As used in this chapter, a not for profit association that: a) has been in active and continuous existence for at least three (3) years prior to
the effective date of this chapter, whether incorporated or not, b) is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club
purposes at all times, c) is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain,
and d) only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For purposes of this definition, private club means an organization that is managed by a
board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has established bylaws, a constitution, or both to
govern its activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 USC 501.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including, without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment,
mobile home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, private residence shall not include a hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed
and breakfast or other similar public accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility.
PUBLIC PLACE: That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or
in part by private persons or entities, the state of Illinois, or any other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission, including a
minimum distance, as set forth in section 3-12-2 of this chapter, of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that
serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A public place does not include a private residence unless the private residence is used to provide
licensed childcare, foster care, or other similar social service care on the premises. A public place includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, restaurants,
retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities,
nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling places,
private clubs, gaming facilities, all government owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the state or
state subcontract, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities, ticket
areas, public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than
seventy five percent (75%) of the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public accommodation that
are rented to guests, but excludes private residences.
RESTAURANT: As used in this chapter, any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals consisting
of lunches and/or full course dinners are actually and regularly served to the general public, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided
with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and an indoor seating capacity of not less than thirty (30) people and having employed
therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests. Restaurant shall not be construed to include
drive-in restaurant, or self-service or carryout restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail establishment that derives more than eighty percent (80%) of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants,
or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, vaporizers which are intended to simulate smoking tobacco, electronic cigarettes (a.k.a. e-cigs or e-cigarettes), or
any electronic nicotine delivery system and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other
products is merely incidental. Retail tobacco store does not include a tobacco department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any
establishment with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or any
other lighted smoking equipment. "Smoke" or "smoking" shall also mean the use of vaporizers which are intended to simulate smoking tobacco, electronic
cigarettes (a.k.a. e-cigs or e-cigarettes), or any electronic nicotine delivery system typically, but not necessarily battery powered, which produces an
aerosol which delivers nicotine to the user by means of inhalation. (Ord. 0-08-04, 2-4-2008; amd. Ord. 0-15-02, 1-26-2015)
3-12-2: SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES, PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT, AND CITY VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 127/470
No person shall smoke in a public place or in any place of employment or within fifteen feet (15') of any entrance to a public place or place of employment.
No person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the city, the state of Illinois or a political subdivision of the state of Illinois as provided
in section 15 of the smoke free Illinois act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 82/15. Smoking is prohibited in indoor public places and workplaces unless
specifically exempted under this chapter. (Ord. 0-08-04, 2-4-2008)
3-12-3: POSTING OF SIGNS, REMOVAL OF ASHTRAYS:
A. "No Smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with
a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this
chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that place.
B. Each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this chapter shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly
stating that smoking is prohibited.
C. All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having
control of the area. (Ord. 0-08-04, 2-4-2008)
3-12-4: SMOKING PROHIBITED IN STUDENT DORMITORIES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking is prohibited in any portion of the living quarters, including, but not limited to, sleeping rooms,
dining areas, restrooms, laundry areas, lobbies, and hallways, of a building used in whole or in part as a student dormitory that is owned and operated or
otherwise utilized by a public or private institution of higher education. (Ord. 0-08-04, 2-4-2008)
3-12-5: DESIGNATION OF OTHER NONSMOKING AREAS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator, manager, or other person in control of any public
place or place of employment may designate a nonenclosed area of a public place or place of employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where
smoking is also prohibited provided that such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner
described in subsections 3-12-3A and B of this chapter. (Ord. 0-08-04, 2-4-2008)
3-12-6: EXEMPTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking is allowed in the following areas:
A. Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a childcare, adult daycare, or healthcare facility or any other home based business open to
the public.
B. Retail tobacco stores as defined in section 3-12-1 of this chapter in operation prior to the effective date of this chapter. Any retail tobacco store that
begins operation after the effective date of this chapter may only qualify for an exemption if located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the
business and smoke from the business does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited.
C. Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers and
have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where smoking is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the nursing
home.
D. Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms, provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of
rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to permanently add additional nonsmoking rooms. (Ord. 0-08-04, 2-4-2008)
3-12-7: ENFORCEMENT; COMPLAINTS:
A. The police department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and may assess fines pursuant to section 3-12-8 of this chapter.
B. Any person may register a complaint with the police department for a violation of this chapter. The department shall establish a telephone number that a
person may call to register a complaint under this subsection. (Ord. 0-08-04, 2-4-2008)
3-12-8: VIOLATIONS:
A. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who violates section 3-12-2 of this chapter shall be fined pursuant to this section.
Each day that a violation occurs is a separate violation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 128/470
B. A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under section 3-12-2 of this chapter shall be fined in an amount that is not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). A person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or
place of employment that violates section 3-12-2 of this chapter shall be fined: 1) not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation,
2) not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second violation within one year after the first violation, and 3) not less than two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each additional violation within one year after the first violation. (Ord. 0-08-04, 2-4-2008)
3-12-9: INJUNCTIONS:
The police department or any individual personally affected by repeated violations may institute, in a circuit court, an action to enjoin violations of this
chapter. (Ord. 0-08-04, 2-4-2008)
3-12-10: DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED:
No individual may be discriminated against in any manner because of the exercise of any rights afforded by this chapter. (Ord. 0-08-04, 2-4-2008)
3-12-11: ENTRANCES, EXITS, WINDOWS, AND VENTILATION INTAKES:
Smoking is prohibited within a minimum distance of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited under this chapter so as to ensure that smoke does not enter the area through entrances, exits, open windows,
or other means. (Ord. 0-15-02, 1-26-2015)
Title 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE
4-1-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A. Adoption: A certain document, entitled the International Building Code, 2012 edition, and all appendices thereto, published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City of Prospect Heights. Three (3) copies of the document shall be kept on file with the City
Clerk.
B. Application: The International Building Code, 2012 edition, applies to all buildings except single-family residences, two-family dwellings (i.e., duplexes)
and townhomes. Those structures are covered in the International Residential Code, 2012 edition.
C. ANSI A117.1:
1. Adoption: The International Code Council/ANSI A117.1-2009 American National Standard Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities is hereby
adopted by the City of Prospect Heights.
2. Conflicts: Whenever two (2) or more codes are in conflict, the more stringent requirement shall govern. With respect to accessibility, the Illinois
Accessibility Code shall take precedence and shall supersede the ICC/ANSI A117.1-2009 American National Standard.
D. 2010 ADA Standards For Accessible Design: 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design is hereby adopted by the City of Prospect Heights.
1. Conflicts: Whenever two (2) or more codes are in conflict, the more stringent requirement shall govern. With respect to accessibility, the Illinois
Accessibility Code shall take precedence and shall supersede the 2010 ADA Standards. (Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-1-2: ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
International Building Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council is amended as follows:
A. General Amendments:
1. The City Of Prospect Heights Amendments: The city of Prospect Heights amendments, zoning ordinance, and municipal ordinances shall supersede
all sections of all of the adopted model codes.
2. Conflicts: Whenever two (2) codes are in conflict, the more stringent requirement shall govern.
3. Permit Drawings:
a. Architect Seal: All drawings submitted for permit shall bear the seal of the architect's license as well as his signature and the expiration date of his
license. Other drawings shall bear the seal and same information of the design professional who prepared them, such as the structural engineer,
civil engineer, mechanical engineer, professional engineer, etc. Every sheet shall bear the seal, signature and expiration date (3 sets of plans
required).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 129/470
Exception: An architect's seal (i.e., design professional seal) is not required for sheds and other minor accessory structures.
b. Plan Review: When necessary, in the judgment of the building official, for complex projects the plans shall be reviewed by qualified third party plan
review service, at the owner's expense.
4. Penalties:
a. Time Frame for Permits: If a building is not completed within the allotted time and the permit expires, the applicant shall be required to pay an
additional permit fee, equal to one-half (1/2) (50 percent) of the original permit fee and provide the building department with a schedule of
completion, such that the project is fully completed one hundred eighty (180) days. If not completed within the one hundred eighty (180) day
period, an additional fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day shall be imposed for each and every day the project is incomplete. Further,
legal action may be taken to ensure that all fines are paid and the project gets completed.
b. Work without Permit: Penalty For Building Projects Without An Approved Building Permit: In addition to every other penalty provided by law, any
person, firm, corporation, or entity that undertakes any work for which a permit is required by this title without first having secured a permit
authorizing such work will be fined a sum of money equal to the full amount of the building or other permit for such work. This subsection requires
the violator to: pay the permit cost, the penalty, and stop work until the building department approves a building permit for the project. Such
approval will occur within a reasonable time, within the confines of seasonal demand for services, holiday schedules, and building code
regulations. The project may commence when the permit applicant has received approval and paid necessary fines and fees.
c. Penalty For Noncompliant (Failed) Reinspections: The penalty for failure to pass a reinspection shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). This reinspection fee
shall be paid prior to scheduling another reinspection. Any subsequent reinspection for same shall be an additional one-hundred dollars ($100.00)
per reinspection until approved.
5. All Buildings:
a. Noncombustible: All elements of all buildings shall be of noncombustible construction. All buildings shall be type 1A, 1B, 2A or 2B. Construction
type 1 and construction type 2 are those types of construction in which the building elements listed in table 601 are of noncombustible material or
as approved by the building official.
b. Tenant Finish-Outs And Remodeling: All tenant finish-outs and remodeling shall be entirely noncombustible construction.
6. Fire Alarm System Required: All buildings shall have a fire alarm system, which complies with the NFPA fire alarm code and meets the following, but
not limited to, minimum requirements:
a. Alarm Requirements:
(1) All occupancies require a fire alarm system with horns, strobes and pull stations.
Exception: One- and two-family dwellings.
(2) All fire alarm systems are to be direct connect to RED Center via a two-way AES/Keltron radio.
7. Generator Required: The Fire Marshal and Building Official will review each application for fire pumps and make a determination if a generator is
required to support a fire pump based upon the conditions and power source for emergency and standby power.
8. Exterior Walls: All buildings shall be constructed of approved masonry materials or approved precast concrete panels. "Approved masonry materials"
shall mean: face brick, natural stone, precast concrete, split face block or equivalent masonry construction. Regular concrete block (CMU) which is
painted or stained is not an approved masonry material.
a. Exterior Walls At Side And Rear Elevation: The exterior walls at the side(s) and rear elevation of all buildings shall be constructed of approved
masonry materials and shall complement the architectural design of the front facade of the building. The side and rear elevations shall also be
aesthetically pleasing, so as to not negatively impact the adjacent neighborhood.
In commercial and industrial districts where a residential neighborhood is not affected, the side and rear elevation of a building may utilize, split
face block, or any combination of approved masonry materials.
b. Exterior Insulation Finish Systems (EIFS): When approved in advance by the building official, EIFS may be used for the spandrels of one-story
strip shopping centers, or for minor accent areas in other buildings.
(1) All exterior insulation finish systems (EIFS) shall be a completely drainable type system utilizing one or more of the following, as specified by
the manufacturer's installation instructions:
A continuous mesh
A "wrinkle wrap" type of building wrap
Vertical groove drains in the insulation board
Other method as prescribed by the manufacturer's installation instructions
(2) The insulation shall be mechanically fastened.
(3) The contractor performing the work must be a certified installer of the EIFS product that he is installing.
(4) The certified EIFS contractor shall provide a warranty for the labor and materials, identifying that the installation was performed in accordance
with manufacturer's installation instructions as well as the provisions of this code. Any and all violations of this code or discrepancies with the
manufacturer's installation instructions shall be corrected at the expense of the EIFS contractor, and general contractor who has control over the
project.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 130/470
(5) The city of Prospect Heights building department does not recommend EIFS and assumes no responsibility for its use and/or application to any
building.
(6) A certified independent EIFS inspector may be employed at the direction of the building official at the owner's expense.
9. Gypsum Wallboard: The minimum thickness of all gypsum wallboard to be used in all locations, of all buildings, is five-eighths inch (5/8") GWB (type
X).
10. Partitions And Framing: The minimum requirement for all partitions, in all buildings is one layer of five-eighths inch (5/8") GWB (type X) each side of
three and five-eighths inch (35/8") metal studs at sixteen inches (16") OC. All framing shall be sixteen inches (16") OC. All metal studs shall be
securely fastened, with a screw located on each flange, both sides, at the top track and at the bottom track.
11. Stairs: All stairs in all buildings shall be constructed of solid cast in place concrete or concrete filled metal pan stair treads with metal risers. A
"pattern metal plate" or any type of metal plate used for stair treads is not permitted.
a. The minimum width of all stairs in all buildings shall be forty eight inches (48") wide.
b. For industrial and manufacturing uses, a nonslip metal grate may be used for treads on stairs and ships ladders that lead to mezzanines utilized
for utilitarian purposes or to access metal grate catwalks.
12. Standing Seam Metal Roofs And Mansards: Five-eighths inch (5/8") or three-fourths inch (3/4") plywood shall be permitted sheathing or backup for
standing seam metal roofs or mansards when used over metal deck on bar joists or used as a sheathing over steel C-joist framing, or other
noncombustible framing.
B. Specific Amendments To The Sections Of The IBC, 2012:
101.1 Title
These regulations shall be known as the Building Code Of The City Of Prospect Heights, hereinafter referred to as "this code".
101.2 Scope
Exceptions:
1. Detached one and two family dwelling or townhouses not more than 21/2 stories above grade, and their accessory structures shall comply
with the International Residential Code as amended and adopted by the city of Prospect Heights.
105.2 Work Exempt From Permit
All work shall require a permit including all detached accessory structures, fences, retaining walls, sidewalks, driveways, swimming pools, window
awnings, signs, radio and television transmitting stations and all construction listed on the city of Prospect Heights fee schedule.
Work exempt from permit shall be any:
*Minor repair or replacement
*Painting, papering, carpeting, tiling, cabinet and other finish work
*Emergency repairs - (some emergency repairs may require a permit after the fact)
114.3 Unlawful Continuance
Any person who shall continue to work after having been served a stop work order, shall be liable to a fine of $100.00 for the first day, $200.00 for
the second day and an additional $500.00 for the third day and subsequent days @ $500.00/day for each and every day, thereafter.
501.2 Premises Identification
Letters or numbers shall be a minimum of 6 (six) inches in height and a stroke of minimum 0.5 inch of a contrasting color to the background itself.
508.4 Nonseparated Uses
Fire separations are required between uses, such as tenant separation walls, and shall be rated in accordance with table 508.4 with no reduction
in hourly rating. (No reduction, even when the building is fully sprinklered.)
Section 3000 - Elevators and Conveyance Systems:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 131/470
Amend following sections to read:
3001.2 Reference Standards: Reference Standards are to be as stringent and comply with current Illinois Elevator Safety Act (225 ILCS 312) and
its Rules for private residential conveyance application, the Act does not apply; however, the IBC code shall for new installation, permits, final
acceptance. For applications not covered by the Illinois Elevator Safety Act, those conveyance applications shall be covered by the IBC code by
the AHJ for new installation, permits, final acceptance, periodic inspections and testing, unsafe conditions, power to seal equipment, put
conveyance out of service, and certificate compliance as well as owner/ agent responsibility for contractor, maintenance, accident/injury
responsibility.
Referenced Standards from (225 ILCS 312): Safety Code for Elevator and Escalators (ASME A17.1), the Standard Qualification of Elevator
Inspectors (ASME QEI-1), the Automated People Mover Standards (ASME 21), the Safety Requirements for Personnel Hoists and Employee
Elevators (ASNI A10.4), and the Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts (ASME A18.1).
3002.4 Elevator to Accommodate Ambulance Stretcher: In all buildings at least one elevator shall be provided for fire department emergency
access to all floors in building.
Such elevator car shall be of such size and arrangement to accommodate a minimum 24 inch by 84 inch ambulance stretcher in the horizontal
open position and shall be identified by the International Symbol for emergency medical services (Star of Life). The symbol shall not be less than
3 x 3 inches high and wide (76 mm x 76 mm) and shall be placed inside on both sides of the main lobby hoistway door frame.
3003.2 Fire Fighters Emergency Operation: Elevators shall be provided with Phase 1 emergency recall operation and Phase 2 emergency car
operation in accordance with ASME A17.1 and NFPA 72.
3005.1 - 3005.4 Miscellaneous hoisting and elevating equipment: All miscellaneous hoisting and elevating equipment shall be subjected to
tests and inspections as required by the AHJ to ensure safe operation. As per changes a full load governor and full load safety test to be done
after installation of hoist, a major alteration, and a jump of the hoist tower travel.
Conveyors: Conveyors and related equipment shall be inspected and tested in accordance with ASME B20.1 listed in Chapter 25 and Sec
3005.4A regarding personal hoists.
3006.1 Approved means of access: An approved means of access shall be provided to elevator machine room and overhead machinery
equipment spaces. This means is not to be used as a passage way through the machine room to other areas of the building or roof.
3009.1 Certificate of Occupancy: The operation of all equipment governed by the provisions of this chapter and hereafter installed, relocated,
altered shall be unlawful by persons other than the installer until such equipment has been inspected and tested as herein required and a final
certificate of compliance has been issued by the AHJ.
3009.2 Posting of Certificate of Compliance: The owner or lessee shall post the current-issued certificate of compliance in a conspicuous place
inside the conveyance. A copy of the current issued certificate is acceptable. Please refer to the Illinois Elevator Safety Act.
3109.0 Swimming Pools
a) All swimming pools shall conform to the Illinois department of public health requirements as well as local requirements. The applicant shall
submit drawings for approval to that agency as well as the city of Prospect Heights
3411 Condominium Ownership Add this section.
Buildings which are planned as having condominium ownership or existing buildings which are converting to condominium ownership shall have
the following:
a) A legally established condominium association, with declarations, rules and regulations for the operation, maintenance and use of the
property. These documents shall be submitted for review by the city's legal staff, and must conform to state of Illinois statutes for condominiums.
b) Demising Walls: The demising walls which compartmentalize each unit shall be constructed of 8" C.M.U., creating a 2 (two) hour fire rated
barrier wall minimum. Corridor walls shall be constructed of 8" C.M.U., creating a 2 (two) hour fire rated barrier wall, as well. (Minimum) If the
C.M.U. wall is not technically feasible, a 2 hour fire rated gypsum wall may be used.
c) Assigned Parking: Each unit shall have a designated parking space(s).
d) Easements: Easements and cross-easements shall be established as necessary to perform repair and replacement of various building
systems, building elements and for utilities.
e) Water Meter: The association shall be responsible for paying the water bill. The main water meter to the building shall be read for billing
purposes. The association may utilize private submeters to calculate the proportionate share of individual units water usage, and then the
association may use that information for its own purposes. The city will not issue multiple water meters to one building and send out multiple
bills.
f) Apartment Buildings: Existing apartment buildings which are constructed of wood frame floor/ceiling assemblies, or have wood stud wall
framing, shall be required to install an approved fire sprinkler and fire alarm system before converting to condominium ownership.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 132/470
Part IX Referenced Standards - Chapter 35
All of the referenced standards listed in chapter 35 of the IBC 2012 edition are hereby adopted by the city of Prospect Heights.
(Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-1-3: SURETY AND PERFORMANCE BONDS REQUIRED:
A. Surety Bond: Before any building permit is issued for the erection, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal or demolition of any building, structure or
structural part thereof within the City, the applicant shall produce evidence that he has filed with and had approved by the building official, a surety bond
in the amount of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) protecting the City against any and all damages that may arise to the public ways of the City,
and to the City and to any person in consequence or by reason of the proposed operation to be authorized by such permit, or by reason of any
obstruction or occupation of any public ways in and about such building operations.
The surety bond required by this section may be acquired from the company, agent or broker of the contractor's choice. The bond and sureties shall be
subject to approval of the City of Prospect Heights.
This section shall be read and interpreted in accord with the Contractor Unified License and Permit Bond Act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 830/1 et
seq.
B. Cash Deposit To Guarantee Performance: To guarantee performance of the work permitted, the applicant shall deposit a cash bond in an amount equal
to the total permit fees for the permitted work. The person depositing the cash bond, by making such deposit agrees that all the undertakings,
covenants, terms, conditions and agreements of the contract or contracts entered into between the principal and the property owner or its
representative will be performed. The person depositing the cash bond further agrees that all persons, firms and corporations having contracts with the
principal or with subcontractors and all just claims due them under the provisions of such contracts for labor performed or materials furnished in the
performance of the work which is the subject of the permit shall be satisfied out of the cash deposit made pursuant to this subsection.
Any funds not disbursed by the Building Department in compliance with this subsection will be refunded to the applicant upon completion of the work
for which the building permit was issued.
C. Waiver: The City building official may waive the requirement of having a surety bond if he determines that the operation authorized by any building
permit is not likely to cause any damage to the public ways or to the City or to any person by reason of such operation or by reason of any obstruction
or occupation of any public ways in and about the proposed operation. (Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-1-4: MINIMUM HEATING STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS:
Every owner or manager of any residential building with two (2) or more dwelling units located within the City shall maintain, or otherwise make available
for optional use by any tenant or occupant, sufficient heat for a minimum temperature of sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (65F) in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and hallways located within each dwelling unit at all times between October 1 and April 30. Should the outside temperature fall below fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (50F) at any other time of the year at the official weather station at O'Hare Airport, the provisions of the previous sentence will apply.
It shall be the duty of the building official to enforce the provisions of this section. Any owner or manager of any building or part thereof that is found to be
in violation of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each and every offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day a violation occurs or continues to exist. (Ord.
0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-1-5: FOUNDATION HEIGHT AND GRADING:
A. Scope: These regulations shall control all new construction, alteration, and addition of all buildings and any substantial filling, excavating or grading that
affects surface drainage by altering the existing topography.
B. Finish Grading Plan: All permit plans for work described in subsection A of this section must contain a finish grading plan and should include the heights
of each corner of the top of foundation. The plan should also indicate the direction of stormwater flow. Finish grading shall not cause ponding of
stormwater on adjacent property, nor on the property being developed. Finish grades shall meet the finished grades at the adjacent property lines.
C. Requirements: The top of any foundation shall not be less than one foot (1'), nor exceed two and one-half feet (21/2') above the top of the curb.
Elevations shall be measured from a point midway across the front of the lot. If no curb exists, the finished centerline grade of the street shall be
substituted for the curb as a point of measurement. Variations from these standards may be permitted by the City Engineer if circumstances warrant,
and subject to the following conditions:
1. Owner demonstrates that the proposed foundation height will enhance the aesthetic and functional values of the existing nearby structures and
surrounding topography.
2. Physical conditions exist which prevent the developer from adhering to the requirements.
When a variation is requested, it shall be reviewed and approved or rejected, in writing, by the City Engineer.
D. Inspection; Survey: An inspection shall be made by the City after the foundation forms are set. Concrete shall not be poured for the foundation until
approval following inspection is obtained. If the levels of the foundation top do not conform to these regulations, the City Engineer shall have the
authority to order that the form be reconstructed to achieve compliance. After the site has been finish graded, the owner shall furnish to the City a
survey giving the location of the foundation on the property, the elevation at top of each corner of the foundation and elevations of the finish grade at
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 133/470
the foundation and property corners to determine compliance with the grading plan, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Said survey shall
be prepared by a licensed surveyor. Cost of such survey shall be borne by the owner. (Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-1-6: PENALTY:
A. Penalties: Any person(s) who shall violate the provisions of this chapter or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. The person(s) shall be required to correct any violation of the provisions of this section in a manner
approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
Chapter 2
RESIDENTIAL CODE
4-2-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A certain document, entitled the International Residential Code, 2012 edition, and all appendices thereto, published by the International Code Council, is
hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the City of Prospect Heights. Three (3) copies of the document shall be kept on file with the City Clerk. (Ord. 0-
19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-2-2: ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
International Residential Code, 2012 edition, and all appendices thereto, published by the International Code Council is amended as follows:
A. General Amendments:
1. Amendments Supersede All: The City of Prospect Heights amendments, zoning ordinance and municipal ordinances shall supersede all sections of
all of the applicable adopted model codes.
2. Conflicts: Whenever two (2) codes are in conflict, the more stringent requirement shall govern.
3. Permit; Required, Duration, Exempt: A permit is required, and must be obtained before any work may commence. A building permit shall expire
twelve (12) months after the date of issuance for single-family residences, townhomes or any other structure covered under the International
Residential Code, 2012. Fences and sheds must be completed within sixty (60) days of the start of construction. No permit is required for minor
repair or replacement.
a. Permit Drawings: Architect's Seal: All drawings submitted for permit shall bear the seal of the architect's license as well as his signature and the
expiration date of his license. Other drawings shall bear the seal and same information of the design professional who prepared them, such as the
structural engineer, civil engineer, mechanical engineer, professional engineer, etc., as applicable (every sheet) (2 sets required).
Exception: An architect's seal (i.e., design professional seal) is not required for sheds and other minor accessory structures.
b. Plan Review Fee: For projects which have been reviewed and then subsequently withdrawn, review fees shall be charged to the applicant for all
expenses incurred.
4. Penalties:
a. Time Frame: If a building or structure is not completed within the allotted time and the permit expires, the applicant shall be required to pay an
additional permit fee, equal to one-half (1/2) (50 percent) of the original permit fee and provide the building department with a schedule of
completion, such that the project is complete within thirty (30) days. If the project is not completed within the thirty (30) day period, an additional
fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day shall be imposed for each and every day the project is incomplete. Further, legal action may be
taken to ensure all fines are paid and the project gets completed. The penalty for beginning work without paying for and obtaining a permit, is that
the permit fee shall be doubled.
b. Work Without Permit: Penalty For Building Projects Without An Approved Building Permit: In addition to every other penalty provided by law, any
person, firm, corporation, or entity that undertakes any work for which a permit is required by this title without first having secured a permit
authorizing such work will be fined a sum of money equal to the full amount of the building or other permit for such work. This subsection requires
the violator to: pay the permit cost, the penalty, and stop work until the building department approves a building permit for the project. Such
approval will occur within a reasonable time, within the confines of seasonal demand for services, holiday schedules, and building code
regulations. The project may commence when the permit applicant has received approval and paid necessary fines and fees.
c. Penalty For Noncompliant (Failed) Reinspections: The penalty for failure to pass a reinspection shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). This reinspection fee
shall be paid prior to scheduling another reinspection. Any subsequent reinspection for same shall be an additional one-hundred dollars ($100.00)
per reinspection until approved.
5. City's Right To Draw On Bond: The city of Prospect Heights shall have the right at all times, at its option, to draw on the contractor's bond for the
costs, including, but without limitation, for: legal fees, administrative expenses - for damage to neighbor's property or damage to city property - for
undertaking any work in violation of the code or for refusing to complete work authorized by any permit.
Also, if the contractor refuses to correct work that is in violation of any code, the bond shall be collected to correct and remedy the code violation.
6. Replenishment Of Bond: If the city of Prospect Heights draws on the contractor's bond, then the contractor shall replenish the bond to the full
amount. If the "amount to remedy" exceeded the amount of the bond, the contractor shall also "make whole" the amount of the difference required to
the party affected, either the city of Prospect Heights or other persons or entity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 134/470
Failure to replenish the bond and financially "make whole" the affected party, shall result in one or all of the following:
* A stop work order
* Cancellation of the permit
* Refusal of an occupancy permit
* Refusal by the city to issue transfer tax stamps
* Refusal to issue the contractor any other new permit
* Refusal for said contractor to do any other work within the city of Prospect Heights
7. Damage To Property: No person engaged in any work pursuant to a permit shall injure, damage or destroy any property, public or private, not owned
by such person. In the event property is injured, damaged or destroyed, the general contractor shall be responsible for the damage and shall
promptly repair and restore the damaged property at his own expense.
The general contractor or applicant acting as a general contractor shall be responsible for all of the subcontractors' actions and shall be responsible
for all of the work in its entirety including means, methods and techniques of construction.
8. Safeguards: The general contractor or applicant acting as a general contractor shall be responsible for safety on, in, near and around the job site. All
persons undertaking work pursuant to a permit issued by the city of Prospect Heights shall exercise proper care for the safety of all persons and
property.
9. Wet Saw Required: A wet saw shall be required for cutting all types of masonry, stone, brick pavers, concrete and pavement. Any person not using a
wet saw shall be issued a "stop work order" and fined one hundred dollars ($100.00). The fine must be paid before work is allowed to continue with a
wet saw.
10. Demolitions: Whenever a building is demolished, the contractor shall be required to provide dust abatement by hosing down the structure with
water, during the demolition.
11. Concrete Foundations:
a. Footings And Foundation Walls: All footings and foundation walls shall be cast in place concrete. Wood, masonry, ICF, flat ICF, waffle grid ICF,
screen grid ICF and other similar systems for foundations are not permitted. All concrete shall be 6-bag mix or an engineered design mix which
shall have the specified compressive strength (f'c) of not less than three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch (psi) at twenty eight (28) days,
unless the concrete is required to have a greater compressive strength as designed by the architect or structural engineer. The minimum
foundation wall thickness shall be eight inches (8") for a frame wall and ten inches (10") for a brick veneer wall.
b. Admixture: The use of calcium chloride as an admixture is not permitted on site.
c. Depth: The minimum depth for all footings shall be three feet six inches (3'6"), measured from finished grade to the bottom of the footing.
d. Thickness: The minimum thickness for all footings shall be twelve inches (12").
e. Extension: All footings shall extend a minimum of six inches (6") each side of the foundation wall it is supporting.
Example: A one foot zero inch (1'0") wide foundation wall shall be supported by a two foot zero inch (2'0") wide footing.
f. Reinforcement: All foundation walls shall have steel reinforcing bars, a minimum of two (2) #5 bars at the top and bottom of the foundation wall,
running continuous.
g. Three-Season Rooms/Porches: Three-season rooms, screened porches and the like shall be built on a full footing and foundation wall, like any
other habitable space. (300 square feet or less may utilize a trench footing; the trench footing shall be 12 inches wide x 48 inches below grade with
2 #5 bars at top and bottom.)
h. Existing Masonry Foundation: When a second floor addition is planned for an existing house which has a masonry foundation or a concrete
foundation that is of questionable structural integrity, the existing foundation must be evaluated by a licensed structural engineer. The structural
engineer shall prepare and submit a written report to the building department that indicates one or more of the following:
(1) The existing foundation is capable of supporting the new loads imposed by the addition; or
(2) The existing foundation shall be capable of supporting the new loads if specified reinforcement or improvements are made; or
(3) The existing foundation is not capable of supporting new loads.
The structural engineer's report is to protect the owner in advance from a catastrophic and/or unexpected collapse of the structure.
i. Window Well Covers Required: Bars, grilles, covers, screens or similar devices are required to be placed over all window wells, whether rescue,
escape or otherwise. Window well covers shall be capable of supporting a full grown adult (minimum capacity 250 pounds).
j. Concrete Slabs: Concrete slabs in basements and slab on grade construction shall be a minimum of four inches (4") thick w/6 X 6 W 1.4 X W 1.4
W. W. F. over six (6) mil vapor barrier over a five inch (5") crushed stone base.
12. Carpentry:
a. All framing shall be sixteen inches (16") OC or less than sixteen inches (16") OC (balloon framing shall not be permitted).
b. All plumbing walls shall be two by six (2 x 6) wood stud framing (minimum).
c. All framing shall be dimension lumber with the lumber species and grade identified on the permit drawings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 135/470
d. All roof sheathing shall be five-eighths inch (5/8") exterior grade plywood, minimum. OSB and particle board are not permitted for roof sheathing.
e. Wall sheathing shall be minimum one-half inch (1/2") plywood or one-half inch (1/2") OSB (oriented strand board). The entire exterior envelope
(exterior walls) shall be completely sheathed with one-half inch (1/2") plywood or one-half inch (1/2") OSB wall sheathing.
f. All floors shall be a minimum of three-fourths inch (3/4") tongue and groove plywood. OSB is not permitted for floor sheathing.
g. Two (2) layers of five-eighths inch (5/8") type X GWB shall be required on the ceilings of a garage which has habitable rooms above. A single layer
of five-eighths inch (5/8") type X GWB is required between all garage and attached homes, and enclosing all mechanical rooms/closets.
h. Fire blocking shall be provided to cut off all concealed draft openings (both vertical and horizontal) to form an effective fire barrier between stories
and between a top story and a roof space. (See Section R-602.8.) Materials which may be used are as follows:
* Unfaced batt insulation, when the stud cavity is filled to a height of sixteen inches (16") vertically per R-602.8.1.1
* Blankets of mineral wool
* Thermal fiber or fire safe batts
* Drywall compound
* Cementitious material
* 3-M fire stopping caulk or equal (intumescent fire stopping caulk)
* Other approved materials installed in such a manner as to be securely retained in place as an acceptable fire block by the building official.
Note: Foam plastic products are not permitted to be used as a fire blocking or fire stopping material.
i. Fire block at the rim height of every tub with 2 x wood blocking, every stud space, all around, or
Provide water resistant five-eighths inch (5/8") GWB or one-half inch (1/2") dura rock completely down to the floor behind all tubs and shower stalls
for proper fire stopping, or use other materials as permitted in section R-602.8.1.
j. Three-season rooms, screened in porches and like structures shall be built with construction consistent with this code, and the same as any other
house addition. All shall have a full footing and foundation (see subsection A11g of this section, 300 square feet or less may utilize a trench
footing). Use of foam plastic panels, structural or otherwise are not permitted. A one hour fire rating is required at walls and ceiling (5/8 inch
gypsum board type X).
k. Lightweight Stairs: Lightweight stair construction is prohibited. 3/4" OSB and gusset plate stringer are prohibited in stair construction.
13. Electrical
a. Arc Fault Circuit; Interrupter Protection: All branch circuits that supply one hundred twenty five (125) volt, single-phase, fifteen (15) and twenty (20)
ampere outlets installed in dwelling unit bedrooms shall be protected by an arc fault circuit interrupter listed to provide protection of the entire
branch circuit (per section 210.12(B) of NEC).
b. Conductors: All electrical conductors shall be copper. Aluminum conductors are not permitted.
c. Prohibited: Nonmetallic sheathed cable, mineral insulated, metal sheathed cable, rigid nonmetallic conduit and boxes, armored cable, and flat
conductor cable are all not permitted.
d. GFCI Protected: All switches, receptacles and light fixtures in a bathroom, powder room, shower, etc., shall be GFCI protected.
e. Conduit: Exterior belowground conduit may be:
* Rigid galvanized (minimum) six inches (6") deep; or
* Electrical grade nonmetallic conduit (minimum) eighteen inches (18") deep; or
* Type "UF" cable with ground conductor (minimum) twenty four inches (24") deep per NEC table 300.5.
f. Sump Pumps and Ejector Pumps: The electrical circuit which provides power for the sump pump and/or ejector pump shall each have a dedicated
circuit independent of all circuits in the building and shall have a single outlet.
14. Mechanical:
a. All dryer vents shall be metal or metal flex. Nonmetallic vents for dryers are not permitted.
b. All ductwork shall be a closed system and in compliance with the international mechanical code section 603. Use of a stud space or joist space for
a supply or plenum return is not permitted. Gypsum ducts are not permitted.
c. Provide a one and one-half inch (11/2") precast concrete pad under all furnaces which are set on a wood floor (or use 2 layers of 1/2 inch dura rock
or a 2 inch thickness of poured concrete).
15. Fireplaces:
a. Masonry Fireplaces: All wood burning fireplaces shall be constructed of masonry per section R-1003 of the IRC and in compliance with the New
York Masonry Association's guidelines and details. The hearth extension shall always be twenty inches (20") minimum. Provide an exterior air
supply per section R-1005. The smoke shelf shall be twelve inches (12") minimum.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 136/470
b. Direct Vent Fireplaces: Direct vent fireplace units which burn gas only and have a fixed glass plate in front of the firebox which cannot be opened,
are permitted.
(1) The direct vent unit may terminate the vent at the outside wall, directly behind the unit, with a collar, per manufacturer's installation instructions.
(2) If a chimney is created for the direct vent, on the outside of the building, it must be brick or stone veneer. Wood siding or nonmasonry materials
are not permitted to enclose the chimney created on the outside wall.
If the direct vent is run vertically in the interior of the building, it may terminate through the roof as an exposed vent. If the vent through the roof
has a chimney enclosure around it, the enclosure must be clad to look like stone or brick. (Wood siding or similar siding material shall not be
permitted to create a chimney.)
c. Ventless Fireplace: Ventless fireplace units which burn gas and have no vent to the outside, are not permitted in bedrooms, basements and attics.
They must be operated with a door or window open, per manufacturer's instructions.
B. Specific Amendments:
R-101.1 Title
These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code For One And Two-Family Dwellings Of The City Of Prospect Heights, and shall be cited
as such and will be referred to herein as "this code".
R-101.2 Scope
The provisions of the international residential code for one- and two-family dwellings shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement,
enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location removal and demolition of single family residences, townhouses and
duplexes, and their accessory structures. Townhouses and duplexes shall have a vertical wall as a fire barrier and shall not have one dwelling unit
stacked above another. Apartment type buildings and other multiple dwelling buildings shall be governed by the IBC 2012 as amended.
No exception for existing buildings:
Existing buildings undergoing repair, alteration, additions or movement shall comply with the requirements of this code, same as new buildings.
R-103.1 Enforcement Agency
The individual in charge of the building department shall be known as the Building Official and/or Building and Development Director.
R-104.11 Tests
Add: The building official shall have the final authority to approve or disapprove materials, designs, assemblies, products, methods of construction,
equipment, and etc. proposed to be used in any construction project.
R-105.2 Work Exempt From Permit
All work shall require a permit, including detached accessory structures, fences, retaining walls, patios, decks, gazebos, sidewalks, driveways,
swimming pools and all other construction listed on the city of Prospect Heights fee schedule.
Work exempt from permit shall be as follows:
* Emergency repairs
* Minor repair or replacement
* Painting, papering, carpeting, tiling, cabinets and other finish work
* Re-roofing of a single family residence or townhouse
R-106.1 Submittal Documents
All construction documents submitted shall be signed and sealed by the design professional who prepared them. (The licensed architect, structural
engineer, or registered professional engineer shall include his license number, signature, and the expiration date of his license clearly identified on
the drawings.)
R-113.4 Violation Penalties
The building official and/or his agents may issue citations which carry a fine of $100.00 per day for each and every violation which exists. The
$100.00 per day penalty also applies to "orders" in which the contractor or other persons "fail to comply" as directed by the building official,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 137/470
inspectors, or his agents.
R-114.2 Unlawful Continuance
Any person who shall continue to work after having been served a "stop work order" shall be liable to a fine of $100.00 for the first day, $200.00 for
the second day and an additional $500.00 for the third day.
R-115 Site Requirements is hereby added:
All sites shall have a code of conduct sign clearly posted including address. All construction sites shall have the following and comply with the
following.
a) Portable sanitation facility shall be provided and maintained in an approved manner on site.
b) Parking Restrictions: All contractor/service providers and other persons associated with a construction project shall restrict the parking of
vehicles to one side of the street. Do not park vehicles on the public parkway or blocking the public sidewalk.
c) Public walks shall be kept clear and passable. Maintain sidewalk area with compacted gravel as necessary throughout the duration of
construction, so that it is safe for pedestrians to walk on.
d) Sidewalks shall not be blocked with parked vehicles. Concrete trucks or delivery vehicles may block the sidewalks for a short period of time
while they are placing concrete or delivering materials.
e) Tree Protection: Tree protection for new homes shall be kept in place and properly constructed at all times. The contractor may be required
to install tree protection, when deemed necessary by the building official, for home "additions".
f) Storage of materials: Do not place or store materials on the public parkway.
g) Dumpster Required: Provide a dumpster for all trash and discarded building materials, or keep the trash or scrap building materials
contained inside of the building. The maximum length of time that a dumpster may be on site is 6 months. After 6 months, all garbage and debris
shall be placed in a 6 yard dumpster which shall be located inside the garage, or the garbage and debris shall be placed in trash receptacles
located inside the house. City has a contract with a waste hauler and the dumpster shall be from the contract provider. Failure to use City waste
hauler could result in a fine of $100.00.
h) Street Maintenance: Maintain streets and sidewalks free of mud. The general contractor shall be responsible to clean up large clumps of
mud, immediately, as trucks or other vehicles leave the site. ($100.00 fine for each occurrence.)
i) Driveway Access Required: On all new construction sites, the designed area for the driveway shall be graveled. Gravel shall be in place
immediately after the foundation is backfilled. This gravel is a sacrificial base for use during construction. More gravel shall be added as
appropriate during construction to assist in keeping the site and the public streets clean. Additional gravel shall be added to meet appropriate
requirements for the pre-pour driveway inspection.
j) Spot Survey Required: The city requires that the builder of a new single family home submit a spot survey after the pouring of the foundation
and that those documents be reviewed and approved by the city prior to any framing work being started on the structure. The spot survey shall
indicate the dimension from the foundation to all property lines and all pertinent elevations. In both cases, these documents shall be signed and
sealed by either a professional engineer or a registered land surveyor and shall contain verbiage indicating that the foundation has been
installed in accordance with the site plan submitted and approved by the city.
k) Neighbor Property: The general contractor is responsible for controlling the sub-contractors and the project as a whole. No person shall
trespass on a neighbor's property, without their permission. Do not damage neighbor's property. The general contractor shall be responsible to
restore any damage to neighbor's property, or compensate that neighbor for damage to his property, regardless of which subcontractor or
service provided actually did the damage.
l) Safety Fencing Required: All construction sites shall be fenced. The fence shall be a 6 ft. chain-link fence with locking gate surrounding the
entire site.
m) Landscaping: The minimum requirement for landscaping is that the entire property must be seeded or sodded by a professional landscaper.
n) Erosion Control: Keep erosion control measures in place as directed by the city engineer.
o) Construction Fires: No open fires or burning, except for heating sand for mortar.
p) Obey work hours: Monday through Saturday 7 AM - 6 PM
No work on Sundays or legal city holidays
q) Window Well Drains And Perimeter Drainage: All window wells shall have adequate drainage installed. A drain pipe of not less than 4
inches in diameter, shall be connected to a tee fitting, incorporated with the building foundation footing drain tile system.
A perimeter drain with leaders from window wells, is always required at basements. A 4 inch diameter perimeter drain tile at footing shall be set
on a minimum of 2 inches of stone and covered with a minimum of 6 inches of stone. The total height of the stone used shall be 12 inches
minimum. (2" + 4" + 6" = 12"). The top of the tile must be below the top of the footing.
r) Sump Pump Discharge: The sump pump discharge of the perimeter drain tile system shall be approved by the city engineer department.
The discharge of the sump pump is storm water and shall not be connected to or discharged into the sanitary sewer.
s) Downspouts: All downspouts as well as storm water sump pumps shall be connected to the ground storm sewer system as directed by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 138/470
city engineer. Downspouts and storm water sump pumps may discharge onto your own property and be absorbed into the soil when preapproved
by engineering. Drainage shall not run onto adjacent property. Provide a grading plan to the city engineer for pre-approval.
R-202 Definitions
a) Air Admittance Valves are not permitted.
b) Insulating Concrete Forms (ICF) are not permitted.
c) Manufactured Home: Manufactured homes as defined are not permitted. Any manufactured home must meet all of the requirements of "this
code" as well as the requirements of the amendments.
d) Structural Insulated Panels (SIPS): Structural insulated panels are not permitted.
e) Wet Vents: Wet vents are not permitted.
R-301.1.2 Construction Systems
a) Balloon framing is not permitted.
R-301.2 (1) Climatic & Geographic Design Criteria Table
Ground snow load 30 P.S.F.
Wind speed 90 mph, 3 second gust - fig 301.2(4)
75 mph, fastest mile - table 301.2.1.3
Seismic design category B
Weathering Severe
Frost line depth 42" below finished grade (minimum)
Termite Slight to moderate
Decay Slight to moderate
Winter design temperature -4 degrees Fahrenheit
Ice shield underlayment required Yes
Flood hazards Contact engineering
Air freezing index 1750
Mean annual temperature 50 degrees Fahrenheit
R-301.5 Attic And Crawlspace Access
Access to attics and crawlspaces shall be a minimum of 30 inches by 30 inches. A light is required in the immediate vicinity of the opening, inside
the attic and/or crawlspace.
R-302.6 Dwelling/Garage Separation Required
This section is hereby amended to require 5/8" fire rated gypsum board on all walls, attics and ceilings of an attached garage. (2 layers of 5/8" fire
rated gypsum board is required on the ceiling of the garage if habitable rooms, a storage room or closet is above)
R-305.1.1 Crawlspace Height
All crawlspace areas shall have a minimum required clear height of 3 feet (36 inches). Beams, girders, ductwork, mechanical and plumbing
components may project into that area as long as there remains 2 feet (24 inches) under those projections.
R-306.3 Private Sewage Disposal
A private sewage disposal system is not permitted.
Add: R-309.1.1 Garage Floor Drainage
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 139/470
The garage floor shall have a minimum slope from back to front of 2 (two) inches, for drainage. A garage floor may not slope to any drain. (All
garage floors shall be 5" thick concrete over 5" crushed stone base and have wire mesh or be fiber mesh concrete.)
Add: R-309.3.1.2 Gas Curb
The floor of the garage shall be separated vertically from the adjacent floor of the main residence by a concrete gas curb, minimum 6 inches in
height.
R-311.7.10.1.1 Spiral Stairways
Spiral stairways are not permitted to be used as a means of egress; they are considered a decorative element only.
R-311.7.11 Lightweight Stairs:
Lightweight stair construction is prohibited.
R-312.1 Guardrails
In addition to the requirements of this section, add: "Porches, balconies, decks or exterior raised floor surfaces 8 feet or more above the floor or
grade below shall have a guardrail not less than 42 inches in height."
R-319 Site Address
Premises identification: The address numbers shall be a minimum of 6 inches high with a minimum stroke of 0.5 of a contrasting color, facing the
street and readily visible for emergency vehicles.
R-322.1.9 Manufactured Housing
Manufactured and prefabricated construction shall comply with all of the code provisions and amendments for standard construction, as amended
by the city of Prospect Heights, herein.
R-401.3 Drainage
Drainage shall be as approved by the city engineer.
R-402.1 Wood Foundations delete in entirety
Wood foundations are not permitted.
R-402.2 Concrete Compressive Strength
Revise section R-402.2 and table R-402.2, such that, in all cases the minimum specified compressive strength of concrete shall be 3,000 p.s.i., or
greater as indicated by table R-402.2.
R-403.1.1 Footings, Minimum Size
a) All spread footings shall be one foot (12 inches) thick, and a minimum of 20 inches wide for an 8" wide foundation wall. Footing projections shall
be at least 6" each side of the foundation wall. Example: A 10 inch foundation wall requires a 22 inch wide footing. Provide a continuous 11/2" x
31/2" key way centered in the top of all spread footings.
b) Trench footings may be utilized for slab on grade additions, such as a 3-season room and the like, which does not exceed an area of 300
square feet, and is only one story in height. The trench footing shall be 12" wide with 2-#5 bars top and bottom. The bottom of the trench footing
shall be 48 inches below grade.
c) Concrete slab for a detached garage, shall utilize a full perimeter grade beam 12 inches wide with a depth of 12 inches below grade. It shall also
have 2-#5 bars continuous around perimeter. The garage slab shall be 5" thick with wire mesh or fiber mesh concrete poured monolithic with the
grade beam. The slab shall be over a 5" crushed gravel base.
d) Concrete slabs for sheds may be a 4" concrete slab over 4" crushed stone base. Turn down perimeter edge below grade as necessary,
minimum 6 inches, when a slab is provided. A shed is not required to have a concrete slab but must be properly anchored.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 140/470
R-403.1.4.1 Frost Protection
All footings shall be 42 inches below grade. Delete the "Exceptions" in this section.
R-404.1.1 Design of masonry foundation walls - Delete section in entirety
R-404.1.1.1 Masonry foundation walls. Delete section in entirety
R-404.1.1 Masonry Foundation Walls Masonry foundation walls and others are not permitted. Masonry foundation walls, pier & curtain wall
foundations, rubble stone masonry, wood foundation walls, insulating concrete forms (ICF), waffle grid insulating concrete form wall and screen grid
insulating concrete form wall systems are "not permitted".
R-405.1 Foundation Drainage Delete the exception.
Add: The electrical circuit that provides power for the sump pump in the perimeter drainage system shall be a dedicated circuit, independent of all
circuits in the building and shall have a single outlet.
R-502.2.2 Decks
All decks shall be designed for a 40 p.s.f. live load. All decks shall be supported by concrete filled post holes which are 42 inches below grade. The
wood posts shall be securely anchored with metal post base anchors which are embedded in the concrete or mechanically fastened to the
concrete, with expansion bolts.
R-504 Pressure Preservatively Treated - Wood Floors (On Ground)
Treated wood floors on the ground shall not be permitted. Delete this section in its entirety.
R-506 Concrete Floors (On Ground)
Concrete slab-on-ground floors shall be minimum of 4" thick over 5" crushed stone base. Basement concrete floors shall have a 6 mil vapor
barrier.
a) Garage slabs shall be a minimum of 5" thick over a 5" crushed stone base. Attached garages shall have a 6 mil vapor barrier.
b) Concrete floors in basements shall be 4" concrete slab with 6 x 6 W 1.4 x W 1.4 W.W.F. over 6 mil vapor barrier over 5" crushed stone base,
minimum.
c) Typical welded wire fabric required for various slab thicknesses are as follows:
4" conc. slab - 6 x 6 W 1.4 x W 1.4 W.W.F.
5" conc. slab - 6 x 6 W 2.1 x W 2.1 W.W.F.
6" conc. slab - 6 x 6 W 2.9 x W 2.9 W.W.F (All vapor barriers shall be 6 mil.)
d) Blast furnace slag shall not be permitted as a base for a concrete slab.
e) Delete the exception in section R-506.2.2. The exception says that a base course is not required under certain conditions. A base course
shall always be required.
R-602.3.2 Top Plate
A double top plate shall always be required. Delete the exception in this section. A single top plate is not permitted.
Tables R-602.3 (3 & 4) Stud Spacing And Panel Thickness
Stud spacing shall always be 16" O.C. or less than 16" O.C.
a) The minimum panel thickness shall be 1/2" plywood or 1/2" O.S.B. for wood structural panel wall sheathing.
b) Particle board wall sheathing is not permitted.
R-602.8 Fireblocking Required
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 141/470
Fireblocking shall be required per this section. Other materials which may be used, in addition to the materials listed in R-602.8.1 are Therma fibre
insulation and approved intumescent firestopping caulk. (See subsection 4-2-2A12h of the Prospect Heights city code)
Note: Foam plastic products are not permitted to be used as a fireblocking or firestopping material.
R-602.9 Cripple Walls
Cripple walls shall be 2 x 6 studs @ 16" O.C., minimum. Foundation cripple walls which have a stud height less than 14 inches shall be sheathed
on both sides with a wood structural panel that is glued with sub-floor adhesive and fastened to both the top and bottom plates in accordance with
table 602.3 (1) or the cripple walls shall be constructed of solid blocking. Cripple walls shall be supported on continuous foundations.
R-606.1.1 Professional Registration Required
All project drawings, typical details and specifications are required to bear the seal of the architect or engineer responsible for the design (typical
for all).
R-611 Insulating Concrete Form Wall Construction: Delete this section in its entirety. ICF wall construction is not permitted.
R-703.9 Exterior Insulation Finish Systems (EIFS)
Add: All exterior insulation finish systems (EIFS) shall be a completely drainable type system utilizing one or more of the following, as specified by
the manufacturer's installation instructions:
* A continuous mesh
* A "wrinkle wrap" type of building wrap
* Vertical groove drains in the insulation board
* Other method as prescribed by the manufacturer's installation instructions
a) The insulation shall be mechanically fastened.
b) The contractor performing the work must be a certified installer of the EIFS product that he is installing
c) The certified EIFS contractor shall provide a warranty for the labor and materials, identifying that the installation was performed in accordance
with manufacturer's installation instructions as well as the provisions of this code. Any and all violations of this code or discrepancies with the
manufacturer's installation instructions shall be corrected at the expense of the EIFS contractor, and general contractor who has control over the
project.
d) The City of Prospect Heights building department does not recommend EIFS and assumes no responsibility for its use and/or application to
any building.
R-801.3 Roof Drainage And Sump Discharge
Roof drainage and stormwater discharge shall be directed by the city engineer on a case by case basis. The city engineer's directive in the plan
review process or as directed in the field during construction is the final authority with respect to roof drainage and sump pump (stormwater)
discharge.
a) Storm water from the roof, perimeter drain tile system, sump pump or any other source shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer.
b) A sanitary sewer shall not be connected to a storm sewer.
R-905.2.7.1 Ice Protection (i.e. Self-Adhesive Ice/Water Shield)
Ice protection shall be provided for asphalt shingled roofs that consists of a self-adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet, which shall be used in
lieu of normal underlayment and shall extend from the eaves edge to a point at least 24 inches inside the exterior wall line of the building.
a) The same requirement applies for metal roof shingles, mineral surface roll roofing, slate and slate type shingles, wood shingles, wood shakes,
similar roofs and when a complete "tear-off" occurs for re-roofing of an existing building.
M-1408 Delete this section in its entirety. Vented floor furnaces are not permitted.
M-1601.1: Items #5, #6 and #7 are hereby deleted. Construction cavities in stud and joist spaces shall not be used as a plenum for air supply or
returns.
Part VII Plumbing - chapter 25 through 32.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 142/470
All plumbing shall comply with the Illinois state plumbing code.
Part VIII Electrical - chapters 33 through 42.
All electrical shall comply with the N.F.P.A. 70, national electrical code 2011 and the more stringent, City of Prospect Heights amendments to that
code.
a) The electrical chapters 33 through 42 of the International Residential Code 2012 may be referenced and shall apply when:
* The standards set forth are at least as stringent as the NEC 2011 as amended.
* The standards set forth are at least as stringent as the applicable city of Prospect Heights amendments.
* When the NEC 2011 and the City of Prospect Heights amendments are silent on a particular subject.
Chapter 41 - Swimming Pools
See appendix G and amendments to appendix G, for additional detailed requirements.
Part IX Chapter 44 Referenced Standards
All of the referenced standards listed in chapter 44 of the IRC 2012 edition are hereby adopted by the city of Prospect Heights.
Part X Appendices of the IRC 2012 edition:
Appendix G of the IRC 2012 edition - swimming pools, spas and hot tubs is hereby adopted and amended as follows:
Add the following new section AG101.1.1
Section AG101.1.1 General Overview Requirements For Swimming Pools, Spas And Hot Tubs.
a) All hot tubs and spas are required to have an approved safety cover.
b) Location:
* All pools must be 50% visible from inside your home.
* No shrub, bush, tree, structure, equipment or other impediment to vision, except the fence and gate, shall be placed as to impair the visibility of
the entire area of the pool surface from the side of the pool nearest the dwelling on the premises. In case of round or irregularly shaped pools
this "side" shall be considered as a projection of the face nearest the dwelling
* Pools must be 10 feet from any building, which includes the house, shed, garage, balcony, porch, deck or any accessory structure
* 10 feet is measured from the eave or edge of structure to the water edge
* The pool may not be installed over an easement
* Must be 10 feet away from any and all overhead power lines
* Must be 5 feet away, measured horizontally, from any underground power lines
* The distance is always measured horizontally from the waters edge of the pool
* Must be at least 5 feet from a side property line and at least 5 feet from a rear property line
c) Where a wall of a dwelling serves as part of the barrier of the pool, the following shall apply:
* All doors with direct access to the pool through that wall shall be equipped with an alarm which produces an audible warning when the door
and its screen (if present) are opened
* The alarm shall sound continuously for a minimum of 30 seconds immediately after the door is opened
* The alarm shall have a minimum sound pressure rating of 85 dBA at 10 feet and the sound of the alarm shall be distinctive from other
household sound such as smoke alarms, telephones and door bells
* The alarm shall automatically reset under all conditions
* The alarm shall be equipped with manual means, such as touch pads or switches, to deactivate the alarm temporarily for a single opening from
either direction
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 143/470
* Such deactivation shall last for not more than 15 seconds
* The deactivation touch pads or switches shall be located at least 54 inches above the threshold of the door
d) Barrier
A barrier is required for all swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. See section AG105.
e) Other Safeguards
When the pool is not in use under the supervision of the owner, his agent, tenant or other responsible person, all access gates or doors leading
directly to the pool area shall be securely locked, and/or other safeguards, such as an approved cover, shall be in place to provide protection
against the possibility of accidental falling into the pool by a person.
f) Grading And Site Drainage
* Maintain existing grading and site drainage. All unused excavated material shall be removed from the site
g) Electrical
* All electrical wiring required for pumps, lights and outlets must comply with the national electric code
* No extension cords are permitted
* All wiring must be ground fault protected
* A single twist lock receptacle is permitted between 5 feet and 10 feet of the inside edge of the pool, ground fault protected, for the pump
* All other outlets must be ground fault protected and at least 10 feet from the inside edge of the pool
* For all pools at a dwelling unit, a receptacle is required between 10 feet and 20 feet from the inside edge of the pool, ground fault protected
* No lighting fixture shall be installed over a pool or within 5 feet horizontally of the inside walls of a pool unless it is located at least 12 feet
above the maximum water level
h) Water Supply
* The water supply for the pool must be taken from a sill cock connected to a house water service and must include a vacuum breaker or back
flow prevention device
* The swimming pool shall not collect or hold stagnant or improperly treated water
* The pool may not be drained on any other property
* The pool must be drained to the curb or gutter located along an adjacent street during warm weather
i) Permit Procedures
If the pool, hot tub or spa holds more than 1,000 gallons of water, or has a depth of 24 inches or greater, a permit is required for construction of
installation. A permit is required for all hot tubs and spas.
1. Obtain a pool permit application from the building department
2. Submit the completed application along with two (2) copies of each of the following:
a) Plat of survey indicating proposed location of the pool
b) With distances from property lines dimensions
c) A grading plan for the pool is needed if excavation or filling or any change of grade is required
d) The manufacturer's specifications for the pool and filter, if the pool is above ground
e) The set of architectural plans if the pool is in ground
j) Illegible Plans Will Not Be Accepted
k) Call JULIE joint utility location information for excavating at 1-800-892-0123, for utility line location information, JULIE is a free service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 144/470
Appendix G - Section AG102 - Definitions Omitted
Appendices L - P - Delete in Entirety
(Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-2-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or the code adopted herein, shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-2-4: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
A. Detached Garages: Grade beam construction permitted consisting of a four inch (4") concrete floor poured monolithically with a minimum of eighteen
inches (18") thickened outer edge a width of twenty inches (20") around perimeter of building. Said grade beam to be of equal depth and on
undisturbed soil. Floor to be reinforced with 6 x 6 x 10/10 w.w. mesh and grade beam to contain two (2) #4 bars continuous two inches (2") from
bottom.
B. Garden Sheds: Above requirements shall not apply to any metal or wood accessory structure one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area and under.
Said accessory structure must be safely anchored to grade with approved ground anchors. The proposed method of anchorage must be submitted to
the Building and Zoning Administrator and included in the application for permit.
All wood accessory structures in direct contact with the ground shall have treated (moisture resistant) sill members at all points of contact with grade.
(Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-2-5: MINIMUM HEATING STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS:
Every owner or manager of any residential building with two (2) or more dwelling units located within the City shall maintain, or otherwise make available
for optional use by any tenant or occupant, sufficient heat for a minimum temperature of sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (65F) in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and hallways located within each dwelling unit at all times between October 1 and April 30. Should the outside temperature fall below fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (50F) at any other time of the year at the official weather station at O'Hare Airport, the provisions of the previous sentence will apply.
It shall be the duty of the building official to enforce the provisions of this section. Any owner or manager of any building or part thereof that is found to be
in violation of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each and every offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day a violation occurs or continues to exist. (Ord.
0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
Chapter 3
MECHANICAL CODE
4-3-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A certain document, entitled the International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, and all appendices thereto, published by the International Code Council, is
hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the City of Prospect Heights. Three (3) copies of the document shall be kept on file with the City Clerk. (Ord. 0-
19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-3-2: ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, and all appendices thereto, published by the International Code Council is amended as follows:
A. Governing Principles:
1. The City Of Prospect Heights Amendments: The city of Prospect Heights amendments to the IBC, the IRC, other amendments, the zoning ordinance
and municipal ordinances shall supersede all sections of all of the adopted model codes.
2. Conflicts: Whenever two (2) codes are in conflict, the more stringent requirement shall govern.
B. General Amendments:
1. Furnaces: Attic furnaces and crawl space furnaces are not permitted unless clearance and access, per code is provided.
2. Concrete Pad: All gas fired furnaces shall be placed on a minimum of two inches (2") of concrete or on a solid one and one-half inch (11/2") precast
concrete pad. (The precast pad may be under the furnace only, and extend a few inches beyond the perimeter of the unit's footprint.) Furnaces may
be placed directly on basement floor slabs.
3. Air Conditioning Equipment: Air conditioning equipment, including pads, condensing units, heat pumps, etc., are not permitted in the required side
yard setbacks (per zoning ordinance).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 145/470
4. Dryer Vents: All dryer vents shall be metal or metal flex. Nonmetallic vents for dryers are not permitted. See section 504.6 and amendment to section
504.6.
5. Ductwork: All ductwork shall be a closed system and in compliance with the International Mechanical Code section 603. Use of a stud space or joist
space for a supply or plenum return is not permitted. Gypsum ducts are not permitted. Delete sections 603.5 and 603.5.1.
6. Furnaces On Wood Floors: Provide a one and one-half inch (11/2") precast concrete pad under all furnaces which are set on a wood floor (or use 2
layers of 1/2 inch dura rock or a 2 inch thickness of poured concrete).
7. Exhaust Fans: All bathroom, shower and powder room exhaust fans shall have insulated ductwork.
C. Energy Efficiency: Any and all references in this code (IMC), relating requirements of the International Energy Conservation Code to single-family
dwellings and townhomes are hereby deleted.
D. Specific Amendments:
Section 306.3 Appliances In Attics
Attic furnaces are not permitted unless specifically approved by the building official.
Section 306.4 Appliances Under Floors
Furnaces in the crawlspace or other appliances under floors are not permitted unless specifically approved by the building official.
Section 602.3 Stud Cavity And Joist Space Plenums - Not Permitted
Delete this section in its entirety. Stud cavity and joist space plenums are not permitted.
Section 603.5.1 Gypsum Ducts - Not Permitted
Delete this section in its entirety. The use of gypsum board to form ducts is not permitted.
Section 910 Floor Furnaces - Not Permitted
Delete this section in its entirety. Floor furnaces are not permitted.
Section 922 Kerosene And Oil-Fired Stoves - Not Permitted
Delete this section in its entirety. Kerosene and oil-fired stoves are not permitted.
Chapter 15 Referenced Standards
All of the referenced standards listed in chapter 15 of the IMC 2012 edition are hereby adopted by the city of Prospect Heights.
Appendix A
Appendix A of the IMC 2012 edition is hereby adopted by the city of Prospect Heights.
(Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-3-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-19-
06, 2-25-2019)
Chapter 4
PLUMBING CODE
4-4-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 146/470
The 2014 State of Illinois Plumbing Code is hereby adopted. (Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-4-2: ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
City shall follow the 2014 State Plumbing Code by statute. (Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-4-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-19-
06, 2-25-2019)
Chapter 4A
ELECTRICAL CODE
4-4A-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A certain document, entitled the National Electric Code, 2011 edition, and all appendices thereto, published by the National Fire Protection Association,
Inc. (NFPA), is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the City of Prospect Heights. Three (3) copies of the document shall be kept on file with the City
Clerk. (Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-4A-2: ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
National Electric Code, 2011 edition, and all appendices thereto, published by the NFPA is amended as follows:
A. The City Of Prospect Heights Amendments: The city of Prospect Heights amendments to the IBC, the IRC, other amendments, the zoning ordinance
and municipal ordinances shall supersede all sections of all of the adopted model codes.
B. Conflicts: Whenever two (2) codes are in conflict, the more stringent requirement shall govern.
C. Licensed, Bonded And Registered: All electrical work shall be performed by a licensed and bonded electrician who is also registered with the City of
Prospect Heights building department. The electrical license must be one which was acquired by passing a written electrical examination offered by an
approved municipality or City. The electrician(s) shall provide a legible copy of their electrical license, to the building department, with the application for
registration.
D. Deleted Articles: The following articles of the 2011 NEC are hereby deleted in their entirety; and are not permitted:
Article
320 Armored cable
324 Type FCC flat conductor cable
326 Type IGS integrated gas spacer cable
330 Metal clad cable
332 Mineral insulated, metal sheathed
334 Nonmetallic sheathed cable
338 Service entrance cable
356 Liquid flexible nonmetallic conduit
362 Electrical nonmetallic tubing
378 Nonmetallic wireways
382 Nonmetallic extensions surface
388 Nonmetallic raceways
394 Concealed knob and tube wiring
398 Open wiring on insulators
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 147/470
E. Indoor Use Only; Power And Control Tray Cable: Type TC as presented in article 336, shall be permitted for indoor use only. Outdoor or exterior
installations of this product shall not be permitted.
F. Nonmetallic Auxiliary Gutters; Not Permitted: Nonmetallic auxiliary gutters as presented in article 366, are not permitted.
G. Aluminum Conductors; Not Permitted: Aluminum conductors shall not be permitted. (All electrical conductors shall be copper.) Nonmetallic sheathed
cable, mineral insulated, metal sheathed cable, flexible nonmetallic conduit, rigid nonmetallic conduit and boxes, armored cable and flat conductor
cable are all not permitted. (PVC type conduit shall be permitted underground.)
H. GFCI Protected: All switches, receptacles and light fixtures in a toilet room, bathroom, powder room, shower, etc., shall be GFCI protected (ref. 210.8A
of the NEC).
I. Arc Fault Circuit; Interrupter Protection: All branch circuits that supply one hundred twenty five (125) volt, single-phase, fifteen (15) and twenty (20)
ampere outlets installed in dwelling unit bedrooms shall be protected by an arc fault circuit interrupter listed to provide protection of the entire branch
circuit (per article 210.12(B) of the NEC).
J. Carbon Monoxide Detectors: Carbon monoxide detectors shall be provided as follows:
1. Outside each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms (within 15 feet).
2. On every floor on which a fossil fuel burning boiler or furnace is located and/or in a room in which the furnace or water heater is located.
3. On every floor in which sleeping rooms are heated by any type of warm air heating plant that burns fossil fuel.
Ref: State of Illinois 91st general assembly legislation 91-HB0603 engrossed.
K. Rigid Conduit Required:
1. All exterior aboveground conduit shall be rigid galvanized pipe.
2. All service entrance conductor conduit to the first disconnect enclosure shall be rigid galvanized pipe.
3. All outside aboveground conduit and ground rod conduit shall be rigid galvanized pipe.
Exception: Air conditioning condensers may utilize liquid tight metal flexible conduit. If flexible conduit is over six feet zero inches (6'0"), it must
include a ground wire bonded to the disconnect enclosure and the condenser. GFCI protection is not required on dedicated circuits.
L. Service Panel: All service panels and subpanels shall be installed with a main breaker in the panel. All breakers shall be in one inch (1") width.
Whenever the electric meter is more than five feet zero inches (5'0") from the panel, an outside service disconnect breaker is required at the electric
meter. A minimum one hundred (100) amp service with (minimum) twenty (20) circuit positions is required. Homes in excess of one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet, excluding basement, must be equipped with (minimum) two hundred (200) amp service with (minimum) thirty (30) circuits
positions.
M. One Service For A Single-Family Dwelling:
1. Only one electrical service shall be permitted to a single-family dwelling (ref. article 230.2).
2. All subpanels shall be fed through the main panel, located in the dwelling (ref. article 230.40).
N. Interior Underground Installations: Rigid galvanized or underground PVC conduit may be used under all interior concrete slab construction. All slab and
foundation wall penetrations must be rigid galvanized conduit which is grounded (ref. article 250.80).
O. Exterior Underground Installations; Minimum Cover Requirements:
1. Exterior belowground conduit may be rigid galvanized (minimum) six inches (6") deep, or
2. Electrical grade PVC type nonmetallic conduit (minimum) eighteen inches (18") deep, or
3. Type "UF" cable with ground conductor (minimum) twenty four inches (24") deep. Table 300.5 in the NEC.
P. Interior Conduits: All new interior electrical installations shall be piped in rigid or EMT (minimum 1/2 inch) Greenfield whips up to six feet zero inches
(6'0") as needed. (BX armored cable is not permitted.)
Q. Garages: All garages shall have a minimum of two (2) wall outlet receptacles plus one additional outlet in the ceiling for each overhead garage door. All
wall outlets in the garage shall be GFCI protected. At least one ceiling light is required for each bay, plus one outside light at each exterior service door
and one light on each side of the overhead doors.
R. Dedicated Circuits: A dedicated circuit is an individual branch circuit that supplies only one piece of utilization equipment. Heating and cooling systems,
sump pumps, sewage ejectors, washers and dryers shall be installed on their own separate dedicated circuits. A single receptacle is required for
pumps and ejectors. Provide a readily accessible on-off switch on heating and cooling systems. GFCI protection is not required on dedicated circuits.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 148/470
S. Plaster Rings: All plaster rings shall be for five-eighths inch (5/8") gypsum board.
Plaster rings at garage ceilings shall be for one and one-fourth inch (11/4") gypsum board, when there is habitable space, a closet or storage room
above the garage.
T. Low Voltage Wiring In Commercial Buildings: "Low voltage wiring" shall be defined as wires/cables which are used for fire alarms, burglar alarms,
telephone, intercoms, security systems, computer cable, CATV, doorbells, thermostats and the like.
1. Plenum Rated: All low voltage wiring shall be "plenum rated", cables or wires.
2. Concealed Areas: When concealed, low voltage wiring/cables are not required to be in conduit. "Concealed" shall be defined as follows:
a. Located within a gypsum board partition;
b. Located within a floor/ceiling assembly in which the ceiling is gypsum board, suspended acoustical ceiling panel and grid, or similar;
c. Located in a tray or runway that is located above the bottom cord of bar joists in a warehouse space.
3. Exposed Areas: Low voltage wiring is required to be in EMT conduit in all exposed areas, in the interior of a building and rigid conduit on the exterior
of buildings.
Some examples of exposed areas are as follows:
a. Vertically on a wall and not concealed in the wall;
b. Horizontal runs which are below the top of the bar joists or ceiling assembly;
c. Any location where one can see the wires.
Exception: Low voltage wires may run exposed at the top or bottom of the bar joists providing that the wires are bundled with ties and that proper
hangers are installed at regular intervals to prevent sagging, or installed on cable trays.
U. Low Voltage Wiring In Single-Family Dwellings And Townhouses: Low voltage wiring and cables are not required to be in conduit for single-family
homes and townhomes and are not required to be plenum rated.
(Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-4A-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-19-
06, 2-25-2019)
Chapter 4B
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
4-4B-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A certain document, entitled the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, and all appendices thereto, published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Prospect Heights. Three (3) copies of the document shall be kept on file with
the City Clerk. (Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-4B-2: ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, and all appendices thereto, published by the International Code Council is amended as follows:
A. Governing Principles:
1. The City Of Prospect Heights Amendments: The city of Prospect Heights amendments to the IBC, the IRC, other amendments, the zoning ordinance
and municipal ordinances shall supersede all sections of all of the adopted codes.
2. Conflicts: Whenever two (2) codes are in conflict, the more stringent requirement shall govern.
B. Specific Amendments:
Section 101.1 Title
These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code Of The City Of Prospect Heights, hereinafter referred to as "this code".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 149/470
Section 103.5 Fees
See city code for applicable fees.
Section 302.4: Grass and Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be kept free from weeds or plant growth in excess of eight (8) inches. All
noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all non-native plantings or all non-ornamental grasses, annual plants and vegetation,
other than trees or shrubs: provided however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers, gardens, or natural landscaping.
Section 302.09: Defacement of Property/Graffiti Removal:
A. For the purposes of this Section, the term "graffiti" shall mean the inscription on a wall, fence, sign, other structure, sidewalk, pavement, post,
stone, tree or other natural object by carving, application of paint or other substance, or other means of any symbol (including any letter, word,
numeral, emblem or combination thereof), picture or other character placed thereon, other than as permitted by the ordinances of the City.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner of the real property on which is located any structure, improvement or object on which any graffiti is placed to
fail to remove, cover or otherwise eradicate such graffiti within seven (7) working days from its placement on his property. In the event the owner
fails to remove, cover or otherwise eradicate the graffiti within such time, the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause notice to be served, either by
personal service on the owner or his agent or mailed by certified mail to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last
preceding year, which notice shall state a date, no less than seven (7) days later than the date of personal service or mailing to remove, cover or
otherwise eradicate such graffiti or be subject to penalty.
Section 302.10 Outside Storage Prohibited: No household items, motorized machinery or equipment, bicycle parts, items for sale, goods,
inventory, or equipment or other items, which may be similar, shall be stored outside of a fully enclosed structure unless otherwise authorized by this
Code. All exterior properties and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition, free of rubbish, debris, and waste matter.
Section 302.11 Bicycles, grills, and refuse, recycling and yard waste containers: if stored outside, shall not be placed in plain view from a public
street nor be a nuisance to any adjacent property. Proper concealment methods include: solid brick and/or wood enclosures or intense landscaping
that is effective during all seasons. This paragraph shall not apply to the wheeled carts listed as approved receptacles when stored in the side or rear
yard.
Section 302.12 REMOVAL OF DEAD, DYING OR DISEASED TREES OR LIMBS:
(a) Where the Director of Building & Development and City Arborist appears in this section, it shall mean the Director, City Arborist or authorized
designee.
(b) The owner of a lot or parcel of land containing any dead, dying or diseased trees, which constitute a hazard to persons or property, or any
dead, dying or diseased limbs, which constitute a hazard to persons or property, shall remove promptly such trees and limbs when required to do
so by the Director of Building & Development or City Arborist.
(c) Notice to remove said trees and limbs shall be served upon the owner and shall cause said trees and limbs to be removed upon receipt of such
notice.
If the hazard constitutes an immediate public safety concern, the Department of Public Works may perform the necessary removal work
immediately and all costs incurred therefor shall be assessed against the owner.
(d) If an owner fails to remove said trees and limbs within 15 days after receipt of notice to remove served pursuant to this Section, the Department
of Public Works may perform the necessary removal and all costs incurred therefor shall be assessed against the owner.
Section 304.3 Premises Identification
Address numbers are required and shall be a minimum of 6 (six) inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch.
Section 304.14 Insect Screens
During the period January 1 to December 31, insect screens shall be provided as necessary.
Section 304.20 Holiday Decorations:
Decorations on private property clearly incidental and customary and commonly associated with national, local or religious holidays, provided they
shall be displayed as follows:
a) Holidays between March 1st and November 14, shall not be placed more than 30 days prior to the holiday and shall be removed no later than
30 days after the holiday.
b) Holidays between November 15 and the last day of February, shall not be placed more than 45 days prior to the holiday and shall be removed
no later than 45 days after the holiday.
Section 602.3 Minimum Heating Standards for Single Family Residential Buildings:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 150/470
Heat Supply: A minimum temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit shall be provided at all times from October 1 to April 15 in place of [Date] to [Date].
Delete: Exception #2.
Add Section 602.3.1: Minimum Heating Standards for Multi-Unit Residential Buildings:
Every owner or manager of any residential building with two (2) or more dwelling units located within the city shall maintain, or otherwise make
available for optional use by any tenant or occupant, sufficient heat for a minimum temperature of sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (65F) in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and hallways located within each dwelling unit at all times between October 1 and April 30. Should the outside
temperature fall below fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50F) at any other time of the year at the official weather station at O'Hare airport, the provisions of
the previous sentence will apply.
It shall be the duty of the building official to enforce the provisions of this section. Any owner or manager of any building or part thereof that is
found to be in violation of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each and every offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day a violation
occurs or continues to exist.
Section 602.4 (Occupiable Work Spaces):
October 1 to April 15 in place of [Date] to [Date].
Chapter 8 - Referenced Standards
The referenced standards listed in chapter 8 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition are hereby adopted by the city of
Prospect Heights.
(Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-4B-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-19-
06, 2-25-2019)
Chapter 4C
FUEL GAS CODE
4-4C-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A certain document, entitled the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition, and all appendices thereto, published by the International Code Council, is
hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Prospect Heights. Three (3) copies of the document shall be kept on file with the City Clerk. (Ord. 0-
19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-4C-2: ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition, and all appendices thereto, published by the International Code Council is amended as follows:
A. The City Of Prospect Heights Amendments: The city of Prospect Heights amendments to the IBC, the IRC, other amendments, the zoning ordinance
and municipal ordinances shall supersede all sections of all of the adopted model codes.
B. Conflicts: Whenever two (2) codes are in conflict, the more stringent requirement shall govern.
(Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-4C-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-19-
06, 2-25-2019)
Chapter 4D
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
4-4D-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 151/470
A certain document, entitled the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition and all appendices thereto, published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Prospect Heights. Three (3) copies of the document shall be kept on file with
the City Clerk. (Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-4D-2: ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition, and all appendices thereto, published by the International Code Council is amended as follows:
A. The City Of Prospect Heights Amendments: The city of Prospect Heights amendments to the IBC, IRC and other amendments, the zoning ordinance
and municipal ordinances shall supersede all sections of all of the adopted model codes.
(Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-4D-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-19-
06, 2-25-2019)
Chapter 5
BUILDING PERMITS AND FEES
4-5-1: BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED:
No building permit required pursuant to the building code of the city shall be issued until the fee(s) prescribed herein has been paid. No amendment to a
permit shall be approved until the additional fee(s), if any, due because of an increase in the estimated cost of the building or structure has been paid.
(Ord. 0-03-09, 3-17-2003, eff. 3-27-2003)
4-5-2: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
The fee for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy required by the provisions of the applicable building code shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
certificate. (Ord. 0-03-09, 3-17-2003, eff. 3-27-2003)
4-5-3: PERIODICAL AND ANNUAL INSPECTION FEES:
Whenever periodical, semiannual or annual inspections are required by the provisions of the building or adopted codes of the city to verify code
compliance, a fee of forty dollars ($40.00) shall be charged to the owner, agent or tenant conducting business at the inspected property. The fee for an
office (business) suite shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00). A fifty dollar ($50.00) reinspection fee shall be assessed for each reinspection should more
than one reinspection be required to achieve compliance. All fees shall be paid prior to a reinspection. (Ord. 0-03-09, 3-17-2003, eff. 3-27-2003)
4-5-4: BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
The minimum fee for any permit to alter, remodel, repair or underpin any residential building, accessory structures or parts thereof as required by this
chapter, shall be one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) provided the valuation of the work authorized by said permit does not exceed ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00). The fee for any permit to alter, remodel, repair or underpin any residential building, accessory structures or parts thereof if the
valuation of the work authorized by the permit exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be as proscribed in subsection A2 of this section.
A. Single-Family And Multi-Family Residential Building Permits:
1. Additions: Addition permits shall cost one dollar forty cents ($1.40) per square foot of the addition. For the purposes of permit fee calculation,
"addition" is defined as square footage outside the original structure.
2. Remodeling: Remodeling permits shall cost one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) for the first ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of valuation plus
twelve dollars ($12.00) for each additional one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of valuation or fraction thereof.
3. New Construction: New residential construction permits shall cost one dollar twenty cents ($1.20) per square foot. This section shall not include the
attached garage footage in the calculation.
4. Demolition: Demolition permits for residential buildings shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
B. Commercial Building Permits:
1. Industrial Or Commercial: New industrial and commercial construction permits shall cost two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) of valuation, plus twelve dollars ($12.00) for each additional one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of valuation or fraction thereof up
to one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). Thereafter, the fee shall be eight dollars fifty cents ($8.50) for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of
valuation or fraction thereof for valuation in excess of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and less than five million dollars ($5,000,000.00).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 152/470
Thereafter, the fee shall be six dollars seventy five cents ($6.75) for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of valuation or fraction thereof for
valuation in excess of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00).
2. Demolition: Demolition permits for industrial and commercial buildings and accessory structures shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00).
C. Not For Profit Organization Fees: Fees for not for profit organizations that are approved and registered pursuant to applicable state and federal statutes
shall be sufficient to cover the city's out of pocket costs only. Out of pocket costs relate to payments to service providers necessary for project review,
inspection and completion.
D. Valuation: An applicant for a commercial or remodeling building permit shall give the estimated cost of the proposed improvement, but for purposes of
establishing the valuation, the building department shall use the most recent copy of the "Means Square Foot Costs" on file in the building department.
(Ord. 0-03-09, 3-17-2003, eff. 3-27-2003)
E. Outside Consultant: In the event the city is required to utilize consulting, engineering, inspection or legal services in the review of any building plans or
construction drawings, or in any phase of a permitted project, the applicant shall be required to reimburse the city for the actual costs incurred by the
city for those review services. This provision shall be read as a fee in addition to other fees charged pursuant to a permit issued under this code. (Ord.
0-05-32, 8-22-2005)
F. Engineering Plan Review: The city engineer will determine if construction within the city limits will require a site engineering plan review. If a site
engineering plan review is required, the cost of said review shall be set forth in the following table:
Construction Type Fee
Residential construction:
New single-family residence $750.00
Additions with footprint increase of 20% or more 500.00
Additions with footprint increase of less than 20% 250.00
Remodeling (if engineering review required) 100.00
Detached garage 100.00
Accessory structures (sheds, pools, sidewalks, gazebos, etc.) 75.00
Site grading permits 75.00
Additional inspections (compliant, code violation, etc.) 50.00
Commercial/industrial construction (based on estimated construction cost):
$0.00 to $25,000.00 2.5% of construction value
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00 2.5% of construction value
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 2.0% of construction value
$100,001.00 to $250,000.00 2.0% of construction value
$250,001.00 to $500,000.00 1.5% of construction value
$500,001.00 and above 1.5% of construction value
Parking lots:
New parking lot $ 750.00
Reconstruction 500.00
Resurfacing 250.00
Other:
Special flood hazard area development 50% additional to standard fee
Demolition, residential (building department fee) $ 500.00
Demolition, commercial:
Up to 5,000 square feet 1,000.00
5,001 to 25,000 square feet 2,500.00
25,001 to 50,000 square feet 5,000.00
50,001 to 75,000 square feet 7,500.00
75,001 square feet and over 10,000.00
Out of pocket 100% reimbursed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 153/470
(Ord. 0-07-07, 3-5-2007; amd. Ord. 0-10-36, 10-25-2010, eff. 11-5-2010)
G. Penalty For Building Projects Without An Approved Building Permit: The penalty for building without a permit is set to a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00)
or the cost of the permit, up to five hundred dollars ($500.00), whichever is greater. This subsection requires the violator to: pay the permit cost, the
penalty, and stop work until the building department approves a building permit for the project. Such approval will occur within a reasonable time, within
the confines of seasonal demand for services, holiday schedules, and building code regulations. The project may commence when the permit applicant
has received approval and paid necessary fines and fees.
H. Penalty For Noncompliant (Failed) Reinspections: The penalty for failure to pass a reinspection shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). This reinspection fee shall
be paid prior to scheduling another reinspection. Any subsequent reinspection for same shall be an additional fifty dollars ($50.00) per reinspection until
approved. (Ord. 0-03-09, 3-17-2003, eff. 3-27-2003)
4-5-5: SWIMMING POOL PERMIT FEES:
The fee for a permit to construct a swimming pool shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00) with an additional zoning review fee of thirty five dollars ($35.00).
All inground pools shall be considered accessory structures and the fee shall be as prescribed in subsection 4-5-4A2 of this chapter. (Ord. 0-03-09, 3-17-
2003, eff. 3-27-2003)
4-5-6: FENCE PERMIT FEES:
The fee for a permit to construct, alter or erect a fence shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) for a fence up to seventy feet (70') in length. The fee for fences
greater than seventy feet (70') in length shall be thirty five dollars ($35.00). In addition to these fees, a zoning review fee of thirty five dollars ($35.00) shall
be applicable to all fence permits. (Ord. 0-03-09, 3-17-2003, eff. 3-27-2003)
4-5-7: ELECTRICAL PERMIT FEES:
The permit fees for electrical installations and alterations shall be as follows:
A. The minimum permit fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Fixture, replacement, underground subfeed to a garage, shed, exterior lighting, air condenser replacement or any switch or outlet replacement.
2. Electrical service upgrade or replacement for single-family residences shall be as follows:
100 amp $ 70.00
200 amp 100.00
400 amp 120.00
600 amp 150.00
3. In addition to the above permit fees, a fifty dollar ($50.00) inspection fee shall be required per inspection.
4. Commercial electrical service fees are included in the commercial building permit fee as prescribed in subsection 4-5-4B of this chapter. (Ord. 0-03-
09, 3-17-2003, eff. 3-27-2003)
4-5-8: PLUMBING PERMIT FEES:
The fees for the installation, alteration or extension of a plumbing system shall be:
A. A minimum permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for residential structures, which shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Private well drilling permit fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
2. All commercial plumbing fees are included in the commercial building permit fee as prescribed in subsection 4-5-4B of this chapter.
3. Fire suppression system fee shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00), plus ninety cents ($0.90) per head. (Ord. 0-03-09, 3-17-2003, eff. 3-27-2003)
4-5-9: MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION FEES:
Mechanical equipment permit fees other than air conditioning, refrigeration, elevators or fire protection systems shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for residential
properties and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for industrial and commercial properties. These fees shall not include, nor be limited to, the following
mechanical equipment:
A. Residential: HVAC system water heaters.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 154/470
B. Commercial: Rooftop mechanical systems and water heaters in excess of two hundred (200) gallons and all hydronic boilers. (Ord. 0-03-09, 3-17-2003,
eff. 3-27-2003)
4-5-10: PLAN EXAMINATION FEES:
A. For single-family home: Seventy dollars ($70.00).
B. For detached garages and accessory structures for single-family homes: Thirty five dollars ($35.00).
C. For single-family home additions or alterations: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
D. Commercial building plan review fees: The minimum plan review fee for construction value of less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00). For commercial plan reviews conducted by outside consultants the applicant shall be required to reimburse the city for the
actual costs incurred by the city for those review services. In addition, the following permit fees shall be added when applicable:
1. Mechanical: Add fifteen percent (15%) of the base fee.
2. Plumbing: Add fifteen percent (15%) of the base fee.
3. Electrical: Add fifteen percent (15%) of the base fee.
4. Fire protection: Add five percent (5%) of the base fee. (Ord. 0-03-09, 3-17-2003, eff. 3-27-2003)
4-5-11: ELEVATOR INSPECTION FEES:
A. For each elevator servicing a building up to and including three (3) floors: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
B. Each additional reinspection: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
C. An elevator inspector authorized by the city will conduct an annual inspection of each elevator. Such inspections must be made at reasonable times and
upon reasonable notice to and with the consent of the owner or occupant, except when an emergency requires immediate action. (Ord. 0-03-09, 3-17-
2003, eff. 3-27-2003)
4-5-12: FUEL STORAGE TANK PERMIT FEES:
A. The permit fee for a heating fuel storage tank in conjunction with other construction:
0 - 2,000 gallons $36.00
Over 2,000 gallons 48.00
B.The permit fee for fuel storage tanks of flammable liquids:
1,065 gallons or less $100.00
1,066 to 7,000 gallons 150.00
7,001 to 25,000 gallons 200.00
25,001 to 50,000 gallons 300.00
50,001 to 100,000 gallons 400.00
Over 100,000 gallons 500.00
(Ord. 0-03-09, 3-17-2003, eff. 3-27-2003)
4-5-13: ENGINEERING FEES:
No building permit required by the code of this city that affects the building's exterior footprint, drainage, value of property in floodplain, impervious square
footage of property or construction that can adversely effect the city's infrastructure shall be issued without the city engineer's or designee's approval. The
fees to be charged for either engineering plan review or inspection shall be as follows:
A. Residential (Single-Family And Multi-Family):
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 155/470
1. New construction: New residential construction permits will cost five hundred dollars ($500.00) for review and will include preliminary and final
inspections.
2. Additions:
a. Significant additions where the footprint of the house is increased by twenty percent (20%) or more and/or grading is required will cost five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for review and will include preliminary and final inspections.
b. Significant additions where the footprint of the house is increased by twenty percent (20%) or more and grading is not required will cost two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and include preliminary and final inspections.
c. Additions where the increase is less than twenty percent (20%) will cost seventy five dollars ($75.00) and include preliminary and final inspections.
3. Remodeling:
a. Remodeling where construction value is greater than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) will cost the following:
In FEMA designated floodplain areas $125.00
Area not designated floodplain 75.00
b. Remodeling where construction value is less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) will cost seventy five dollars ($75.00) and include
preliminary and final inspections.
4. Detached garage: Review of detached garage construction will cost seventy five dollars ($75.00) and include preliminary and final inspections.
5. Pools, decks, patios, gazebos, sidewalks, inspection included: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
6. Sheds or other small accessory structures, inspection included: Twenty five dollars ($25.00).
7. Construction or maintenance work, inspection included, in ROW (including driveways and culverts): Fifty dollars ($50.00).
8. Site grading (not designated floodplain), inspection included: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
9. Site grading (in floodplain), inspection included: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
10. Floodplain determination, inspection not included: Thirty five dollars ($35.00).
11. LOMRs, LOMAs, etc., inspection not included: Thirty five dollars ($35.00).
Any additional inspections required for subsections A5 through A9 of this section due to complaints, code violations or improper construction practice
shall be considered additional to the original permit and charged in accordance with subsection 4-5-4H of this chapter.
B. Commercial Properties:
1. Industrial or commercial: The fees will be set as follows:
Estimated Cost Of Construction City Engineer Review Fees
$ 0.00to $ 25,000.00 2.5percent
25,001.00to 50,000.00 2.25percent
50,001.00to 100,000.00 2.0percent
100,001.00to 250,000.00 1.75percent
250,001.00to 500,000.00 1.50percent
500,001.00and over 1.25percent
C. Parking Lots: A permit is required for any resurfacing or reconstruction work performed on a parking lot. The plan review will cost five hundred dollars
($500.00) and will include two (2) inspections.
D. Subdivisions: For subdivision review fees refer to subsection 6-7-4C of this code. Any inspections due to unforeseen events or required reinspections
will be billed at fifty dollars ($50.00) per inspection.
E. Outside Fees: Any outside fees incurred by the engineering department for indirect mailings, copying costs or consulting fees deemed necessary by the
city engineer shall be reimbursed by the applicant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 156/470
F. Additional Fees: Additional fees may apply for projects with large impervious areas (greater than 25 percent of lot coverage) or set in floodplain. (Ord. 0-
03-09, 3-17-2003, eff. 3-27-2003)
4-5-14: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such violation continues unabated after ten (10) days from
receipt of notice. (Ord. 0-03-09, 3-17-2003, eff. 3-27-2003)
Chapter 6
NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION PROGRAM
4-6-1: CREATION AND GOALS OF PROGRAM:
There is hereby established a Neighborhood Preservation Program to:
A. Prevent the deterioration and abandonment of housing;
B. Preserve, coordinate and concentrate maintenance efforts by the City in designated neighborhoods;
C. Promote private investment in housing in those neighborhoods;
D. Promote community involvement in all such activities. (Ord. 0-77-8, 4-1-1977)
4-6-2: DESIGNATION OF NEIGHBORHOODS:
A. The City has conducted studies in consultation with community representatives to determine which neighborhoods within the City should be considered
for designation as Neighborhood Preservation Areas and will develop appropriate programs for each neighborhood so designated.
B. The City Council will adopt ordinances or resolutions, which shall have effective dates subsequent to public meetings at which the residents of the City
may comment upon any designations tentatively made of neighborhoods as Neighborhood Preservation Areas. (Ord. 0-77-8, 4-1-1977)
4-6-3: CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION OF AREAS:
An area meeting any of the following criteria will be eligible for designation as a Neighborhood Preservation Area:
A. Where the existing housing stock is now essentially sound but where private financial institutions and property owners have recently begun to withdraw
financing;
B. Where the housing stock has deteriorated but is in need of moderate rehabilitation only;
C. Where there are substantial numbers of housing units in violation of existing City building codes;
D. Where there have been recent increases in adverse housing indicators;
E. Where existing unique community resources distinguish the neighborhood, such as historical sites or buildings. (Ord. 0-77-8, 4-1-1977)
4-6-4: IMPLEMENTATION OF NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION PROGRAM:
Upon designation of a Neighborhood Preservation Area by the City, the City will transmit a communication to the Cook County Bureau of Administration,
office of the Chief Administrative Officer. This communication will include the following:
A. A legal description of the Neighborhood Preservation Area(s) designated by the City, and an official City map delineating the area.
B. A statement that the ordinance or resolution designating the Neighborhood Preservation Area did not become final until members of the public had an
opportunity to comment upon such designation.
C. A record of public services (as defined in section 570.200 of the January 1976, Federal Register), to be provided to the Neighborhood Preservation
Area(s) and a schedule of the use for Community Development Block Grant Funds to be applied to housing rehabilitation. (Ord. 0-77-8, 4-1-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 157/470
4-6-5: DESIGNATION OF FIRST NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION AREA:
After consultation with community representatives and the holding of a public hearing, the following area is designated as a Neighborhood Preservation
Area:
Area (A)The area located east of Wolf Road, north of Willow Road, south of Palatine Road and west of Milwaukee Avenue. (Ord. 0-77-8, 4-1-1977)
4-6-6: DESIGNATION OF AREAS IN NEED OF PLANNING STUDIES:
After consultation with community representatives and the holding of a public hearing, it is hereby found and determined that the following areas are in
need of planning studies, and that application for Community Development Block Grant Funds be made for such purpose:
A. The area located east of Wheeling Road, north of Euclid Avenue, south of Camp McDonald Road and west of Wolf Road, except that portion thereof
located in the Village of Mount Prospect and the City of Prospect Heights.
B. The area bounded on the west by Elmhurst Road, on the east by School Lane, on the south by Olive Avenue and on the north by Willow Road.
C. The area located east of Schoenbeck Road, north of Palatine Road, south of Stonegate Drive and west of Elmhurst Road.
D. The area located east of Wheeling Road, north of Olive Avenue extended, south of Willow Road extended and one-quarter (1/4) mile west of Coldren
Avenue.
E. The area bounded on the east by Dale Avenue extended, on the west by Lancaster Avenue, on the south by Olive Avenue and on the north by Willow
Road. (Ord. 0-77-8, 4-1-1977)
4-6-7: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT FUNDS:
After consultation with community representatives and the holding of a public hearing, it is found and determined that:
A. A housing assistance plan is needed for the entire City and that application for Community Development Block Grant Funds be made for such purpose.
B. The Maple Street bridge located on Maple Street, approximately one-eighth (1/8) mile south of Palatine Road is in urgent need of reconstruction and
that application be made for Community Development Block Grant Funds for such purpose. (Ord. 0-77-8, 4-1-1977)
4-6-8: LEGAL DESCRIPTIONS; MAP:
Legal descriptions are more specifically shown upon a map which is appended to and made a part of this Section, which map delineates the areas
designated in Sections 4-6-5, 4-6-6 and subsection 4-6-7B of this Chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 158/470
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 159/470
(Ord. 0-77-8, 4-1-1977)
Chapter 7
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
4-7-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
A. Findings: The City Council hereby finds that:
1. Excessive quantities of soil may erode from areas undergoing development for certain nonagricultural uses including, but not limited to, the
construction of residential dwelling units, commercial buildings and industrial plants, the building of roads and highways, and the creation of
recreational facilities;
2. The washing, blowing and falling of eroded soil across and upon roadways endangers the health and safety of users thereof by decreasing vision
and reducing traction of road vehicles;
3. Soil erosion necessitates the costly repairing of gulleys, washed out fills, and embankments;
4. Sediment from soil erosion and accumulated random debris both tend to clog sewers, waterways and ditches and to pollute and silt rivers, streams,
lakes and reservoirs;
5. The deliberate or unintentional disposition of sediment, debris or unwanted materials limits the use of water and waterways for most beneficial
purposes, promotes the growth of undesirable aquatic weeds, destroys fish and other desirable aquatic life, and is costly and difficult to remove; and
6. The deliberate or unintentional disposition of sediment, debris or unwanted materials interferes with, obstructs, restricts and reduces the efficient
conveyance capacity of waterways, resulting in increased chances of flooding which may create hazards to persons, damage to property and
threaten public health, safety, comfort and welfare.
B. Purpose: The Council therefore declares that the purpose of this Chapter is to safeguard persons, protect property, prevent damage to the environment,
and promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating and controlling the design, construction, use and maintenance of any development or other
activity which:
1. Disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise results in the excessive movement of earth; and
2. Results in the random and excessive accumulation of debris or unwanted materials in manmade or natural drainage and waterways situated in the
City.
C. Format Of Chapter: This Chapter is set up in two (2) parts:
Article A:Site Development; and
Article B:Preservation of Drainage and Waterways;
the provisions of this part of the Chapter providing general ordinance information. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter certain terms used herein are defined as set forth below:
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the City of Prospect Heights for the construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building.
CERTIFY OR CERTIFICATION: Formally attesting that the specific inspections and tests where required have been performed, and that such tests comply
with the applicable requirements of this Chapter.
CITY: The City of Prospect Heights, Cook County, Illinois.
CUBIC YARDS: The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by the method of "average end areas".
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FINAL GRADE: The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after the grading work is completed in accordance with the site development plan.
GRADING: Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
NATURAL DRAINAGE: Channels or swales formed in the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 160/470
PARCEL: All contiguous land in one ownership.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
PERSON: Any individual, firm or corporation, public or private, the State of Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or employee of any of the foregoing.
REMOVAL: Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction, or killing by spraying.
SITE: A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Altering terrain and/or vegetation and construction improvements.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A permit issued by the City for the construction or alteration of ground improvements and structures for the control of
erosion, runoff and grading.
STRIPPING: Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover including tree removal, clearing, and storage or removal of top soil.
VACANT: Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
WATERWAYS: A natural or artificial channel of perceptible extent, with definite bed and banks to confine and carry continuously or periodically flowing
storm and surface waters and drainage. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7-3: GENERAL PRINCIPLES:
A. Site Development (Article A): It is the objective of this part of the Chapter to control soil erosion and sedimentation caused by development activities in
the City. Measures taken to control erosion and sedimentation should be adequate to assure that sediment is not transported from the site by a storm
event of 10-year frequency or less. The following principles shall apply to all development activities within the City and to the preparation of the
submissions required under Article A of this Chapter:
1. Development should be related to the topography and soils of the site so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes where
high cuts and fills may be required should be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours should be followed as closely as possible.
2. Natural vegetation should be required, and protected wherever possible. Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses should be left
undisturbed wherever possible.
3. The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the shortest practical time during development.
4. Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins, or silt traps or filters should be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters
from land undergoing development.
5. The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures should be based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other events
likely to contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the risks, costs, and benefits involved.
6. In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics and the requirements of continuing maintenance should be considered.
7. Provision should be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.
Drainageways should be designed so that their final gradients and the resultant velocities of discharges will not create additional erosion.
8. Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed as soon as practical during development.
B. Preservation Of Drainage And Waterways (Article B):
1. It is the objective of this part of the Chapter to preserve natural drainage and waterways by:
a. Developing and implementing a maintenance plan, including and encouraging State, regional, special district and local community participation on
a regular and continuous basis.
b. Controlling the illegal depositing of debris.
2. The following principles shall apply to all drainage or waterway preservation activities within the City:
a. An annual maintenance plan should consist of an alternating inspection and work task program as follows:
Spring (March _ April)Inspection
Summer (May _ August)Maintenance tasks
Fall (September _ October)Reinspection
Winter (November _ February)Maintenance tasks
The "Handbook of Stream Preservation", as prepared by the Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Water Resources, shall be used as a
working guide for the maintenance plan.
b. Preservation or maintenance tasks should be a combined and cooperative effort on the part of interested participants. Although the primary effort
should come through community assistance, certain jurisdictional authorities are available for additional manpower and equipment support.
These agencies include:
State"Stream Preservation Program", Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Water Resources.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 161/470
Regional"Stream Maintenance", Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago.
LocalLocal Sanitary Districts, City Public Works, Community Service Organizations and Concerned Citizens.
c. The City should attempt to secure perpetual easements along drainage and waterways and right of entry easements from public streets to the
waterways at select locations in order to improve maintenance efficiency.
d. The City, in conjunction with other governmental agencies or planning commissions, should attempt to inform the public as to illegal depositing of
debris, suggested maintenance practices and recommended vegetative cover to establish the channel bank or slopes. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7-4: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Any person found to be violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations and correct all existing violations noted in the written notice. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
B. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection A of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine in an amount of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. Each
day during which any such violation is committed, continued or permitted shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981; amd. Ord. 0-19-
06, 2-25-2019)
C. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this chapter, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be required to restore the site to the condition existing prior to commission of the violation, or to bear the expense of such restoration.
D. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the City by
reason of such violation. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
ARTICLE A. SITE DEVELOPMENT
4-7A-1: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
4-7A-1-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no person shall commence or perform any grading, stripping, excavating or filling of land without having first
obtained a site development permit from the City Engineer. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7A-1-2: EXCEPTIONS:
A permit shall not be required for any of the following:
A. Development of a site of less than two and one-half (21/2) acres for residential use, or of less than one and one-half (11/2) acres for commercial or
industrial use; provided that the person responsible for any such development shall implement necessary erosion and sedimentation control measures
to satisfy the principles set forth in Section 4-7-3 of this Chapter;
B. Excavation below final grade for the basement and footings of a single-family residence and appurtenant structures on a site in excess of two and onehalf
(21/2) acres for which a building permit has been issued by the City.
C. Agricultural use of land, including the implementation of conservation measures included in a farm conservation plan approved by the Soil and Water
Conservation District, and including the construction of agricultural structures;
D. Installation, renovation or replacement of a septic system to serve an existing dwelling or structure. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7A-1-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Application for a site development permit shall be made by the owner of the property or his authorized agent to the City Engineer on a form furnished for
that purpose. Each application shall bear the name(s) and addresses of the owner or developer of the site and of any consulting firm retained by the
applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00).
Each application shall include certification that any land clearing, construction or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with
the plans approved upon issuance of the permit. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7A-1-4: SUBMISSIONS:
Each application for a site development permit shall be accompanied by the following information:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 162/470
A. A vicinity map in sufficient detail to enable easy location in the field of the site for which the permit is sought, and including the boundary line and
approximate acreage of the site, existing zoning and a legend and scale.
B. A development plan of the site showing:
1. Existing topography of the site and adjacent land within approximately one hundred feet (100') of the boundaries, drawn at no greater than two foot
(2') contour intervals and clearly portraying the conformation and drainage pattern of the area.
2. The location of existing buildings, structures, utilities, water bodies, flood plains, drainage facilities, vegetative cover, paved areas, and other
significant natural or manmade features on the site and adjacent land within approximately one hundred feet (100') of the boundary.
3. A general description of the predominant soil types on the site, their location and their limitations for the proposed use.
4. Proposed use of the site, including present development and planned utilization; areas of excavation, grading and filling; proposed contours, finished
grades and street profiles; provisions for storm drainage, including the control of accelerated runoff, with a drainage area map and computations;
kinds and locations of utilities; and areas and acreages proposed to be paved, covered, sodded or seeded, vegetatively stabilized or left undisturbed.
C. An erosion and sedimentation control plan showing:
1. All erosion and sedimentation control measures necessary to meet the objectives of this Chapter throughout all phases of construction and
permanently after completion of development of the site.
2. Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application,
and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures.
3. Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including easements, and estimates of the cost of maintenance.
4. Identification of the person(s) or entity which will have legal responsibility for maintenance of erosion control structures and measures after
development is completed.
D. The proposed phasing of development of the site, including stripping and clearing, rough grading and construction, and final grading and landscaping.
Phasing should identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, and the sequence of
clearing, installation of temporary sediment control measures, installation of storm drainage, paving streets and parking areas, and establishment of
permanent vegetative cover.
These submissions shall be prepared in accordance with the standards and requirements contained in "Procedures and Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control in Northeastern Illinois" prepared by the Northeastern Illinois Erosion and Sedimentation Control Steering Committee and
adopted by the North Cook County Soil and Water Conservation District, which standards and requirements are hereby incorporated into this Chapter
by reference.
The City Engineer may waive specific requirements for the content of submissions upon finding that the information submitted is sufficient to show that
the work will comply with the objectives and principles of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7A-1-5: BONDS:
The applicant may be required to file with the City a faithful performance bond or bonds, letter of credit or other improvement security satisfactory to the
City Attorney in an amount deemed sufficient by the City Engineer to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, maintenance of improvements and
landscaping for such period as specified by the City, and engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed
on the site. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7A-1-6: REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
Each application for a site development permit shall be reviewed and acted upon according to the following procedures:
A. The City Engineer will review each application for a site development permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this Chapter. The City
Engineer may also refer any application to the North Cook County Soil and Water Conservation District and/or any other local government or public
agency within whose jurisdiction the site is located for review and comment. Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the City Engineer
shall in writing:
1. Approve the permit application if it is found to be in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter, and issue the permit;
2. Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this Chapter, and
issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
3. Disapprove the permit application, indicating the deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission.
B. No site development permit shall be issued for an intended development site unless:
1. The development, including, but not limited to, subdivisions and planned unit development, has been approved by the City where applicable; or
2. Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building permit issued by the City, or
3. The proposed earth moving is coordinated with any overall development program previously approved by the City for the area in which the site is
situated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 163/470
C. Failure of the City Engineer to act on an original or revised application within thirty (30) days of receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in
accordance with the plans as filed unless such time is extended by agreement between the City Engineer and the applicant. Pending preparation and
approval of a revised plan, development activities shall be allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions established by the City Engineer. (Ord. 0-
81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7A-1-7: APPEALS:
The applicant, or any person or agency which received notice of the filing of the application, may appeal the decision of the City Engineer as provided in
Section 4-7A-1-6 of this Article to the City Council. Upon receipt of an appeal, the City Council shall schedule and hold a public hearing, after giving fifteen
(15) days' notice thereof. The City Council shall render a decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing. Factors to be considered on review shall include,
but need not be limited to, the effects of the proposed development activities on the surface water flow to tributary and downstream lands, any
comprehensive watershed management plans, or the use of any retention facilities; possible saturation of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural
and domestic; runoff surface waters that produce erosion and silting of drainageways; nature and type of soil or rock which when disturbed by the
proposed development activities may create earth movement and produce slopes that cannot be landscaped; and excessive and unnecessary scarring of
the natural landscape through grading or removal of vegetation. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7A-1-8: RETENTION OF PLANS:
Plans, specifications and reports for all site developments shall be retained in original form or on microfilm by the City Engineer. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7A-2: OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
4-7A-2-1: APPLICABILITY:
All grading, stripping, excavating and filling which is subject to the permit requirements of this Chapter, and any grading, stripping, excavating and filling
which is exempted from the permit requirement of subsection 4-7A-1-2A of this Article shall be subject to the applicable standards and requirements set
forth in this Section 4-7A-2. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7A-2-2: RESPONSIBILITY:
The permittee shall not be relieved of responsibility for damage to persons or property otherwise imposed by law, and the City or its officers or agents will
not be made liable for such damage by: a) the issuance of a permit under this Chapter, b) compliance with the provisions of that permit or with conditions
attached to it by the City Engineer, c) failure of City officials to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions, d) failure of City officials to
recommend denial of or to deny a permit, or e) exemptions from the permit requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7A-2-3: HANDBOOK ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The standards and specifications contained in "Procedures and Standards for Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Northeastern Illinois" cited in
Section 4-7A-1-4 of this Article, are hereby incorporated into this Section and made a part hereof by reference for the purpose of delineating procedures
and methods of operation under site development and erosion and sedimentation control plans approved under Section 4-7A-1 of this Article. In the event
of conflict between the provisions of said manual and of this Chapter, this Chapter shall govern. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7A-2-4: INSPECTION:
The City Engineer shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee
wherein the work fails to comply with the site development or erosion and sedimentation control plan as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating
and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the City Engineer shall be maintained at the site during progress of the work. In order to obtain
inspections, the permittee shall notify the City Engineer at least two (2) working days before the completion of:
A. Stripping and clearing,
B. Rough grading,
C. Final landscaping.
If stripping, clearing, grading and/or landscaping are to be done in phases or areas, the permittee shall give notice and request inspection at the
completion of each of the above work stages in each phase or area. If an inspection is not made and notification of the results given within five (5)
working days after notice is received by the City from the permittee, the permittee may continue work at his own risk, without presuming acceptance by
the City. Notification of the results of the inspection shall be given in writing at the site. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7A-2-5: SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS:
A. If at any stage of the grading of any development site the City Engineer determines by inspection that the nature of the site is such that further work
authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil any property, public way, watercourse or drainage structure, the City Engineer may require, as a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 164/470
condition of allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable special precautions to be taken as is considered advisable to avoid the likelihood of
such peril. "Special precautions" may include, but shall not be limited to, a more level exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities,
berms, terracing, compaction or cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion control, and recommendations of a registered soils engineer and/or
engineering geologist which may be made requirements for further work.
B. Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading on any development site is not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee
required to install temporary structures or take such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or the public safety. On large
developments or where unusual site conditions prevail, the City Engineer may specify the time of starting grading and time of completion or may
require that the operations be conducted in specific stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures or devices prior to the advent of
seasonal rains. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7A-2-6: AMENDMENT OF PLANS:
Major amendments of the site development or erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer and shall be processed and
approved or disapproved in the same manner as the original plans. Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the City Engineer by written
authorization to the permittee. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7A-2-7: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
Every site development permit shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within one hundred
eighty (180) days, or is not completed by a date which shall be specified in the permit; except that the City Engineer may, if the permittee presents
satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work being commenced or completed within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable
extension of time if written application is made before the expiration date of the permit. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7A-3: EXCEPTIONS AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
4-7A-3-1: EXCEPTIONS:
The City Council may, in accordance with the following procedures, authorize exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this
Chapter:
A. Application for any exception shall be made by a verified petition of the applicant for a site development permit, stating fully the grounds of the petition
and the facts relied upon by the applicant. Such petition shall be filed with the site development permit application. In order for the petition to be
granted, it shall be necessary that the City Council find all of the following facts with respect to the land referred to in the petition:
1. That the land is of such shape or size or is affected by such physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations of record that it is impossible or
impractical for the applicant to comply with all of the requirements of this Chapter;
2. That the exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; and
3. That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject property.
B. Each application for an exception shall be referred to the City Engineer for review. The City Engineer shall transmit his recommendations to the City
Council which shall review such recommendations prior to granting or denying the exception.
C. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on each application for exception, within thirty (30) days after receiving application, in the manner approved
with respect to appeals. After public hearing, the City Council may approve the site development permit application with the exceptions and conditions
it deems necessary or it may disapprove such site development permit application and exception application or it may take such other action as
appropriate. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7A-3-2: STOP WORK ORDER; REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
In the event any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this Chapter violates the terms of the permit, or carries on site development in such
a manner as to materially and adversely affect the health, welfare or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the development site or
so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the City Engineer may suspend or
revoke the site development permit.
A. Suspension of a permit shall be by a written stop work order issued by the City Engineer and delivered to the permittee or his agent or the person
performing the work. The stop work order shall be effective immediately, shall state the specific violations cited, and shall state the conditions under
which work may be resumed. A stop work order shall remain in effect until the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council at which the
conditions of subsection B of this Section can be met.
B. No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the City Council. Written notice of such hearing shall
be served on the permittee, either personally or by registered mail, and shall state:
1. The grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or revocation, in clear and concise language;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 165/470
2. The time when and place where such hearing will be held.
Such notice shall be served on the permittee at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given
an opportunity to be heard and may call witnesses and present evidence on his behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall
determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
ARTICLE B. PRESERVATION OF DRAINAGE AND WATERWAYS
4-7B-1: UNLAWFUL DEPOSITING OF DEBRIS:
The keeping or disposal of trash, debris, obstructions or unwanted materials, unless otherwise permitted, into storm sewers or manmade or natural
drainage and waterways or in areas identified as "flood plain", as defined in Title 7, Chapter 1 of this Code, is unlawful. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7B-2: OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
4-7B-2-1: APPLICABILITY:
All activities relating to the preservation or maintenance of drainage and waterways situated in the City shall be subject to the applicable standards and
requirements set forth in this Section 4-7B-2. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7B-2-2: RESPONSIBILITY:
A. The City, through its Public Works Department, shall develop and implement an annual maintenance plan, including and encouraging State, regional,
special district and local community participation on a regular and continuous basis.
B. The City or its officers or agents will not be made liable for damage to persons or property by: 1) completing the recommended work tasks of the said
maintenance plan, or 2) the failure of City officials to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7B-2-3: HANDBOOK ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The standards, specifications and procedures contained in the "Handbook of Stream Preservation", cited in subsection 4-7-3B2 of this Chapter are hereby
incorporated into this Section and made a part hereof by reference for the purpose of delineating procedures and methods of operation for the
preservation and maintenance of drainage and waterways in the City. In the event of conflict between provisions of said handbook and of this Chapter, this
Chapter shall govern. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7B-2-4: INSPECTION:
Duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties (either by existing grant
of easement or upon the request or permission of a property owner) for the purpose of inspection, observation and measurement, in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
4-7B-2-5: EASEMENTS AND RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The City or its officers or agents shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of completing maintenance work tasks described in the
maintenance plan or for accomplishing emergency services due to storm damage or unforeseen circumstances by either:
A. An existing grant of easement on the particular properties. Exhibit "A", following this Section and made a part hereof, tabulates existing recorded
easements along primary drainage and waterways situated in the City. This list shall be updated from time to time as additional easements are
secured.
B. A written "right-of-entry" statement signed by the property owner or an authorized agent or representative of the owner. Exhibit "B", following this
Section and made a part hereof, provides an acceptable right of entry statement permitting access to authorized employees of the City to perform
necessary maintenance or emergency work tasks.
EXHIBIT "A"
RECORDED EASEMENTS FOR DRAINAGE PURPOSES ALONG
WATERWAYS IN THE CITY OF PROSPECT HEIGHTS,
COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS
Width Location & Description Document No. Date
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 166/470
SECTION I (H.M. Cornell & Co.'s Camp McDonald Acres):
25 ft. Each side of centerline
along McDonald Creek 1078297 12-17-45
10 ft. North side of Lots 14, 27,
28 & 29 to McDonald Creek " "
10 ft. South side of Lots 41_51
to McDonald Creek " "
SECTION II (Feuerborn's Bonnie Brook No. 2):
10 ft. West side of centerline along
McDonald Creek 17221943 5-29-58
10 ft. Adjoining west side of above
Creek Easement " "
5. ft. North side of Lots 75_77
to McDonald Creek " "
5 ft. South side of Lot 74 to
McDonald Creek " "
5 ft. North side of Lot 71;
South side of Lot 70 to
McDonald Creek " "
10 ft. North side of Lot 69 to
McDonald Creek " "
5 ft. North side of Lots 65 & 66
to McDonald Creek " "
5 ft. South side of Lot 64 to
McDonald Creek " "
5 ft. North side of Lots 57, 62 & 63;
South side of Lots 54_56 to
McDonald Creek " "
10 ft. North side of Lots 50_52 to
McDonald Creek " "
SECTION III (Unsubdivided):
20 ft. North from Carl Court to
McDonald Creek
R.E. Index 03-22-209-003
SECTION IV (Old Town Estates Sub. & Smith & Dawson Country Club
Width Location & Description Document No. Date
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 167/470
Addition)
(varying) Width of existing Flood Plain
of McDonald Creek, East of
Maple St.
24371843 3-22-78
None Private Property Lot 11 11939624 1-22-37
SECTION V (Flynn's Sub. #1 & 2):
20 ft. Utility Easement, North side
of Lots 6_15 along McDonald Creek 16283237 6-28-55
20 ft. Utility Easement, North side
of Lot 1 along McDonald Creek 16560937 4-25-56
SECTION VI (Unsubdivided):
None Private Property R.E. Index 03-22-100-022
SECTION VII (Unsubdivided):
None Private Property R.E. Index 03-15-302-025
Commonwealth Edison R.O.W. R.E. Index 03-15-302-024
SECTION VIII (Ehler & Wenborg's Country Gardens Unit No. 3):
(Utility Easements only)
12 ft. South side of Lots 132_134
to McDonald Creek 16689592 9-10-56
6 ft. West side of Lots 132, 166_173
along McDonald Creek " "
6 ft. East side of Lots 133, 174_183
along McDonald Creek " "
SECTION IX (Ehler & Wenborg's Country Gardens Unit No. 4):
(Utility Easements only)
6 ft. East side of Lots 184_193
along McDonald Creek 16720612 10-8-56
6 ft. West side of Lots 194, 196_202
along McDonald Creek " "
12 ft. North side of Lots 203 & 204 to
McDonald Creek " "
Width Location & Description Document No. Date
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 168/470
SECTION X (Ehler & Wenborg's Country Gardens Unit No. 5):
10 ft. South side of Lots 39 & 40 to
McDonald Creek 16640167 7-17-56
SECTION XI (Unsubdivided):
None Private Property R.E. Index 03-16-201-007
" " " 03-16-201-006
" " " 03-16-201-001
SECTION XII (Prospect Heights Park & Library District):
None Park District Property;
Tributary A to McDonald Creek R.E. Index 03-22-308-009
" Library District Property;
Tributary A to McDonald Creek " 03-22-305-021
SECTION XIII (Smith & Dawson Country Club Acres):
None Across Lots 29_31; 12004693 5-28-37
Tributary A to McDonald Creek R.E. Index 03-22-306-004
" 03-22-306-005
" 03-22-306-006
None Across & Along Lots 13 & 14; R.E. Index 03-22-307-003
Tributary A to McDonald Creek " 03-22-307-022
SECTION XIV (Smith & Dawson's Second & Fourth Additions
to Country Club Acres):
Tor. Doc. 791719 5-23-38
Tor. Doc. 828098 7-14-39
None (Hillside Slough) R.E. Index 03-22-403-001
Private Property;
Tributary A to McDonald Creek
" " " 03-22-401-009
SECTION XV (Smith & Dawson Country Club Addition And
Ehler & Wenborg's Hillcrest Sub. Unit No. 1 & 2):
11939624 1-22-37
16115221 1-5-55
16147443 2-11-55
Width Location & Description Document No. Date
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 169/470
None (Hillcrest Slough) R.E. Index 03-22-204-015
Private Property; " 03-22-204-017
Tributary A to McDonald Creek " 03-22-204-018
None Private Property; " 03-22-203-023
Tributary A to McDonald Creek " 03-22-203-024
SECTION XVI (Prospect Heights Manor):
66 ft. Owen Place R.O.W. 13821026 6-14-48
Tributary B to McDonald Creek
66 ft. Tully Place R.O.W.; " "
Tributary B to McDonald Creek
SECTION XVII (Unsubdivided):
None Private Property - Rob Roy; R.E. Index 03-26-100-001
Tributary B to McDonald Creek
SECTION XVIII (Unsubdivided):
None Private Property - Rob Roy; " 03-26-102-001
Tributary B to McDonald Creek
SECTION XIX (Euclid Trails):
700 ft. Flood Plain Easement Along " 03-26-202-004
Tributary B to McDonald Creek " 03-26-202-007
SECTION XX (River Trails Park District)
None Park District Property; " 03-26-202-006
Tributary B to McDonald Creek " 03-26-203-011
EXHIBIT "B"
The undersigned, the owner an/or duly authorized agent of property commonly known as and legally described below hereby authorizes the City of
Prospect Heights and its duly authorized employees to enter upon the subject premises between the day of , 19 , and the day of , 19 , the first and last
days herein specifically included in order to perform the following functions(s):
or any and all emergency tasks that may be required in connection with the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Program in effect in the City of
Prospect Heights, but only during the period specified herein.
(Date)
Width Location & Description Document No. Date
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 170/470
(Signature)
Legal Description of Property:
(Ord. 0-81-02, 3-2-1981)
Chapter 8
WATER CONSERVATION
ARTICLE A. APPLICABILITY AND AUTHORITY
4-8A-1: AREAS SERVED BY PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY:
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply only to areas, users or customers served by the city owned and operated Prospect Heights water
supply, known as IEPA facility no. 0162530. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
4-8A-2: PRIVATE WELLS:
Single-family homeowners whose single-family home is served by a private well at the time the home is connected to the Prospect Heights municipal
water supply may continue to operate the private well for landscaping and nonpotable, exterior use after the home is connected to the Prospect Heights
municipal water supply. At no time shall any single-family homeowner be required to connect to the Prospect Heights municipal water supply. If a property
connects to the municipal water supply, a homeowner may not disconnect from the municipal water system without the express, written authorization from
the city council. At such time as the private well runs dry or is otherwise determined unfit for further service, as determined by the director of public works,
the homeowner shall have the right to drill a new well subject to applicable ordinances of the city and statutes and regulations of the state of Illinois. If, in
the opinion of the director of public works, it is determined that an existing private well is unfit for further service, then the well shall be capped in accord
with applicable statutes, regulations and rules promulgated by the director of public works.
For the purposes of this section "unfit for further use", shall not mean routine maintenance or pump replacement to the extent that pump replacement is
possible. (Ord. 0-08-42, 9-15-2008)
4-8A-3: RESPONSIBILITY OF DIRECTOR:
The director, department of public works, or his designated agent, shall inspect the plumbing in every building or premises connected to the Prospect
Heights water supply as frequently as in his judgment may be necessary to ensure that such plumbing has been installed in such a manner as to prevent
the possibility of pollution and inefficient use of the water supply of the city. The director shall notify or cause to be notified, in writing, the owner or
authorized agent of the owner of any such building or premises, to correct, within a reasonable time set by the director, any plumbing installed or existing
contrary to or in violation of this chapter, and which in his judgment may, therefore, permit the pollution or inefficient use of the city water supply, or
otherwise adversely affect the public health. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
4-8A-4: INSPECTION:
The director, or his designated agent, shall have the right of entry into any building, during reasonable hours, for the purpose of making inspection of the
plumbing systems installed in such building or premises provided that with respect to the inspection of any building or structure, consent to such inspection
shall first be obtained from a person of suitable age and discretion therein or in control thereof. Consistent refusal to allow inspection of a specific structure
may be cause for requiring installation of suitable fixtures or facilities or discontinuation of potable water service. The director, or his designated agent,
shall have the authority to inspect any premises to determine the presence of inefficient fixtures or facilities and to order the elimination of wasteful water
use practices. (Ord. 0-07-36, 12-3-2007, eff. 12-14-2007)
4-8A-5: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL:
A. All plumbing installed within the city shall be installed in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890. If in accordance
with the Illinois plumbing code or in the opinion of the director, an approved reduced pressure zone valve (alternatively referred to as a "cross
connection control device" or "RPZ") is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the director will give notice to the water customer to
install such an approved device immediately. The water customer shall install such an approved device, including expansion tank or other approved
storage vessel at the point of interior connection, at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code, Illinois environmental
protection act and all applicable local regulations, within ten (10) days of receiving said notice from the director of public works, and shall have
inspections and tests made from such approved devices upon installation and as required by the Illinois plumbing code, Illinois environmental
protection act and local regulations.
The cross connection protection devices protecting the municipal waterworks system shall be approved by and supplied by and owned by the city of
Prospect Heights. Costs for said devices shall be paid for in accordance with procedures established by the city.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the city may enter the supply or distribution system of said
municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved
by the director and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 171/470
C. The department of public works shall be responsible for testing and certification of all cross connection control devices protecting the municipal
waterworks system from contamination in accordance with 35 Illinois administrative code 653, subpart H.
1. Testing and certification of all cross connection control devices shall be done at least annually and upon initial installation.
2. Each device shall have a tag attached by the licensed cross connection control device inspector (CCCDI) listing the following information:
a. Date of most recent test.
b. Name of CCCDI and company of the CCCDI.
c. Type and date of repairs, if any.
3. A maintenance log shall be maintained by the city and include:
a. Date of each test;
b. Name and approval number of person performing the test;
c. Test results;
d. Repairs or servicing required;
e. Repairs and date completed; and
f. Servicing performed and date completed.
4. Costs for all inspections and testing of cross connection control devices protecting the municipal waterworks system shall be paid by the property
owner, occupant, or tenant as provided for in this chapter. The city council shall set such inspection and testing fees by separate ordinance or
resolution.
5. Costs for maintaining, repairing, or replacing cross connection control devices protecting the municipal waterworks system shall be borne by the city,
unless the maintenance, repair, or replacement is necessitated by freezing, negligence, or other act of the owner, occupant, or tenant.
D. The approved cross connection control device inspector shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the
public water supply or distribution system of the city for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross connections, and the director or his
authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution
system of the city for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the required cross connection control inspection. On
demand the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish the director any information which he may request regarding the piping
system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the director, be
deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this section.
E. The director is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any property wherein
any connection in violation of the provisions of this section is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as he may deem
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored
until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this section, and until a reconnection fee of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) is paid to the city. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the director is assured that imminent danger of
harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection.
Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water
supply; provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the director or the Illinois environmental protection agency, such action is required to prevent actual
or potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply. Neither the city, the director, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for
any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this section,
whether or not said termination was with or without notice.
F. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, occupant, or tenant of a building to periodically survey or cause to be surveyed, the water use
practices in the building to establish the presence or lack of potential cross connections between private plumbing systems and the municipal
waterworks system.
G. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, occupant, or tenant of a building to prevent potential or actual cross connections between a private
water system and the municipal waterworks system with the installation of an approved cross connection control device.
H. The property owner, occupant, or tenant is responsible for back siphoned or back pressured material or contamination through backflow, if
contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device
or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system.
I. Rules and regulations with respect to the system of cross connection control described in this section are hereby approved and adopted in substantially
the form attached to the ordinance codified herein by reference.
J. Any person found to be violating any provision of this section or the rules and regulations adopted herein shall be served with written notice stating the
notice of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violation.
K. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section or the rules and regulations adopted herein, in addition to the fine provided, shall become liable
to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation, whether the same was caused before or after notice.
(Ord. 0-08-39, 9-2-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 172/470
4-8A-6: SPECIAL SERVICE AREA POLICY:
Whenever a special service area is proposed under the special service area tax law for the exclusive purpose of providing potable water service, no "lot"
(as defined in title 5 of this code) shall be included in such special service area which is already served by the city's municipal water system under this title.
(Ord. 0-10-18, 7-12-2010)
ARTICLE B. WATER CONSERVATION FIXTURES AND APPLIANCES
4-8B-1: PLUMBING FIXTURES:
Plumbing fixtures in all new construction, as well as repair and/or replacement of fixtures in existing construction, shall not exceed the following
established flow rates and/or water usage criteria (based on water pressures at the fixture of 40 to 50 pounds per square inch [psi]):
Fixture Maximum Flow
Water closets, tank type 3.5 gallons/flush
Water closets, flushometer type 3.0 gallons/flush
Urinals, tank type 3.0 gallons/flush
Urinals, flushometer type 3.0 gallons/flush
Shower heads 3.0 gallons/minute
Lavatory, sink faucets 3.0 gallons/minute
(Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
4-8B-2: PUBLIC RESTROOM LAVATORY FAUCETS:
Restrooms intended for public use shall be equipped with metering or self-closing lavatory faucets. This shall apply to all new construction as well as to all
replacement of faucets. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
4-8B-3: COMMERCIAL CAR WASH FACILITIES:
All newly constructed car wash facilities shall be equipped with an approved water recycling system on both the wash and rinse water units. All existing
commercial car wash facilities shall be equipped with such recycling systems when the systems are remodeled or replaced. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
4-8B-4: PRESSURE REDUCTION VALVES:
Pressure reduction valves shall be required on all supply inlets where the pressure regularly exceeds sixty (60) pounds per square inch. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-
18-1983)
4-8B-5: WATER METERS:
All new water services shall be metered. In the case of new single-family attached and multiple-family dwelling units, the water service lines from the
exterior water main to the structure containing the dwelling units shall be metered. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
4-8B-6: UNMETERED SERVICES:
All existing unmetered services shall be metered as part of any major remodeling. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
4-8B-7: WATER SOFTENERS:
No new residential water softeners may use more than seventy five (75) gallons during the entire regeneration cycle, and must be sized to regenerate no
more than three (3) times per week. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
4-8B-8: AIR CONDITIONING:
The installation of closed system air conditioning shall be required in all new construction and in all new remodeling. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 173/470
4-8B-9: WATER CONNECTION TAP-ON FEE:
A. Special Service Areas: For those properties that are not located within a special service area established for the purpose of construction of a potable
water system, and for those properties which are within such a special service area but which are wholly exempt from ad valorem real estate taxes, the
water connection tap-on fee shall be as follows:
Single-family residential $ 9,000.00 per inch of diameter
Multi-family residential (2 to 4 units) 9,000.00 per unit
Multi-family residential (over 4 units) 18,000.00 per inch of diameter
All nonresidential service 24,000.00 per inch of diameter
B. Properties In Special Service Areas Not Exempt From Taxes: For those properties that are located within a special service area and not wholly exempt
from ad valorem real estate taxes, the connection tap-on fee shall be set forth in the ordinance establishing the special service area. If there is no
connection tap-on fee set forth in the ordinance establishing the special service area, then the connection tap-on fee shall be as follows:
Size Of Tap Charges
1 inch $ 400.00
11/2 inch 525.00
2 inch 675.00
3 inch 1,200.00
4 inch 2,000.00
6 inch 3,000.00
Above 6 inch $500.00 per inch of diameter
In the event any building or premises contains more than one dwelling or commercial unit, an additional permit fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall
be made for each such multiple unit.
C. Construction Costs: All applicants for water service shall provide and pay the costs of construction, both labor and material, of the water service from
the main to the premises to be served. This construction work in connection with the water service shall be performed by a licensed plumber who has a
properly executed bond on file in the office of the city clerk. The water meter shall be furnished by the city and a charge made to cover the cost of such
meter as set forth below. For the connection charge, the city will inspect the water service to determine that the construction thereof is in accordance
with specifications established by the city for the regulation of the water system.
D. Repairs/Replacements/Upgrades To Service Connection: For repairs to existing water connections, there shall be no connection fee. For replacement
of an existing connection where there is no change in the size of the connection, there shall be no connection fee. For upgrades to an existing
connection where the size of the tap-on connection is increased the connection fee shall be calculated by taking the amount of the increase measured
in inches of diameter and multiplying the increase by twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00). For example, an upgrade from a one inch (1") tap-on to a
1.5 inch tap-on would require a six thousand dollar ($6,000.00) connection fee (1/2 inch increase x $12,000.00). The city's regular building permit fees
shall apply in addition to and regardless of whether there is a connection fee.
E. Subaccount Of Water Fund: The city finance department shall establish a ledger account for the development of the city's water system which shall be a
subaccount of the city's water fund, for the deposit of all connection tap-on fees connected pursuant to this section. Funds deposited in this account
shall be used solely for the construction, alteration and enlargement of the city's water system. (Ord. 0-10-18, 7-12-2010)
4-8B-10: METER COST:
The city will purchase and maintain an available stock of meters to be connected to the city water system. Purchase price of meters supplied by the city
will be cost, plus a fifteen percent (15%) handling charge. A copy of the invoice for the meter will be supplied to the permittee upon request. (Ord. 0-07-36,
12-3-2007, eff. 12-14-2007)
4-8B-11: NEW CUSTOMER SERVICE FEE:
Whenever a new customer establishes an account for water service to a property, regardless of whether there is an already existing service connection to
the property, there shall be a new customer service fee of three hundred twenty five dollars ($325.00). (Ord. 0-10-18, 7-12-2010)
ARTICLE C. EMERGENCY WATER USE
4-8C-1: NATURAL DISASTERS, CONFLAGRATIONS OR MAJOR ACCIDENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 174/470
Emergency procedures in the event of a natural disaster, conflagration or major accident will involve the actions listed in this Article for the protection of
public health and property. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
4-8C-2: SHUTOFFS:
All mains and curb stops in the affected area not needed for emergency service will be shut off by water utility personnel during rescue operations and
prior to cleanup activities. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
4-8C-3: SALVAGE:
All meters, fire hydrants and other water utility service equipment will be protected against further damage during cleanup operations, salvaged and
returned to stocks for inspection, repair and reuse. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
4-8C-4: CHLORINATION:
In the event service mains are ruptured or are suspected of having been damaged, water utility personnel may increase the dosage of chlorine in treated
potable water. Public notices will be given of this action, together with the expected duration. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
4-8C-5: BOILING OF WATER:
In the event the safety or integrity of potable water service is compromised by line breaks or equipment malfunctions, citizens will be advised to boil their
water used for potable purposes. Public notice of this recommended action, together with boiling instructions will be given. Police and other Municipal
employees and equipment may be employed in making announcements in the affected area, posting of public notices and issuing news releases. (Ord. 0-
83-19, 7-18-1983)
4-8C-6: BILLING:
Whenever water meters are damaged or destroyed, billings for water consumed since the last meter readings will be based on prorated estimates of past
consumption during the same season of the previous year. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
ARTICLE D. POLICY ON LAWN SPRINKLING AND OTHER OUTDOOR WATER USES
4-8D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish policy and guidelines for instituting restrictions on bans against outdoor water use, and to provide administrative
remedies and penalties for failure to comply with them. (Ord. 0-89-29, 8-7-1989)
4-8D-2: RESTRICTIONS ON LAWN SPRINKLING AND OTHER OUTDOOR WATER USES:
A. Commencing from May 15 through September 15 of each year, it shall be unlawful for any person to use water for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns or
gardens except between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
Water users with even-numbered addresses shall engage in outdoor use of water on even-numbered calendar days; and water users with oddnumbered
addresses shall engage in outdoor use of water on odd-numbered calendar days.
B. The City reserves the right to further limit or suspend the use of water for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns and gardens or for any other special
purposes whenever the City Council shall determine that the public exigencies require further restrictions on outdoor water use. (Ord. 0-89-29, 8-7-
1989)
4-8D-3: EXCEPTIONS:
The restrictions set forth in subsection 4-8D-2A of this article shall not apply to:
A. Any person engaged in the business of landscaping or growing or selling plants of any kind.
B. Any person engaged in the business of washing automobiles, either with attendants, with automatic service or by self-service. (Ord. 0-89-29, 8-7-1989)
C. Any person watering any newly seeded or sodded lawn, any newly transplanted shrub or tree or any other use of water determined by the Director of
Public Works to be necessary, pursuant to a permit issued by the Superintendent of Public Works; provided, that such permit shall not be granted
unless such seeding, sodding or transplant shall have occurred prior to the commencement of additional restrictions pursuant to subsection 4-8D-2B of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 175/470
this article, and provided further that such watering shall only be permitted for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, and further provided that such
use of water shall be permitted between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. only. (Ord. 0-91-48, 8-5-1991)
4-8D-4: PENALTIES:
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-89-29, 8-7-1989;
amd. Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
ARTICLE E. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
4-8E-1: ADMINISTRATION:
The administration of this Chapter shall be the responsibility of the City Administrator or a City official or employee acting under the direction of the City
Administrator. (Ord. 0-88-30, 6-20-1988)
4-8E-2: VARIANCES:
Variances from the regulatory standards of this Chapter may be granted by the City Council in accordance with the requirements noted hereinbelow. No
variance shall be granted unless the applicant for the variance can demonstrate that:
A. An exceptional economic or other hardship would result without the variance;
B. The relief granted is the minimum necessary;
C. There will be no additional threat to public health, welfare or safety or the creation of a nuisance; and
D. No additional public expense will result. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
4-8E-3: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, the provisions expressed herein shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the City, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
4-8E-4: JUDICIAL APPEALS:
Any party shall have the right to appeal decisions of the City pertaining to this Chapter before the Circuit Court of Cook County. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
4-8E-5: SEPARABILITY:
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this
Chapter shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
4-8E-6: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS:
A. General Penalty: Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards
established in connection with variances or special use permits shall be covered by the provisions of Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
B. Corrective Action: Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking other such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. All such costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 0-83-19, 7-18-1983)
Chapter 9
INTERPRETATIONS; APPEALS
4-9-1: AUTHORITY OF THE CODE OFFICIAL:
The code official may render interpretations of the provisions of this title and of any rule, regulation, or condition issued or imposed pursuant to it. (Ord. 0-
19-06, 2-25-2019)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 176/470
4-9-2: PURPOSE OF INTERPRETATIONS:
The interpretation authority established by this chapter is intended to recognize that the provisions of this title cannot possibly address every specific
situation to which they may have to be applied. Many such situations, however, can be readily addressed by an interpretation of the specific provisions of
this title in light of the general and specific purposes for which those provisions have been enacted. Because the interpretation authority herein established
is an administrative rather than a legislative authority, it is not intended to add to or to change the essential content of this title, but rather is intended only
to allow authoritative application of that content to specific cases.
A. Procedure: Any person who seeks an interpretation must file a written application therefor with the Building Department stating specifically the title
provisions at issue and the facts and circumstances related to such person's request for an interpretation. The code official will make a decision in
writing on such interpretation and provide that written decision to the applicant within thirty (30) days after the application is filed. Any failure of the code
official to act within thirty (30) days, or within such further time to which the applicant may agree, will be deemed to be a decision denying the
application rendered on the day immediately after that thirty (30) day period.
B. Appeal: A decision by the code official on an interpretation under this section, or on the application of a provision of this title, may be appealed to the
City of Prospect Heights Building Regulations Board of Appeals by the filing of a written application for an appeal within ten (10) days after notice was
served in the Office of the City Administrator as specified below. (Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-9-3: BUILDING REGULATIONS BOARD OF APPEALS:
A. Board Created: There is hereby created the City of Prospect Heights Building Regulations Board of Appeals.
B. Membership: The Building Regulations Board of Appeals is composed of three (3) members appointed by the City of Prospect Heights City
Administrator. In addition, the code official serves as an advisory member of the Building Regulations Board of Appeals. The members appointed by
the City Administrator must have at least ten (10) years of experience working in one of the following fields:
1. A builder or a superintendent of building construction.
2. A registered architect, structural engineer, mechanical engineer, or electrical engineer.
3. A registered design professional in the field of plumbing engineering.
4. A mechanical, plumbing or electrical contractor.
5. A fire protection contractor or a registered design professional in the field of fire protection engineering.
C. Appointed Terms: The three (3) members of the Building Regulations Board of Appeals appointed by the City Administrator will have a term of two (2)
years or until their replacements have been appointed. The City Administrator may replace a member of the Building Regulations Board of Appeals at
any time.
D. Notices Of Meetings: Within ten (10) days after an appeal has been filed pursuant to this section, the code official must set a date and time for a
meeting. The meeting must take place within thirty (30) days after the appeal has been filed.
E. Meeting Postponement: The appellant has the right to request one postponement of the meeting. If a request is made, then the code official must set
the meeting for a date no more than thirty (30) days after the first established date.
F. Meeting Procedures: The Building Regulations Board of Appeals may adopt procedures governing the procedure for its meetings. Those procedures
must be consistent with the following standards:
1. The procedures need not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but must mandate that only relevant information be received.
2. Meetings must be open to the public. There is no requirement that members of the public be allowed to speak at a meeting.
3. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the City, and any person whose interests are directly affected must be given an opportunity to be heard
and may submit documents in support of their position.
4. At a meeting, the Building Regulations Board of Appeals may receive testimony and review documents and other relevant materials.
5. The Code official may participate fully in all proceedings, but has no vote on any decision.
G. Decisions: The Building Regulations Board of Appeals must issue a written decision within fifteen (15) days after the conclusion of the meeting on
appeal. That decision must be transmitted promptly to the appellant. A failure of the Board to issue a written decision within fifteen (15) days will be
deemed a denial of the appeal. All decisions by the Board of Appeals are final. (Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
Chapter 10
REGISTRATION OF DEFAULTED MORTGAGE PROPERTY
4-10-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 177/470
It is the purpose and intent of the City Council to establish a process to address the deterioration, crime and decline in value of City neighborhoods caused
by property with defaulted mortgages located within the City, and to identify, regulate, limit and reduce the number of these properties located within the
City. It is the City Council's further intent to establish a registration requirement as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from the negative impact and
conditions that occur as a result of vacancy, absentee ownership, lack of adequate maintenance and security and will provide a method to expeditiously
identify a contact person for each property responsible for this protection. (Ord. 0-17-24, 10-9-2017)
4-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY/STRUCTURE: Means a property that is accessible through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc., or a structure that
is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons.
APPLICABLE CODES: Means to include, but not be limited to, the City's Zoning Code, the City's Property and Maintenance Code, Neighborhood
Preservation, and City's Building and Fire Codes.
BLIGHTED PROPERTY: Means:
A. Properties that have broken or severely damaged windows, doors, walls, or roofs which create hazardous conditions and encourage trespassing; or
B. Properties whose maintenance is not in conformance with the maintenance of other neighboring properties causing a decrease in value of the
neighboring properties; or
C. Properties cited for a public nuisance pursuant to the City codes; or
D. Properties that endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare because the properties or improvements thereon are dilapidated, deteriorated, or
violate minimum health and safety standards or lack maintenance as required by the applicable codes.
DEFAULT: Shall mean that the mortgagor has not complied with the terms of the mortgage on the property, or the promissory note, or other evidence of
the debt, referred to in the mortgage.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Means any building official, zoning inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, fire inspector or building inspector, law enforcement
officer or other person authorized by the City to enforce the applicable code(s).
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY: Means any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe
that the property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: overgrown and/or dead vegetation; past due utility notices and/or
disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk or debris; abandoned vehicles, auto parts or materials; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items
consistent with habitation or occupancy; the presence of an unsanitary, stagnant swimming pool; the accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or
mail, or statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government agents; or the presence of boards over doors, windows or other openings in
violation of applicable code.
FORECLOSURE: Shall mean the legal process by which a mortgagee, or other lien holder, terminates a property owner's equitable right of redemption to
obtain legal and equitable title to the real property pledged as security for a debt or the real property subject to the lien. This definition shall include, but is
not limited to, public notice of default, a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure, sale to the mortgagee or lien holder, certificate of title and all other processes, activities
and actions, by whatever name, associated with the described process. The process is not concluded until the property obtained by the mortgagee, lien
holder, or their designee, by certificate of title, or any other means, is sold to a non-related bona fide purchaser in an arm's length transaction to satisfy the
debt or lien.
LOCAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY: Means a property manager, property management company or similar entity responsible for the
maintenance and security of registrable real property within twenty (20) driving miles of the County limits. Upon review of credentials the City, or its
designee, may allow a non-local property manager to be listed.
MORTGAGEE: Means the creditor, including but not limited to, trustees; mortgage service companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement; any agent,
servant, or employee of the creditor; any successor in interest; or any assignee of the creditor's rights, interests or obligations under the mortgage
agreement.
OWNER: Owner means any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who, individually or jointly or severally with others, holds the legal or beneficial
title to any building, facilities, equipment or premises subject to the provisions of this chapter.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY: Means a local property manager, property maintenance company or similar entity responsible for the
maintenance of registrable real property.
REAL PROPERTY: Means any improved residential or commercial land, buildings, leasehold improvements and anything affixed to the land, or portion
thereof identified by a property parcel identification number, located in the City limits. Developed lots are considered improved land.
REGISTRABLE PROPERTY: Means:
A. Any real property located in the City, whether vacant or occupied, that is encumbered by a mortgage in default, is subject to an ongoing foreclosure
action by the mortgagee or trustee, is subject to an application for a tax deed or pending tax assessor's lien sale, or has been the subject of a
foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a
deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.
The designation of a "default/foreclosure" property as "registrable" shall remain in place until such time as the property is sold to a non-related bona
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 178/470
fide purchaser in an arm's length transaction or the foreclosure action has been dismissed and any default on the mortgage has been cured.
REGISTRATION: Shall mean six (6) months from the date of the first action that required registration, as determined by the City, or its designee, and every
subsequent six (6) months. The date of the initial registration may be different than the date of the first action that required registration.
RENTAL PROPERTY: Property that contains a single-family rental dwelling unit or multi-family rental dwelling units for use by residential tenants including
but not limited to the following: mobile homes, mobile home spaces, town homes and condominium unit(s). A rental dwelling unit includes property that is
provided to an individual or entity for residential purposes upon payment of rent or any other consideration in lieu of rent, regardless of relationship
between lessor and lessee.
VACANT: Means any parcel of land in the City that contains any building or structure that is not lawfully occupied or inhabited by human beings as
evidenced by the conditions set forth in the definition of "evidence of vacancy" in this section which is without lawful tenant, or lawful occupant or without a
certificate of occupancy. Vacant property does not mean property that is temporarily unoccupied while the residents are away on vacation, personal
matters or business, or is not intended by the owner to be left vacant, so long as the period does not exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord. 0-17-24, 10-9-2017)
4-10-3: APPLICABILITY:
These sections shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or subject to any other law or provision for same, but rather be an additional remedy
available to the City above and beyond any other State or County provisions for same. (Ord. 0-17-24, 10-9-2017)
4-10-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF A REGISTRY:
The City, or its designee, shall establish a registry cataloging each registrable property within the City, containing the information required by this chapter.
(Ord. 0-17-24, 10-9-2017)
4-10-5: REGISTRATION OF DEFAULTED MORTGAGE REAL PROPERTY:
A. Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the City shall perform an inspection of the property to determine vacancy or
occupancy, upon default by the mortgagor. The mortgagee shall, within ten (10) days of the inspection, register the property with the City, or its
designee, on forms or other manner as directed, and indicate whether the property is vacant or occupied. A separate registration is required for each
property, whether it is found to be vacant or occupied.
B. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name, direct mailing address, a direct contact name, telephone number, and e-mail address for
the mortgagee/trustee, and the servicer, and the name and twenty four (24) hour contact phone number of the local property management company
responsible for the security and maintenance of the property who has the authority to make decisions concerning the abatement of nuisance conditions
at the property, as well as any expenditure in connection therewith.
C. Mortgagees who have existing registrable property on the effective date of this chapter have thirty (30) calendar days from the effective date to register
the property with the City, or its designee, on forms or other manner as directed, and indicate whether the property is vacant or occupied. A separate
registration is required for each property, whether it is vacant or occupied.
D. If the mortgage on a registrable property is sold or transferred, the new mortgagee is subject to all the terms of this chapter and within five (5) days of
the transfer register the property and pay a registration fee in accordance with this chapter. Any previous unpaid semi-annual registration fees are the
responsibility of the new mortgagee or trustee and are due and payable with their initial registration.
E. If the mortgagee owner of a foreclosed real property sells or transfers the property to a non-arm's length related person or entity, the transferee is
subject to all the terms of this chapter and within five (5) days of the transfer register the property and pay a registration fee in accordance with this
chapter. Any previous unpaid semi-annual registration fees are the responsibility of the new registrable property owner and are due and payable with
their initial registration.
F. As long as the property is registrable it shall be inspected by the mortgagee, or designee, monthly. If an inspection shows a change in the property's
occupancy status the mortgagee shall, within ten (10) days of that inspection, update the occupancy status of the property registration.
G. A non-refundable six-month registration fee established by resolution by the City Council, shall accompany each registration pursuant to this section.
H. All registration fees must be paid directly from the mortgagee, trustee, servicer, or owner. Third party registration fees are not allowed without the
consent of the City and/or its authorized designee.
I. Properties subject to this section shall remain under the semi-annual registration requirement, and the inspection, security and maintenance standards of
this chapter as long as they are registrable.
J. Until the mortgage or lien on the property in question is satisfied, or legally discharged, the desire to no longer pursue foreclosure, the filing of a
dismissal of lis pendens and/or summary of final judgment and/or certificate of title, voluntary or otherwise, does not exempt any mortgagee holding the
defaulted mortgage, from all the requirements of this chapter as long as the borrower is in default.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 179/470
K. Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this section must report any change of information contained in the registration within ten
(10) days of the change.
L. Failure of the mortgagee to properly register or to modify the registration form from time to time to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this
section is a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to enforcement and any resulting monetary penalties.
Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and determination that any property is in violation of this chapter, the City may take the necessary
action to ensure compliance with and place a lien on the property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the property and bring it into compliance.
(Ord. 0-17-24, 10-9-2017)
4-10-6: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Properties subject to this chapter shall be kept free of weeds, overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any
accumulation of newspaper circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by Federal, State or local law, discarded personal items including, but not
limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned.
B. The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the
exterior structure.
C. Front, side, and rear yards, including landscaping, shall be maintained in accordance with the applicable code(s) at the time registration was required.
D. Yard maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or
artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential installation. Acceptable maintenance of yards and/or landscape shall not include weeds, gravel,
broken concrete, asphalt or similar material.
E. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, irrigation, cutting and mowing of required ground cover or landscape and removal of all
trimmings.
F. Pools and spas shall be maintained so the water remains free and clear of pollutants and debris and shall comply with the regulations set forth in the
applicable code(s).
G. Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly maintain the property may result in a violation of the applicable code(s) and issuance of a citation or
Notice of Violation in accordance with the applicable code of the City. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the City's Hearing Officer/City Council
or a court of competent jurisdiction, the City may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this section.
H. In addition to the above, the property is required to be maintained in accordance with the applicable code(s) of the City. (Ord. 0-17-24, 10-9-2017)
4-10-7: SECURITY REQUIREMENTS:
A. Properties subject to this chapter shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
B. A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow
a child to access the interior of the property or structure. Broken windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow a child to
access the interior of the property or structure must be repaired. Broken windows shall be secured by re-glazing of the window.
C. If a property is registrable, and the property has become vacant or blighted, a local property manager shall be designated by the mortgagee or owner to
perform the work necessary to bring the property into compliance with the applicable code(s), and the property manager must perform regular
inspections to verify compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and any other applicable laws. (Ord. 0-17-24, 10-9-2017)
4-10-8: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
All registrable property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the abatement of which pursuant to the police power is hereby declared to be
necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the City. (Ord. 0-17-24, 10-9-2017)
4-10-9: INSPECTIONS FOR VIOLATIONS:
Adherence to this chapter does not relieve any person, legal entity or agent from any other obligations set forth in any applicable codes or statutes, which
may apply to the property. (Ord. 0-17-24, 10-9-2017)
4-10-10: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. Enforcement: The requirements of this chapter may be enforced as follows:
1. By citation for civil penalties pursuant or to appear in County Court pursuant to the authority granted by this Code;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 180/470
2. By an action for injunctive relief, civil penalties, or both, through a court of competent jurisdiction;
3. By exercise of the City's powers of eminent domain, or by condemnation and demolition pursuant to State Statute, or by the nuisance abatement
process;
4. By revocation or temporary suspension of necessary permits and/or certificates or occupancy and/or licenses;
5. By any other process permitted at law or equity; and
6. Use of one enforcement process or theory does not preclude the City from seeking the same, different, or additional relief through other enforcement
methods.
B. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or the code adopted herein, shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-17-24, 10-9-2017)
4-10-11: REGISTRATION FEES:
Owners shall be charged a biannual fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for registration pursuant to this section. Except as otherwise provided, all
registration fees shall become part of the Corporate Fund. (Ord. 0-17-24, 10-9-2017)
Chapter 11
FIRE CODE
4-11-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A certain document, entitled the International Fire Code, 2012 edition, and all appendices thereto, published by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted as the Fire Code of the City of Prospect Heights. Three (3) copies of the document shall be kept on file with the City Clerk. (Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-
2019)
4-11-2: ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
International Fire Code, 2012 edition, and all appendices thereto, published by the International Code Council is amended as follows:
A. The City Of Prospect Heights Amendments: The city of Prospect Heights amendments to the IBC, other amendments, the zoning ordinance and
municipal ordinances shall supersede all sections of all of the adopted model codes.
B. Conflicts: Whenever two (2) codes are in conflict, the more stringent requirement shall govern.
C. Automatic Fire Suppression Requirements: The details outlining the requirements for the installation of automatic fire suppression systems are outlined
in section 4-11-3 of this chapter.
(Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-11-3: AUTOMATIC FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM:
A. Definitions: Unless otherwise expressly stated, definitions of terms used in this section shall be consistent with those meanings listed in the most current
adopted codes of the City of Prospect Heights.
B. Automatic Sprinklers Required: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all newly constructed buildings, structures or portions
thereof regardless of occupancy classification, construction, square footage, or use groups for the purpose of life safety and property preservation.
C. Exceptions: The following structures shall be exempt from the requirement of an automatic sprinkler system: 1) new commercial structures of less than
five thousand (5,000) square feet, which are not an assembly use; and 2) detached garages, sheds, and accessory structures located not less than ten
feet (10') from a principal structure, where the principal structure is a one- or two-family dwelling.
D. Exempted Areas: The following areas shall be exempt from the requirement of an automatic sprinkler system: structures or rooms where the work
operations, manufacture process, storage of products, or hazardous materials which contain water reactive agents as determined by the products'
material safety data sheet or which would otherwise pose a public safety threat if exposed to water from an automatic sprinkler system. In such cases,
the Director of Building and Development may require an approved, nonwater based automatic fire suppression.
E. Additions And Alterations: The following additions or alterations shall require the installation of an approved automatic sprinkler system: 1) additions that
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the existing floor area of an existing structure; 2) alterations to an area of a structure in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the
existing floor area of an existing structure; 3) any addition or alteration the cost of which is in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the Cook County
Assessor's opinion of value of the property; or 4) as determined by the City Director of Building and Development and the Fire Marshal of the Prospect
Heights Fire Protection District.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 181/470
F. Existing Buildings: Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, buildings built under, and in full compliance with the codes in force at the time of
construction or alteration thereof, and that have been properly maintained and used as originally permitted, shall be exempt from this section. No
change or alteration shall be made to any building or structure, whether new or existing, except in conformity with the provisions of this section, and no
change of classification or occupancy, whether necessitating a physical alteration or not, shall be made in any existing building or structure, unless
such building or structure is brought into conformance with the requirements of this section which apply to new buildings or the proposed new use.
G. Drainage Required: Provisions shall be made for the discharge of the overflow of water on every story of a sprinkled building. A minimum of one (1) 4-
inch floor drain or other approved means shall be provided and located at least eight feet (8') away from columns and walls for every five thousand
(5,000) square feet or fraction thereof. The installation of floor drains must comply with the current Plumbing Codes. (Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-11-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-19-
06, 2-25-2019)
Chapter 12
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
4-12-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A certain document, entitled the International Existing Building Code, 2012 edition, and all appendices thereto, published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of the City of Prospect Heights. Three (3) copies of the document shall be kept on file with the
City Clerk. (Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-12-2: ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES:
None at this time. (Ord. 0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
4-12-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-19-
06, 2-25-2019)
Chapter 13
FAIR HOUSING
4-13-1: GENERAL:
A. Adoption Of Preamble: In the facts and statements contained in the preamble to Ordinance 0-93-03 are hereby found to be true and correct and are
hereby adopted as part of this Chapter.
B. Declaration Of Policy: In the exercise of its power to regulate for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare, it is declared to be the
public policy of this City to assure fair housing and freedom from discrimination throughout the community, to protect the community from the effects of
residential segregation by race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin, and to secure to its citizens the
economic, social and professional benefits of living in a stable, integrated society.
C. Construction: This Chapter shall be construed according to the fair import of its terms and shall be liberally construed to further the purposes and policy
stated and the special purposes of the particular provisions involved.
D. Severability: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provision of this Chapter not specifically included in said judgment. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any
provision of this Chapter to any person or circumstance, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other person or
circumstance not specifically included in said judgment. (Ord. 0-93-03, 1-18-1993)
4-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
ANSI A117.1-1986: The 1986 Edition of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically
handicapped people.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 182/470
ACCESSIBLE: The public or common use areas of the building can be approached, entered and used by individuals with physical handicaps, when used
with respect to the public and common use areas of a building containing covered multi-family dwellings.
ACCESSIBLE ROUTE: A continuous unobstructed path connecting accessible elements and spaces in a building or within a site that can be negotiated by
a person with a severe disability using a wheelchair and that is also safe for and usable by people with other disabilities. A route that complies with the
appropriate requirements of the American National Standards Institute's ANSI A117.1-1986 or a comparable standard is an "accessible route".
ADMINISTRATOR: The person designated by the Mayor to administer the provisions of this Chapter.
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING: Attempting to attract all prospective buyers and renters with special efforts to attract persons of a race or national origin least
likely to apply through the normal operations of the market place.
AGGRIEVED PARTY/PERSON: Includes any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or believes that he or she will
be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.
BOARD: The Fair Housing Review Board.
BROKER: Includes any person authorized to perform an action on behalf of another person regarding any matter related to the sale or rental of dwellings,
including offers, solicitations or contracts and the administration of matters regarding such offers, solicitations or contracts or any residential real estaterelated
transactions.
BUILDING: A structure, facility or portion thereof that contains or serves one or more dwelling units.
BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE: An accessible entrance to a building that is connected by an accessible route to public
transportation stops, to accessible parking and passenger loading zones, or to public streets or sidewalks, if available.
CHARGE: An allegation contained in a complaint.
CIVIL RIGHTS VIOLATION: Includes and shall be limited to only those specific acts set forth in Sections 4-13-3, 4-13-4 and 4-13-5 of this Chapter.
COMMISSION: The Human Relations Commission.
COMMON USE AREAS: Rooms, spaces or elements inside or outside of a building that are made available for the use of residents of a building or the
guests thereof. These areas include hallways, lounges, lobbies, laundry rooms, refuse rooms, mail rooms, recreational areas and passageways among
and between buildings.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE: A group home or specialized residential care home serving unrelated persons with disabilities.
COMPLAINANT: A party/person, including the Human Rights Commission, who files a complaint.
COMPLAINT: The document filed by a complainant with the Human Rights Commission.
CONCILIATION: The attempted resolution of issues raised by a complaint, or the investigation of such charge, through informal negotiations involving the
aggrieved party, the respondent and the Commission.
CONCILIATION AGREEMENT: A written agreement setting forth the resolution of the issues in conciliation.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Any drug or other substance, or immediate precursor included in the definition in section 102 of the Controlled Substances
Act (21 USC 802).
COVERED MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: A building consisting of four (4) or more units if such building has one or more elevators; and ground floor units in
other buildings consisting of four (4) or more units.
DISCRIMINATE: To treat any person differently from others because of race, color, religion, creed, national origin, age, sex, ancestry, marital status,
physical or mental handicap, familial status or unfavorable military discharge.
DWELLING: Any building structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families
or unrelated individuals, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereof of any such building, structure or
portion thereof.
ELDERLY PERSON: A person fifty five (55) years of age or older.
ENTRANCE: Any access point to a building or portion of a building used by residents for the purpose of entering.
EXTERIOR: All areas of the premises outside of an individual dwelling unit.
FAMILIAL STATUS: One or more individuals who have not attained the age of eighteen (18) years being domiciled with:
A. A parent or a person having legal custody of such individual or individuals;
B. The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person; or
C. Persons who are pregnant or in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of eighteen (18).
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Any bank, credit union, insurance company, mortgage banking company, savings and loan association or other entity or
organization which makes or purchases loans or provides other financial assistance and which operates or has a place or business in the State of Illinois.
HANDICAP: With respect to a person, a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities, a record of such an
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 183/470
impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment. The definition of handicap also includes persons who have tested HIV positive and people
suffering from impairments as a result of prior use or addiction to an illegal controlled substance.
HEARING: That part of an adjudicative proceeding that involves the submission of evidence, either by oral presentation or written submission, and
includes the submission of briefs and oral arguments on the evidence and applicable law.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION: Includes any improved or unimproved real property or part thereof which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged or
designed to be used or occupied as the home or residence of one or more individuals.
HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS: A. All housing that is provided under State and Federal programs for elderly persons as defined by the specific
programs, provided U.S. HUD approval has been secured;
B. Housing that is "intended for, and solely occupied by persons sixty two (62) years of age or older";
C. Communities in which at least eighty percent (80%) of all units are occupied by one person fifty five (55) years of age or older, if the existence of
significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical and social needs of older persons can be documented.
INTERIOR: The spaces, parts, components or elements of an individual dwelling unit.
LEASE: Includes any sublease, assignment or rental and any contract to enter into any of the foregoing.
LOAN: Includes, but is not limited to, the providing of funds, for consideration, which are:
A. Sought for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a housing accommodation;
B. Sought for any commercial or industrial purposes; or
C. Secured by residential real estate.
MARITAL STATUS: The legal status of being married, single, separated, divorced or widowed.
MODIFICATION: Any change to the public or common use areas of a building or any change to a dwelling unit.
NATIONAL ORIGIN: The place in which a person or one of his or her ancestors was born.
OFFER: Includes every attempt by means of written or oral communications to present for acceptance or rejection, to hold out or proffer, to make a
proposal to or to exhibit real estate that may be taken or received with the intention of ultimately entering a real estate transaction.
OWNER: Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or owns any beneficial interest in, any real estate or who holds legal or equitable title to shares
of, or any beneficial interest in, an equity which owns any real estate.
PANIC PEDDLING: For profit, to induce or attempt to induce a person to sell or rent a dwelling by representation regarding the entry or prospective entry
into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin or handicap.
PERSON: Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, jointstock
companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees or trustees in cases under title 11 of the United States Code.
PERSON IN THE BUSINESS OF SELLING OR RENTING DWELLINGS: Any person who:
A. Within the preceding twelve (12) months has participated as principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or
any interest therein;
B. Within the preceding twelve (12) months, has participated as agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in providing sales or
rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or interest therein; or
C. Is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy, or occupied by, five (5) or more families.
PHYSICAL OR MENTAL IMPAIRMENT: Includes:
A. Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems:
neurological, musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genito-urinary;
hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
B. Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness and specific learning
disabilities.
PREMISES: The interior or exterior spaces, parts, components or elements of a building, including individual dwelling units and the public and common
use areas of a building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 184/470
PROTECTED CLASSES: Includes all persons legally protected against discrimination.
PUBLIC CONTRACT: Includes every contract to which the State of Illinois, any of its political subdivisions or any Municipal corporation is a party.
PUBLIC USE AREAS: Interior or exterior rooms or spaces of a building that are made available to the general public. Public use may be provided at a
building that is privately or publicly owned.
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION: The purchase, sale or fee or equitable title to, or beneficial interest in, or rental or lease of, any property; or an option to
do any of the foregoing, or any negotiation, listing, contract, or agreement in connection therewith. Real estate transaction also includes the brokering or
appraising of residential real property and the making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing,
improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or secured by residential real estate.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements, leaseholds, interests in real estate cooperatives, condominiums, and
hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest therein.
RELIGION: Includes all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief; and all aspects of religious nonobservance, nonpractice and
nonbelief.
RESPONDENT: A. The person or other entity against whom a discriminatory housing practice has been alleged in a complaint;
B. Any other person or entity identified in the course of investigation and notified as required under Section 4-13-9 of this Chapter.
SEX: The status of being male or female.
SOLICIT OR SOLICITATION: Any communication by or on behalf of a real estate agent with the owner or occupant of a dwelling:
A. Which is intended to induce the sale or rental of such dwelling;
B. Which is intended to offer or promote services in connection with the sale, rental or listing of such dwelling: and
C. Which is carried out by means of:
1. In-person contacts at the dwelling;
2. Written material mailed or delivered directly to the dwelling, such as direct mail, leaflets or pamphlets; or
3. Telephone contacts with owners or occupants of the dwelling.
For purposes of this Chapter, the term "solicit" or "solicitation" shall not refer to communication carried out by means of print or electronic media of
general circulation, such as a newspaper, radio, television or the yellow pages.
STEERING: Influencing or attempting to influence by words or acts the choice or location of housing of a prospective purchaser, occupant or tenant, in
connection with viewing, buying, leasing or occupying real estate based on race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin or handicap so as to
limit choice or promote or maintain segregation.
TO RENT: Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and to otherwise grant for consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
VARYING TERMS: Includes, but is not limited to, the following practices:
A. Requiring a greater down payment than is usual for the particular type of a loan involved;
B. Requiring a shorter period of amortization than is usual for the particular type of loan involved;
C. Charging a higher interest rate than is usual for the particular type of loan involved;
D. Under-appraising of real estate or other items of property offered as security. (Ord. 0-93-03, 1-18-1993; amd. Ord. 0-96-72, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-
1996)
4-13-3: PROHIBITED ACTS; GENERAL:
It shall be unlawful to:
A. Discriminatory Terms: Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services
or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 185/470
B. Refusal To Negotiate, Deal, Sell Or Rent: Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or
otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or
national origin.
C. Withholding Dwellings: Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin that
any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact available.
D. Advertisements, Signs, Notices: Make, print, circulate or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any written or oral notice, statement or
advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion,
sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national origin or an intention to make such preference, limitation, or discrimination. Discriminatory
notices, statements and advertisements include, but are not limited to:
1. Using words, phrases, photographs, illustrations, symbols or forms which convey that dwellings are available or not available to a particular group of
persons because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin.
2. Expressing to agents, brokers, employees, prospective sellers or renters or any other persons a preference for or limitation on any purchaser or
renter because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin of such persons.
3. Selecting media or locations for advertising the sale or rental of dwellings which deny particular segments of the housing market information about
housing opportunities because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin.
4. Refusing to publish advertising for the sale or rental of dwellings, or requiring different charges or terms for such advertising because of race, color,
religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin.
E. Panic Peddling: For profit, to induce or attempt to induce a person to sell or rent a dwelling by representation regarding the entry or prospective entry
into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin.
Prohibited actions under this subsection include, but are not limited to:
1. Engaging for profit in conduct (including uninvited solicitations for listings) which conveys to a person that a neighborhood is undergoing or is about
to undergo a change in the race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin of persons residing in it, in order to
encourage persons to offer a dwelling for sale or rent.
2. Encouraging, for profit, any person to sell or rent a dwelling through assertions that the entry or prospective assertions that the entry or prospective
entry of persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, familial status or national origin or with handicaps can or will result in undesirable
consequences for the project, neighborhood or community, such as a lowering of property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or a
decline in the quality of schools or other services or facilities.
F. Lending: Discriminate in connection with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages, or otherwise financing a real estate
transaction on the grounds of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin.
G. Lending Terms: Deny or delay the processing of a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing,
constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or discriminate in the fixing of that amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or
conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national
origin of such person.
H. Appraising/Insurance: Discriminate in the appraisal of the value of real estate or in the sale of insurance in connection with a real estate transaction
because of the race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin of the person.
I. Varying Rents/Sale Price: Impose different sale prices or rental charges for the sale or rental of a dwelling upon any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin.
J. Qualification Criteria: Use different qualification criteria or applications, or sale or rental standards or procedures, such as income standards, application
requirements, application fees, credit analysis or sale or rental approval procedures or other requirements, because of race, color, religion, sex,
physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin.
K. Eviction: Evict tenants because of their race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, or because of the race, color, religion, sex,
physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin of a tenant's guest.
L. Listings: Enter into a listing agreement which discriminates against any person because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial
status or national origin.
M. Discrimination In Membership Or Services: Deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate
brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against any
person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation on account of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap,
familial status or national origin.
N. Steering (Restriction Of Choice): Restrict or attempt to restrict, because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or
national origin, the choices of a person by words or acts in connection with buying or renting a dwelling so as to perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate,
segregated housing patterns, or to discourage or obstruct integrated housing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 186/470
Prohibited actions under this subsection, which are generally referred to as unlawful steering practices, include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Discouraging any person from inspecting, purchasing or renting a dwelling because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial
status or national origin; or because of the race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin of persons in a
community, neighborhood, or development, so as to perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate, segregated housing patterns or to discourage or obstruct
integrated housing.
2. Discouraging the purchase or rental of a dwelling because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin
by exaggerating drawbacks or failing to inform any person of desirable features of a dwelling or of a community, neighborhood or development, so as
to perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate, segregated housing patterns or to discourage or obstruct integrated housing.
3. Communicating to any prospective purchaser that he or she would not be comfortable or compatible with existing residents of a community,
neighborhood or development because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin, so as to perpetuate,
or tend to perpetuate, segregated housing patterns or to discourage or obstruct integrated housing.
4. Assigning any person to a particular section of a community, neighborhood or development, or to a particular floor of a building, because of race,
color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin, so as to perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate, or to discourage or
obstruct integrated housing.
5. Failing to inform any person of available housing opportunities in a particular section of a community, neighborhood or development, or in a particular
building or particular floor of a building, because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin or handicap, so as to perpetuate, or tend
to perpetuate, segregated housing patterns or to discourage or obstruct integrated housing.
O. Participation: Act or undertake to act as a real estate broker, salesman or agent with respect to any dwelling, the disposition of which requires said
person to participate in discrimination.
P. Restrictions: Perform any act of discrimination with the intention or effect of restricting or limiting the housing choice of any person.
Q. Aiding And Abetting: Aid or abet acts performed in violation of this Chapter.
R. Interference, Coercion Or Intimidation: Coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his
having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or
protected by this Chapter.
S. Solicitation: Solicit any owner to sell or rent or list residential property at any time after such person has notice that such owner does not desire to sell,
rent or list such residential property. For the purposes of this subsection, notice must be provided as follows:
1. The notice may be given by the owner personally or by a third party in the owner's name, either in the form of an individual notice or a list, provided it
complies with subsection S2 of this Section.
2. Such notice shall be explicit as to whether each owner on the notice seeks to avoid both solicitation for listing and sale, or only for listing, or only for
sale, as well as the period of time for which any avoidance is desired. The notice shall be dated and either of the following shall apply:
a. Each owner shall have signed the notice; or
b. The person or entity preparing the notice shall provide an accompanying affidavit to the effect that all the names on the notice are, in fact, genuine
as to the identity of the persons listed and that such persons have requested not to be solicited as indicated.
3. The individual notice or notice in the form of a list with the accompanying affidavit shall be served personally or by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested. (Ord. 0-93-03, 1-18-1993)
4-13-4: PROHIBITED ACTS; HANDICAPPED HOUSING:
In addition to those prohibited acts identified in Sections 4-13-3 and 4-13-5, the following shall also be unlawful:
A. Discrimination Against The Handicapped:
1. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in
connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of:
a. That buyer or renter;
b. A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
c. Any person associated with that person.
2. To make an inquiry to determine whether an applicant for a dwelling; a person intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made
available; or any person associated with that person has a handicap, or to make inquiry as to the nature or severity of a handicap of such a person.
3. However, this Section does not prohibit the following inquiries, provided these inquiries are made of all applicants, whether or not they have
handicaps:
a. Inquiry into the applicant's ability to meet the requirements of ownership or tenancy;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 187/470
b. Inquiry to determine whether an applicant is qualified for a dwelling available only to persons with handicaps or to persons with a particular type of
handicap;
c. Inquiry to determine whether an applicant for a dwelling is qualified for a priority available to persons with handicaps or to persons with a particular
type of handicap;
d. Inquiry to determine whether an applicant for a dwelling is a current illegal abuser or addict of a controlled substance;
e. Inquiry to determine whether an applicant has been convicted of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance.
4. Nothing in this Section requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or
safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
B. Unit Modification: To refuse to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be
occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises; except that, in the case of a
rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the
premises to the condition that existed before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted.
C. Rules And Policies: To refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may be
necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy the dwelling, including public and common use areas.
D. New Construction: To fail to design and construct dwellings in such a manner that:
1. The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by a handicapped person;
2. All the doors designed to allow passage into and within the premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped
persons in wheelchairs; and
3. All premises within such dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design:
a. An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
b. Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations;
c. Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and
d. Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
E. Guide/Support Dogs: To refuse to sell or rent because a person has a guide, hearing or support dog. It is a civil rights violation for the owner or agent of
any housing accommodation to:
1. Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny
property to any blind, hearing impaired or physically handicapped person because he has a guide, hearing or support dog; or
2. Discriminate against any blind, hearing impaired or physically handicapped person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental property, or
in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because he has a guide, hearing or support dog; or
3. Require, because a blind, hearing impaired or physically handicapped person has a guide, hearing or support dog, an extra charge in a lease, rental
agreement or contract or purchase or sale, other than for actual damage done to the premises by the dog. (Ord. 0-93-03, 1-18-1993)
4-13-5: PROHIBITED ACTS; FINANCIAL:
In addition to those prohibited acts identified in Sections 4-13-3 and 4-13-4 of this Chapter, it shall be a violation for any financial institution, on the grounds
of unlawful discrimination to:
A. Deny any person any of the services normally offered by such an institution;
B. Provide any person with any service which is different from, or provided in a different manner than, that which is provided to other persons similarly
situated;
C. Deny or vary the terms of a loan because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin;
D. Deny or vary the terms of a loan on the basis that a specific parcel of real estate offered as security is located in a specific geographical area;
E. Deny or vary the terms of a loan without having considered all of the regular and dependable income of each person who would be liable for repayment
of the loan;
F. Utilize lending standards that have no economic basis;
G. Refuse to purchase or impose different terms or conditions on loans or other debts or securities which support the purchase, construction,
improvement, repair or maintenance of a dwelling, or which are secured by residential real estate because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 188/470
mental handicap, familial status or national origin. (Ord. 0-93-03, 1-18-1993)
4-13-6: COVERAGE AND EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this Chapter, other than the prohibition against discriminatory advertising, shall:
A. Apply to the following:
1. The rental, lease or occupancy of a room in an owner occupied single-family dwelling, provided the following conditions are met:
a. The owner does not own or have any interest in more than three (3) single-family houses at any one time;
b. The house is sold or rented without the use of a real estate broker, agent or salesperson or the facilities of any person in the business of selling or
renting dwellings.
2. Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his or her residence.
B. Prohibit a religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in
conjunction with a religious organization or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than
commercial purposes to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on
account of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin;
C. Prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates
for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members and their guests or from giving preference
to its members;
D. Prohibit the rental or sale of a dwelling on the basis of age or handicap when such dwelling is authorized, approved, financed or subsidized in whole or
in part by a unit of State, local or Federal Government;
E. Limit the applicability of any reasonable local, State or Federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling;
F. Require the rental or sale of a unit to any person convicted of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance;
G. With regard to discrimination based on familial status apply with respect to "housing for older persons" as defined in Section 4-13-2 of this Chapter;
H. Apply to persons engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than those based on
unlawful discrimination or familial status in furnishing appraisals;
I. Prohibit financial institutions from considering sound underwriting practices in contemplation of any loan to any person. Such practices shall include the
following:
1. The willingness and the financial ability of the borrower to repay the loan;
2. The market value of any real estate or other item or property proposed as security for any loan;
3. Diversification of the financial institution's investment portfolio.
J. Prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than race, creed, age,
ancestry, unfavorable military discharge, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. (Ord. 0-93-03, 1-18-1993)
4-13-7: HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION:
A. Creation: There is hereby created a Human Relations Commission, consisting of seven (7) members who shall be residents of the City. One of whom
shall be a member of the City Council. Each member shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council. When first
appointed, the members of the Human Relations Commission shall serve respectively for the following terms: two (2) for one year, three (3) for two (2)
years, and two (2) for three (3) years, or until their respective successors have been duly appointed and qualified. The successor to each member so
appointed shall serve for a term of two (2) years, or until his successor has been duly appointed and qualified. Vacancies upon the Commission shall
be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant, in the manner herein provided for the appointment of such members.
The chairman of the Human Relations Commission shall be the Council member appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council. (Ord. 0-96-71, 2-18-1997, eff. 2-28-1997)
B. General Duties: The Commission shall have and exercise the power:
1. To act to eliminate discriminatory housing practices;
2. To act to assure to persons living or desiring to live in the City, or in any particular dwelling, the opportunity to purchase, lease, or rent a dwelling
without discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status or national origin;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 189/470
3. To engage in such recruitment, research and public communication and create such advisory councils as may be authorized to effectuate the
purposes of this Chapter;
4. To coordinate its activities with Federal and State agencies in conformity with this Chapter;
5. To gather and provide for the exchange of information relative to the provisions of this Chapter among real estate brokers and salesmen, lenders,
developers, employers, City officials and community groups within and without the City.
C. Enforcement Duties: The administrative and adjudicative responsibilities for this Chapter shall be in the Human Relations Commission. The
Commission shall have and exercise, in addition to the general duties cited in subsection B of this Section, with respect to all dwellings and persons
subject to this Chapter, the power:
1. To issue, receive, initiate and investigate, conciliate, settle and dismiss complaints charging discrimination in housing. Any complaint initiated by the
Commission shall be in writing and signed by the chairperson of the Commission and shall state such detail as to substantially apprise any party
properly concerned as to the time, place and facts surrounding the charged violation of this Chapter;
2. To seek conciliation, hold hearings and make findings of fact with respect to any such complaint;
3. To administer oaths, take sworn testimony and to subpoena witnesses and pertinent documents;
4. To seek temporary relief (judicial enforcement) and to enforce orders of the Commission in conformity with this Chapter;
5. To publish and issue findings of fact and orders in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter;
6. To render, from time to time, but not less than every twelve (12) months, a written report to City officials of its activities and recommendations with
respect to fair housing practices, which written report shall be made public after submission to the City Council; and
7. To adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind, after approval of the City Council, such rules and regulations as may be necessary or desirable to carry
out the purpose of this Chapter.
D. Delegation To Illinois Department Of Human Rights: The City may, by resolution, delegate the administrative and adjucative responsibilities set forth
herein to the Illinois Department of Human Rights, pursuant to the terms of an agreement between said Department of Human Rights and the City.
(Ord. 0-93-03, 1-18-1993)
4-13-8: ADMINISTRATION:
The Mayor of the City shall appoint an Administrator. The Administrator shall have such duties, responsibilities and powers as are necessary for the
implementation of this Chapter and additionally as may be provided by the Commission, including the issuing, initiation, receipt and due processing of
complaints. (Ord. 0-93-03, 1-18-1993)
4-13-9: COMPLAINTS, CONCILIATION, HEARING PROCEDURES:
A. Complaint:
1. Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation of any provision of this Chapter may file with the Administrator a written verified complaint setting
forth his or her grievance within one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of the alleged violation. The complaint shall state, on a printed form
provided by the Commission, such detail as to substantially apprise any party properly concerned as to the time, place, and facts surrounding the
alleged violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-99-071, 4-5-1999, eff. 4-15-1999)
2. A complaint may be filed against any person alleged to be engaged, to have engaged, or about to engage in a discriminatory housing practice.
3. A complaint may also be filed against any person who directs or controls, or has the right to direct or control, the conduct of another person with
respect to any aspect of the sale, rental, advertising or financing of dwellings or the provision of brokerage services relating to the sale or rental of
dwellings if that other person, acting within the scope of his or her authority as employee or agent of the directing or controlling person, is engaged,
has engaged, or is about to engage, in a discriminatory housing practice. (Ord. 0-93-03, 1-18-1993)
B. Notice Of Complaint: Within ten (10) calendar days after a complaint has been received or initiated by the Commission or the Administrator, the
Administrator shall serve or cause to be served, either in person or by certified mail, a copy of said complaint on the person alleged to be in violation of
this Chapter, hereinafter referred to as the "respondent".
The Administrator shall also, within ten (10) days of the date on which the complaint was filed, send written notice to the complainant informing the
complainant of his or her option to file a complaint with U.S. HUD, the Illinois Human Rights Department, the Cook County Commission on Human
Rights, Federal or State courts, including the dates within which the complainant may exercise such options. (Ord. 0-99-072, 4-5-1999, eff. 4-15-1999)
C. Injunctive Temporary Relief:
1. At any time after a complaint is filed and determined to constitute a violation of this Chapter, the Commission may petition the appropriate court for
temporary relief, pending final determination of the proceedings under this Chapter, including an order or decree restraining the respondent from
doing or causing any act which would render ineffectual a recommendation with respect to the complaint. Such petition shall contain a certification by
the Commission/Administrator that the particular matter presents exceptional circumstances in which irreparable injury will result from a violation of
this Chapter in the absence of temporary relief.
2. The petition shall be filed in the circuit court for the county in which the respondent resides or transacts business or in which the alleged violation
took place.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 190/470
3. When the petition is based upon a "civil rights violation" as defined in this Chapter, and relief or restraining order entered by the court shall not
exceed five (5) days unless:
a. A longer period is agreed to by the respondent; or
b. The court finds that there is substantial evidence to demonstrate that the respondent has engaged in violations of this Chapter.
D. Respondent Response: The respondent shall serve a verified copy of his or her response to all allegations contained in the complaint within ten (10)
calendar days of the date on which respondent was served a copy of the complaint.
The Administrator shall issue a notice of default directed to any respondent who fails to file a verified response to a complaint within ten (10) calendar
days of the date on which the complainant was served, unless the respondent can demonstrate good cause as to why such notice should not be
issued.
E. Complainant Response: Within ten (10) calendar days of the date he receives the respondent's response, the complainant may file his reply to said
response. If he chooses to file a reply, the complainant shall serve a copy of said reply on the respondent or his representative. A party shall have the
right to supplement his response or reply at any time that the investigation of the complaint is pending.
F. Investigation:
1. The Commission shall order a prompt investigation of the complaint, completing such an investigation within one hundred (100) calendar days after
the filing of the complaint.
2. Unless it is impossible to do so, upon the review of the report and within one hundred (100) calendar days after the filing of the complaint, the
Administrator shall determine whether there is substantial evidence that the alleged Chapter violation has been committed or is about to be
committed.
3. If the Administrator is unable to make the determination within one hundred (100) calendar days after the filing of the complaint, the Administrator
shall notify the complainant and respondent, in writing, of the reasons for not doing so.
4. If the Administrator determines that there is no substantial evidence, the complaint shall be dismissed and the complainant notified that he or she
may seek review of the dismissal order before the Commission. The complainant shall have thirty (30) calendar days from receipt of notice to file a
request for review by the Commission. The Commission shall:
a. Uphold the finding of insubstantial evidence; or
b. Reverse the finding of insubstantial evidence and remand the complaint to the Administrator for conciliation.
5. If the Administrator determines that there is substantial evidence he shall immediately notify the parties and schedule a conciliation meeting.
G. Conciliation:
1. During the period beginning with the filing of a complaint and ending with a dismissal or a referral to the Commission, the Commission or
Administrator shall, to the extent feasible, engage in conciliation with respect to such complaint.
2. It the Administrator determines:
a. That conciliation is feasible, the complainant and respondent shall be notified of the time and place of the conciliation meeting by registered or
certified mail at least seven (7) calendar days prior thereto and both parties shall appear at the meeting in person or by attorney; or
b. That attempts at conciliation would not further the objectives of this Chapter, or that the complaint cannot be resolved by conciliation, the
Administrator shall report and transfer the complaint and filings to the Commission.
3. The Administrator shall attempt by all accepted methods of conciliation and lawful persuasion to resolve the grievance delineated in the complaint.
4. Nothing occurring at the conciliation meeting shall be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding for the purpose of proving a
violation under this Chapter unless the complainant and respondent agree, in writing, that such disclosure be made.
5. An agreement arising out of such conciliation shall be treated as a settlement pursuant to subsection J of this Section.
6. A conciliation may provide for binding arbitration of the dispute arising from the complaint. Any such arbitration that results from a conciliation
agreement may award relief as provided for in this Chapter.
H. Hearing On Complaint: Within fifteen (15) days of receiving a complaint from the Administrator the Commission shall, upon due and reasonable notice
to all parties, schedule a public hearing on the complaint. The public hearing shall be scheduled no sooner that thirty (30) days from the date of the
notice, nor later than sixty (60) days from the date of the notice.
All parties shall be entitled to be represented by legal counsel, and shall have the right to call witnesses in their own behalf and to cross-examine
witnesses. All parties to the proceedings may apply to the Commission to have subpoenas issued in the name of the Commission. Testimony taken at
the conference/hearing shall be under oath or affirmation and a transcript shall be made and filed in the office of the Commission.
I. Report/Decision:
1. The Commission shall issue a written report within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the public hearing. The report/decision shall include a
summary of the testimony, exhibits admitted into evidence, and a finding of whether a violation of this Chapter was proven by a preponderance of the
evidence. The report/decision shall also contain a recommendation/order of the relief that may include one or more of the elements provided for in
Section 4-13-10 of this Chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 191/470
2. If the Commission determines that a respondent has not complied in a timely manner with the decision, the Commission shall refer the matter to the
attorney for the City who shall seek judicial enforcement of the decision.
J. Settlement:
1. Circumstances: A settlement of any complaint may be effected at any time prior to a decision/report by the Commission upon agreement of the
parties and the approval of the Commission.
2. Settlement: Each settlement agreement shall be made public unless the complainant and respondent otherwise agree and the Administrator
determines that disclosure is not required to further the purpose of this Chapter.
3. Form: Settlements of complaints prior to the issuing of a report/decision shall be issued in writing by the Administrator, signed by the parties, and
submitted by the Administrator to the Commission.
4. Settlement Violation: When either party alleges that a settlement order has been violated, the Administrator shall conduct an investigation into the
matter. If substantial evidence demonstrates that a settlement has been violated, the Administrator shall refer the matter to the attorney for the City
for enforcement in the Circuit Court in which the respondent or complainant resides or transacts business or in which the alleged violation took place.
(Ord. 0-93-03, 1-18-1993)
4-13-10: PENALTY/FINES; REMEDIES/RELIEF:
A. Penalty/Fines: Any person violating any provision of this Chapter may be directed to:
1. Cease and desist from any violation of this Chapter;
2. Pay a civil penalty to vindicate the public interest:
a. In the amount not exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) if the respondent has not been adjudged to have committed any prior violations of
any provision of this Chapter;
b. In an amount not exceeding twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) if the respondent has been adjudged to have committed one other violation
of this Chapter during the five (5) year period prior to the filing date of the current complaint;
c. In an amount not exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) if the respondent has been adjudged to have committed two (2) or more violations
of this Chapter during the seven (7) year period prior to the filing date of the current complaint.
B. Remedies/Relief: In addition to the penalties and fines delineated in subsection A of this Section, the Commission may undertake additional actions,
including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Directing the respondent to pay compensatory/actual damages (including damages to compensate for mental anguish), punitive damages, attorney
fees and costs;
2. Directing the respondent to provide other equitable relief including, but not limited to, access to the dwelling at issue, or to a comparable dwelling,
the provision of services or facilities in connection with a dwelling or other specific relief;
3. Directing the respondent to provide other injunctive relief appropriate to the elimination of discriminatory housing practices affecting the aggrieved
person or other persons;
4. Directing the Administrator to send copies of the decision/report to the Department of Professional Registration of the State and recommend
appropriate disciplinary action, including, where appropriate, the suspension or revocation of the license of the respondent;
5. Further, any persons violating any provision of this Chapter may also be required to undertake actions to prevent future discriminatory housing
practices; to undertake remedial affirmative activities to overcome discriminatory housing practices; or to undertake various report requirements,
including, but not limited to:
a. Requiring the respondent and all of the respondent's brokers, associate brokers, salespeople and agents and employees who are employed as
sales or rental agents or have a contractual relationship with him and are responsible for sales and/or rental of any residential properties, to attend
a fair housing training session conducted by U.S. HUD or an agency acceptable to the City Council. Such training session shall cover Federal,
State and local fair housing laws, applicable case law, and real life or role playing situations. Costs of such training session shall be borne by the
defendant;
b. Requiring all agents and employees of any respondent, owner and/or management company to utilize the fair housing logo and slogan in all
advertising and telephone directories, and on all company stationery, forms, pamphlets and brochures;
c. Requiring all agents and employees of any respondent, owner and/or management company to post and maintain, in a manner conspicuous to
tenants and prospective tenants, buyers and prospective buyers, the fair housing poster and logo;
d. Requiring any respondent owner and/or management company to provide quarterly reports in writing for a period of five (5) years of the names,
addresses, race and sex of each prospective buyer/renter who seeks respondent's aid in locating housing and the subsequent showings to each
prospective buyer/renter and the final disposition. (Ord. 0-93-03, 1-18-1993)
4-13-11: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
Any persons aggrieved by the decision of the Commission shall have the right to appeal in accordance with the following procedure:
A. First, initial reconsideration by the full board of the Commission. This appeal shall be initiated by filing with the Administrator, within seven (7) calendar
days of the decision, a written statement setting forth specifically the grounds for reconsideration. These grounds shall be supported by argument and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 192/470
served on all parties at the time they are filed with the Administrator. The Commission, after reviewing the statement shall:
1. Render a revised decision notifying all parties within fourteen (14) calendar days of the filing of the statement for initial reconsideration; or
2. Issue and serve on all parties a written order for rehearing the case, citing the cause and additional evidence; or
3. Uphold the decision.
B. Second, appeal to the City Council in cases where the Commission decision has been upheld. The appeal shall be initiated within seven (7) calendar
days of the initial decision, by filing with the Council a written statement as delineated in subsection A of this Section. After reviewing the statement and
hearing record, the City Council shall:
1. Render a revised decision notifying all parties within thirty (30) calendar days of the filing of the appeal statements; or
2. Issue and serve on all parties a written order for rehearing the case, citing the cause and additional evidence; or
3. Uphold the decision of the Commission. The decision of the City Council on such appeals shall be final.
C. After a decision by the City Council the aggrieved person may apply for judicial review under writ of certiorari. (Ord. 0-93-03, 1-18-1993)
4-13-12: IMPLEMENTATION; EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Chapter shall be in full force from and after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 0-93-03, 1-18-1993)
Chapter 14
APPEARANCE REVIEW PLAN
4-14-1: TITLE:
This Chapter, including any regulation hereafter adopted, shall be hereafter known, cited and referred to as the CITY OF PROSPECT HEIGHTS
APPEARANCE CODE. (Ord. 0-97-67, 11-17-1997, eff. 11-27-1997)
4-14-2: INTENT AND PURPOSES:
The intent and purposes of this Chapter are as follows:
A. To promote the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the citizens of the City;
B. To enhance the values of property throughout the City;
C. To protect and to stabilize the general appearance of buildings, structures, landscaping and open areas, in all the zoning districts of the City, including
public lands and planned developments.
D. To ensure adequate light, air and privacy for property in the City;
E. To encourage and promote acceptability, attractiveness, cohesiveness and compatibility of new buildings, development, substantial remodeling and
additions so as to maintain and improve the established standards of property values within the City. (Ord. 0-97-67, 11-17-1997, eff. 11-27-1997)
4-14-3: APPEARANCE REVIEW COMMITTEE APPOINTMENTS:
A. Committee Meetings: The Appearance Review Committee meets, as needed, preferably during business hours.
B. Committee Membership: Membership shall consist of three (3) residents of the City. They shall serve with or without compensation. All efforts shall be
made to have the membership consist of registered architects, landscape architects, real estate appraisers, and land planners. If possible, one member
shall be the owner or officer of a firm, owning business, commercial or industrial property in the City. In making appointments to the Committee, the
Mayor shall seek to appoint members who are recognized as experts in matters of aesthetic judgment by virtue of training, education and experience,
and possessing qualities of impartiality and broad judgment. (Ord. 0-97-67, 11-17-1997, eff. 11-27-1997)
4-14-4: CHAIRMAN:
The Mayor, with the concurrence of the City Council, shall appoint one of the members to serve as chairman. (Ord. 0-97-67, 11-17-1997, eff. 11-27-1997)
4-14-5: VACANCIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 193/470
Vacancies on the Committee shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant in the same manner in which original
appointments are required to be made. (Ord. 0-97-67, 11-17-1997, eff. 11-27-1997)
4-14-6: MEETINGS; RECORDS:
Meetings of the Appearance Review Committee shall be held at the call of the chairman, and shall be called whenever a request is submitted for
consideration. All meetings shall be open to the public. The Committee shall keep minutes of its proceedings and shall keep records of its examinations
and other official action. (Ord. 0-97-67, 11-17-1997, eff. 11-27-1997)
4-14-7: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Appearance Review Committee shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To hold public hearings on, and make recommendations for, an appearance review as provided in this Chapter;
B. To consult with and cooperate with the Plan Commission, other City departments, and any other Municipal or governmental bodies on matters affecting
the appearance of the City.
C. To study exterior design drawings, landscape and site plans and materials for any proposed public works or public improvements and to make
recommendations to the Mayor and City Council or City Administrator as to the architectural or aesthetic aspects thereof;
D. To hold hearings, when required, in connection with questions pertaining to appearance review compliance. (Ord. 0-97-67, 11-17-1997, eff. 11-27-1997)
4-14-8: APPEARANCE REVIEW DETERMINATION:
No Appearance Review Committee approval need be obtained if the Director of Building and Zoning determines that a proposal involves:
A. No architectural features;
B. Remodeling or changes or an addition in a single-family district; or
C. Remodeling or changes in any zoning district which will not subsequently change or significantly impact upon a structure's overall appearance; or
D. A custom home.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Director of Building and Zoning determines that a custom home or commercial property is radically different or that
the architectural design is inferior or radically different so as to impair the marketability or property values of existing buildings in the immediate area,
the Director may refer proposed construction projects to the Appearance Review Committee. (Ord. 0-97-67, 11-17-1997, eff. 11-27-1997)
4-14-9: APPEARANCE REVIEW CRITERIA:
A. Review: The Appearance Review Committee may review all new construction projects, including, but not limited to:
1. Residential subdivisions,
2. Custom built homes,
3. Shopping centers (new or remodeled exterior),
4. Commercial,
5. Restaurants, freestanding businesses, etc.
B. Review Criteria: The provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in regard to bulk regulations and standards, and those portions of all codes which directly
affect appearance, shall be part of the following review criteria:
1. Inappropriate, incompatible, bizarre, and exotic colors and designs shall be avoided.
2. Inappropriate materials and methods, and those which will produce inconsistency with the building, shall be avoided.
3. The height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and adjoining buildings.
4. The architectural character of the building shall be in keeping with the topographical dictates of the site.
5. Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties shall be provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 194/470
6. Landscape elements included in this criteria shall consist of all forms of planting and vegetation, ground forms, rock groupings, water patterns, and
all visible construction except buildings and utility structures.
7. Screening of service yards, and other places which tend to be unsightly, shall be accomplished by use of walls, fencing, planting, or a combination of
these. Screening shall be equally effective in summer and winter.
8. Exterior lighting, when used, shall enhance the building design and the adjoining landscape. Lighting standards and fixtures shall be of a design and
size compatible with the building and adjacent areas. Lighting shall be restrained in design, and excessive brightness and brilliant colors avoided.
9. Wall signs shall be part of the architectural concept. Size, color, lettering, location, and arrangement shall be harmonious with the building design,
and shall be compatible with signs on adjoining buildings. Signs shall have good proportions.
10. Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground, or building shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the
building, or they shall be located so as not to be visible from any public ways.
11. Continued good appearance depends upon the extent and quality of maintenance. The choice of materials and their use, together with the types of
finishes and other protective measures must be conducive to easy maintenance and upkeep.
The purpose of this criteria is to establish a checklist of those items which affect the physical aspect of the City's environment. Pertinent to
appearance is the design of the site, building and structure, planting, lighting, signage and miscellaneous other objects which are observed by the
public.
This criteria is not intended to restrict imagination, innovation or variety, but rather to assist in focusing on design principles which can result in
creative solutions that will develop a satisfactory visual appearance within the City. (Ord. 0-97-67, 11-17-1997, eff. 11-27-1997)
4-14-10: ACTION OF APPEARANCE REVIEW COMMITTEE:
The Committee may make recommendations to the applicant as to changes in the exterior drawings, sketches, landscaping, site plans and materials
which in the judgment of the Committee would tend to affect the general purposes of the appearance plan. The Committee shall determine whether or not
the proposed request: a) conforms to the appearance plan; b) that the proposed building or structure will be inappropriate to, or incompatible with the
character of the immediate neighborhood; or c) cause substantial depreciation in property values. (Ord. 0-97-67, 11-17-1997, eff. 11-27-1997)
4-14-11: APPROVAL BY MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL:
The Appearance Review Committee is an advisory committee only. All rulings of the Committee shall be submitted to the Mayor and City Council for final
decision. The Committee shall file minutes of the proceedings along with its recommendation with the City Clerk. The Mayor and City Council may
overrule, approve, modify, or amend, wholly or in part, the Committee's recommendation, with or without a hearing, by a majority vote. (Ord. 0-97-67, 11-
17-1997, eff. 11-27-1997)
4-14-12: RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIRECTOR OF BUILDING AND ZONING:
Exterior drawings, sketches, landscape and site plans, renderings and materials shall be turned over to the Director of Building and Zoning who shall
ensure compliance with the approval. The Director of Building and Zoning may authorize minor changes to the approval if the changes do not substantially
change or significantly impact upon the overall general appearance. (Ord. 0-97-67, 11-17-1997, eff. 11-27-1997)
Title 5
ZONING
Chapter 1
TITLE, INTENT AND PURPOSE
5-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known, referred to, and recited as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF PROSPECT HEIGHTS. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-1-2: INTENT:
The intent of this title is to establish a comprehensive land use regulation ordinance to serve the city of Prospect Heights. The regulations enumerated are
based upon the community's adopted development plans and overall city policies and objectives and are intended to serve the city of Prospect Heights as
it deals with future growth. Further, this title is enacted by the corporate authorities of the city of Prospect Heights pursuant to the full power and authority
granted them under the constitution of the state of Illinois and all applicable laws of said state. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-1-3: PURPOSE:
This zoning ordinance of the city of Prospect Heights is adopted for the purpose of:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 195/470
A. Promoting and protecting the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the city;
B. Ensuring high standards of light, air and open space in areas where people live and work;
C. Encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city;
D. Conserving and enhancing the value of land and buildings;
E. Preventing overcrowding of land with buildings and, thereby, ensuring maximum living and working conditions, and preventing blight and slums;
F. Avoiding undue concentration of population;
G. Fostering a rational pattern of land use relationships between residential and nonresidential uses;
H. Protecting residential, business and industrial areas alike from harmful encroachment by incompatible uses, and ensuring that land allocated to a class
of uses shall not be usurped by other inappropriate uses;
I. Preventing such additions to, and alterations or remodeling of, existing buildings or structures as would not comply with the restrictions and limitations
imposed hereinafter;
J. Checking existing congestion and preventing future congestion by limiting development of land to a degree consistent with the ability of the city to
furnish adequate public services;
K. Preserving and increasing those amenities which are characteristic of the city;
L. Defining the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies as provided hereinafter;
M. Prescribing penalties for the violations of the provisions of this title or any amendment hereto;
N. Protecting the air, water and land resources of the city from the hazards of pollution;
O. Preserving and maintaining the essential character of the city as it exists as of the date of adoption of this comprehensive title and as established by the
nature of its residential development, the height of structures, open areas and existing amenities;
P. Lessening or avoiding the hazards to persons and damage to property resulting from the accumulation or runoff of storm or flood waters;
Q. Providing for the orderly and functional arrangement of land uses and buildings; and fixing reasonable zoning standards to which buildings or structures
shall conform;
R. Establishing standards for the orderly development or redevelopment of neighborhoods, or functional and geographic parts of neighborhoods;
S. Providing adequate locations for housing, employment, shopping, education and recreation for the public;
T. Facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, utility systems, schools, parks and other public requirements;
U. Promoting the economic diversity of the community and enhancing opportunities for participation in the economic and social systems of the community;
V. Providing for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings, and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value of
desirable development in each district. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
Chapter 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
5-2-1: INTERPRETATION:
In the construction of this title, the rules and definitions contained in this chapter shall be observed and applied, except when the context herein clearly
indicates otherwise. Definitions are for clarity and inclusion or exclusion of a definition in this title shall not be construed as an approved or recommended
use. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 196/470
5-2-2: RULES:
A. The present tense includes the future and the present.
B. The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
C. The word "building" includes the word "structure".
D. The word "lot" shall mean a zoning lot, unless otherwise defined herein.
E. The word "shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is permissive, and terms or words unless otherwise defined herein, shall be as defined in Webster's
dictionary. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
ABUTTING: To have a common property line or district line.
ACCESSORY: A use, building, structure, or part of a building or structure which:
A. Is subordinate to and serves the principal building or structure or principal use;
B. Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or structure or principal use served;
C. Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use; and
D. Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or structure or principal use served, with the exception of such accessory off street parking
facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same lot as the building or use served.
ADJACENT: Lying near or in the immediate vicinity.
ADVERTISING DEVICE: Any advertising sign, billboard, or poster panel which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment not
exclusively related to the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: For the purposes of this title, an agricultural building or structure shall imply any building or structure
existing or erected on land used principally for agricultural purposes, with the exception of dwelling units.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture and viticulture.
The necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce, provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall
be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities.
Included are truck farming, growing of nursery stock, raising of fruit and berries, beekeeping, and the retail sale of products grown or raised on the
premises through one growing season.
Agriculture shall not include the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals or operating for the disposal of garbage, sewerage,
rubbish, or offal.
Also excluded from agriculture are mechanized industrial animal farms, commercially operated greenhouses, commercial milk farms, and
commercial dog kennels.
The land area (farm) necessary to constitute an agricultural use is five (5) acres.
AIRPORT: Any area of land or water which is used or intended for use for the landing and taking off of aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which are used
or intended for use for airport buildings or other airport facilities or right of way, including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie down areas,
hangars, and other necessary buildings, and open spaces.
ALLEY: A public right of way which normally affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
Frontage on an alley shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements related to frontage on a dedicated street.
ALTERATION: Any change in size, shape, character, occupancy, or use of a building or structure.
AMENITY: Something that enhances the pleasantness or desirability of the zoning lot or the city, or contributes to the pleasure and enjoyment of the
occupants, rather than to their indispensable needs.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL (VETERINARY CLINIC): A structure where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment. Use as a kennel, or for other
boarding purposes, shall be limited to short time and fully enclosed boarding and shall only be incidental to such hospital use.
ANTENNA, COMMERCIAL: Any antenna structure that is intended for transmitting or receiving television, radio or telephone communications, excluding
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 197/470
those used exclusively for emergency dispatch communications.
ANTENNA STRUCTURE: Any structure, mast, pole, tripod or tower for the purpose of either transmission or reception purposes or both.
APARTMENT: One or more rooms in a multi-family dwelling arranged, intended or designed as living quarters for an individual, group of individuals, or a
family.
APARTMENT HOTEL: A hotel in which at least ninety percent (90%) of the hotel accommodations are occupied by permanent guests.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: A residential facility within which residents with or without minor physical disabilities live, cook, dine, and recreate, and may
be provided with medical and other services. An assisted living facility may provide ancillary services such as memory care or other services for aging
persons.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY (CAR WASH): A building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing motor vehicles, using automatic production line
methods with a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device, or other mechanical devices; or providing space, water, and equipment for the hand
washing of autos, whether by the customer or the operator.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR: Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision service including body,
frame or fender straightening or repair and painting of vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR: Incidental repairs, replacement of parts and motor service to automobiles, but not including any operation specified
under the definition of "Automobile Repair, Major".
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A place where motor fuel, stored only in underground tanks, kerosene, lubricating oil or grease, for operation of motor
vehicles, are offered for sale directly to the public, on the premises; and including minor accessories and the servicing of motor vehicles, but not including
major repairs; and including washing of motor vehicles where no mechanical devices are employed.
When the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels or oil is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be classified as a
public garage.
Services shall not include sale, rental or storage of automobiles, trailers, or other vehicles (new or used).
AWNING: A roof like mechanism, retractable in operation, which projects from the wall of a building, but does not include those advertising signs,
billboards, or poster panels which direct attention to the business on the premises or to a brand name of a product or commodity with which the business
is specifically identified and which is sold on the premises.
BASEMENT OR CELLAR: A story partly or wholly underground. Where more than one-half (1/2) of its height is above the established finished grade, a
basement shall be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, other permanent open areas, or other lines of demarcation. A
block may be located in part beyond the boundary lines of the corporate limits of the city of Prospect Heights.
BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separate on all sides from the adjacent open space, or from other buildings or other structures, by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls pierced only by windows and normal entrance or exit doors.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by an open space on the same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The height of a principal building shall be measured from the mean elevation of the finished lot grade at the front building line to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or
gambrel roof.
Chimneys, towers, spires, elevator penthouses, cooling towers, and similar accessory structures and equipment, other than signs, shall not be
included in calculating building height, provided that spires, radio towers and similar structures do not exceed seventy five feet (75').
BUILDING LINE: A maximum distance to lot lines on which a building may be constructed according to setbacks required. Construction may be anywhere
within the building lines.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: Any building not designed to be permanently located at the place where it is or where it is intended to be temporarily placed or
affixed.
BULK: The term used to indicate the size and setback of buildings or structures, and the location of same with respect to one another, and includes the
following:
A. Size and height of buildings;
B. Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets, or to other buildings;
C. Floor area ratio (FAR);
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 198/470
D. All open spaces allocated to buildings;
E. Amount of lot area and lot width provided per dwelling unit.
BUSINESS: An occupation, employment, or enterprise, which occupies time, attention, labor, and materials; or, wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold;
or, where services are offered.
CAPACITY IN PERSONS: The maximum number of persons that can avail themselves of the services or goods of an establishment or use at any one
time, with reasonable comfort and safety.
CARPORT: An open sided roofed automobile shelter, usually formed by an extension of the roof from the side of a building.
CELLULAR SERVICE: A telecommunications service that permits customers to use wireless, mobile telephones to connect, via low power radio
transmitter sites called cell sites, either to the public switched network or to other mobile cellular phones.
CLINIC, MEDICAL AND/OR DENTAL: A medical and/or dental center or medical and/or dental clinic is an establishment where three (3) or more licensed
physicians, surgeons, and/or dentists or other duly licensed medical practitioners engage in the practice of medicine or dentistry, operating on a group or
individual basis with pooled facilities, such as coordinated laboratory, X-ray and allied departments, and the diagnosis and treatment of humans, which
need not but may include a drug prescription counter (not a drugstore) for the dispensing of drugs and pharmaceutical products to the patients of said
physicians, surgeons and dentists.
CLUB, PRIVATE (NONPROFIT): A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases a
building, or portion thereof; the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests. The affairs and management of such "private club" are
conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting.
It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such premises, providing adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available.
The sale of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed provided it is secondary and incidental to the promotion of some other
common objective of the organization, and further provided that such sale of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable federal, state
and city laws.
COMPATIBLE USE: A property, use or service which is capable of direct association with certain other uses because it is complementary, congruous, or
otherwise not detrimental to the principal use.
CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which: a) complies with all the regulations of this title or of any amendment thereof
governing bulk of the district in which said building or structure is located; and b) is designed or intended for a permitted use or special permitted use, as
herein allowed in the district in which it is located.
CONTIGUOUS: Substantial contact, adjoining, or touching another object or item.
COURT: An open unoccupied space other than a yard on the same lot with a building or group of buildings and which is bounded on two (2) or more sides
by such building or buildings.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of a building measured at the center of such front.
DENSITY, GROSS: The numerical value obtained by dividing the total number of dwelling units in a development by the gross area of the tract of land in
acres within a development. This would include all nonresidential land uses and private streets of the development as well as rights of way of dedicated
streets; the result being the number of dwelling units per gross acre of land.
DENSITY, NET: The numerical value obtained by dividing the total number of dwelling units in a development by the area of the actual tract of land in
acres, upon which the dwelling units are proposed to be located and including private streets, common open space, and associated recreational facilities
within the area; the result being the number of dwelling units per net residential acre of land. Net density calculations exclude rights of way of publicly
dedicated streets.
DETENTION: Temporary storage of rainwater that has a positive calculated outlet that completely empties all runoff between storms. In some situations,
the excavation of a detention facility may extend below the water table or outlet level where the bottom is sealed by sedimentation.
DRIVE-THROUGH RESTAURANT FACILITY: A portion of a restaurant which accommodates those patrons who wish to purchase and pick up their food,
via a service window, without leaving their vehicle, and who normally consume the food off the premises.
DRIVEWAY: A pathway for motor vehicles from a street to a structure used for service purposes or for access to the structure only.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family and multiple-family dwellings.
Mobile homes or other trailers and lodging rooms in hotels, motels or lodging houses are not dwellings.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling joined to two (2) other dwellings (or 1 for an end unit) by party walls, or vertical cavity walls, and aboveground
physically unifying horizontal structural elements.
DWELLING, CONVERTED: Any building which was originally designed for one type of residential use, but which has been altered or changed to another
type of residential use.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is surrounded on all sides by open spaces on the same lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 199/470
DWELLING, SEMIDETACHED: A dwelling joined to one other dwelling by a party wall, or vertical cavity wall, and aboveground physically unifying
horizontal structural elements.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling containing one dwelling unit only.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A dwelling containing two (2) dwelling units only.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms, which are arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for one family only. Individual bathrooms and complete
single kitchen facilities, permanently installed to serve the entire family, are customarily included within each dwelling unit.
EARTH STATION, COMMERCIAL: Any earth station used in conjunction with communication facilities for use in commerce or industry.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS: A public, parochial, private or charitable, or nonprofit school, junior college, or university, other than trade or business
schools, including instructional and recreational uses, with or without living quarters, dining rooms, restaurants, heating plants, and other incidental
facilities for students, teachers, and employees.
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room, exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets, or dining alcove directly off the
principal room.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION CENTER: A terminal at which electric energy is received from the transmission system and is delivered to the distribution
system only.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION: A terminal at which electric energy is received from the transmission system and is delivered to other elements of the
transmission system and, generally, to the local distribution system.
ESTABLISHMENT, BUSINESS: A place of business carrying on operations, the ownership and management of which are separate and distinct from those
of any other place of business located on the same zoning lot. Direct access to each "business establishment" shall be separate and distinct from direct
access to any other business establishment, and in no case shall there be access to one such establishment from within another such establishment.
ESTABLISHMENT, WHOLESALE: A business establishment engaged in selling to retailers, or jobbers rather than consumers.
FALLOUT SHELTER: An accessory building and use designed for the protection of life from radioactive fallout.
FAMILY: Refers to either:
A. An individual or two (2) or more persons, related by blood, marriage, civil union, or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a
dwelling unit; or
B. A group of not more than four (4) persons, who need not be related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a
dwelling unit; plus, in either case, usual domestic servants.
FAMILY COMMUNITY RESIDENCE: A single dwelling unit occupied on a relatively permanent basis in a family-like environment by a group of 4 - 8
unrelated persons, plus paid professional support staff provided by a licensed, sponsoring agency either living with the residents on a 24-hour basis or
present whenever residents with disabilities are present at the dwelling, and complies with the zoning regulations for the district in which the site is located.
A family community residence does not include a residence which serves persons as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense, or persons
whose primary reason for placement is substance abuse or alcohol abuse or for treatment of a communicable disease.
FARM: Land being used for agricultural purposes.
FAST FOOD RESTAURANT: A self-service establishment selling a limited number of prepared food items which are served in containers and with utensils
that are disposable and which are dispensed for consumption on or off the premises.
FENCE: A structure which is a barrier and is used as a boundary, screen, separation, means of privacy, protection or confinement, and is constructed of
wood, plastic, metal, masonry or other similar material.
FENCE, NATURAL: A fence made of natural growth, such as trees, deciduous shrubs, evergreens, etc.
FENCE, OPEN: A fence including gates which has, for each one foot (1') wide segment extending over the entire length and height of the fence, open
spaces which afford a direct view through the fence.
FENCE, SOLID: A fence, including gates, which conceals from view, adjoining properties, streets, alleys, and activities conducted behind it.
FLOODPLAIN: As defined in the city of Prospect Heights "flood control ordinance".
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Area Ratio): For the purposes of determining the floor area ratio (FAR), the "floor area" of a building is the sum of the
gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating
two (2) buildings.
The "floor area" of a building shall include basement floor area when more than one-half (1/2) of the basement height is above the established curb
level (or above the finished lot grade level where curb level has not been established), elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, floor space used
for mechanical equipment (except equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof) penthouses, attic space having headroom of seven feet six
inches (7'6") or more, interior balconies and mezzanines, enclosed porches, and floor area devoted to accessory uses. However, any space devoted
to off street parking or loading shall not be included in "floor area".
The "floor area" of structures devoted to bulk storage of materials, including, but not limited to, grain elevators and petroleum storage tanks, shall be
determined on the basis of height in feet; i.e., ten feet (10') in height shall equal one floor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 200/470
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements): The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building,
or portion thereof, devoted to such use, including accessory storage area located within selling or working space as counters, racks or closets, and any
basement floor area devoted to retailing activities, to the production or processing of foods, or to business or professional offices.
However, "floor area" for the purpose of measurement for off street parking spaces shall not include:
A. Floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes (except as otherwise noted herein);
B. Floor area devoted to off street parking or loading facilities, including aisles, ramps, and maneuvering space or basement floor area other than
area devoted to retailing activities and the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The floor area of the building or buildings on the zoning lot divided by the area of such zoning lot. The FAR requirements, as
set forth under such zoning district, shall determine the maximum floor area allowable for the building or buildings (total floor area of both principal and
accessory buildings) in direct ratio to the gross area of the zoning lot.
FRONTAGE: All the property fronting on one side of a street between the two (2) nearest intersecting streets, measured along the line of the street, or if
dead ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
FRONTAGE, ZONING LOT: All the property of such zoning lot fronting on a street, and measured between side lot lines.
GARAGE, COMMERCIAL: A building or portion thereof designed and used for the storage of motor vehicles for a fee which use may include the sales of
motor fuels and oil, but not including the repair or sales of motor vehicles or parts.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building designed and used for the storage of motor vehicles of not more than twelve thousand (12,000) pounds gross
vehicle weight. A private garage may be occupied by motor vehicles or recreational vehicles of nonresidents of the principal building providing sufficient off
street parking is provided in conformance with the requirements of this title for all vehicles owned or used by the occupants or resident owners of the
property.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof other than a private, or storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, or repairing motor
vehicles. Hiring, selling, or storing of motor vehicles may be included.
GRADE: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building or structure.
GRADING: Reshaping natural land contours, using natural land materials such as soil, gravel, sand, black dirt, etc., for the purpose of eliminating erosion
or sedimentation problems, creating or improving surface drainage, providing for the natural aesthetic contouring of property or to accommodate a building
plan by making minor changes in the land elevation.
GUEST, PERMANENT: A person who occupies or has the right to occupy a lodging house, hotel, apartment hotel, or motel accommodation as his domicile
and place of permanent residence.
HELISTOP: Any area used or to be used for the landing or takeoff of helicopters or other steep gradient aircraft capable of hovering, but does not afford
refueling, maintenance, or repair facilities and is for the accommodation of a single helicopter.
HOME OCCUPATION: See section 5-3-5 of this title.
HOSPITAL OR SANITARIUM: An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment, or care for not
less than twenty four (24) hours in any week, of three (3) or more nonrelated individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, or other abnormal
physical conditions.
The term "hospital" as used in this title does not apply to institutions operating primarily for treatment of insane persons, drug addicts, liquor addicts,
or other types of cases necessitating restraint of patients, and the term "hospital" shall not include convalescent, nursing, shelter, or boarding
houses.
HOTEL: An establishment which is open to transient guests, in contradistinction to a boarding house, lodging house, or apartment hotel, and is commonly
known as a hotel in the community in which it is located.
An establishment which provides customary hotel services such as maid service, the furnishing and laundering of linen, telephone and secretarial or
desk service, the use and upkeep of furniture, and bellboy services.
HOUSE, HALFWAY: Any structure or building which is owned and/or operated by a public or private institution, and is used for or intended to be used for
rehabilitative programs, whereby the occupants are allowed to interact with the community while in residence, and will eventually be reintroduced into the
community.
INCOMPATIBLE USE: A use or service which is incapable of direct association with certain other uses because it is contradictory, incongruous, or
discordant.
JUNK CAR: An automobile, truck or other motor vehicle which has been damaged to such an extent that it cannot be operated under its own power and
will require major repairs before being made usable or such a vehicle which does not comply with state or city laws or ordinances.
JUNKYARD: An open area where junk, waste, scrap, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, sorted, baled, packed, disassembled,
or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles.
A "junkyard" includes automobile wrecking or salvage yards, house wrecking yards, used lumberyards and places or yards for storage of salvaged
house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 201/470
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any premises or portion thereof designed for the purpose of boarding, breeding or caring for dogs, cats or other domestic
animals over six (6) months in age in return for remuneration, or for the purpose of sale.
LABORATORY: See definition of Research Laboratory.
LAUNDERETTE: A business that provides coin operated self-service type washing, drying, dry cleaning, and ironing facilities, provided that no pick up or
delivery service is maintained.
LOADING BERTH: A space within the principal building or on the same lot as the principal building providing for the standing, or unloading of trucks and
with access to a street or alley.
LODGE: A hall or meeting place of a local branch or the members composing such a branch of a fraternal order, or society, such as the Masons, Knights
Of Columbus, Moose, American Legion and other similar organizations.
It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such premises, providing adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available.
The sale of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed provided it is secondary and incidental to the promotion of some other
common objective by the organization, and further provided that such sale of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable federal, state,
and county laws and city ordinances.
LODGING HOUSE: A building originally designed for or used as a single-family dwelling, all or a portion of which contains lodging rooms which
accommodate persons who are not members of the keeper's family. Lodging or meals, or both, are provided for compensation on a weekly or monthly
basis.
LODGING ROOM: A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without cooking facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. In a suite of
rooms without cooking facilities, each room which provides sleeping accommodations shall be counted as one "lodging room".
LOT: A zoning lot, except as the context shall indicate a lot of record, in which case a "lot" is a lot of record.
Corner Lot: A lot having at least two (2) adjacent sides abutting for their full lengths upon streets, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of
such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135).
A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if the tangent to the curve at its points of beginning within the lot or if
the tangent at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street line intersecting, results in an interior angle of less than one hundred
thirty five degrees (135).
The point of intersection of the street lot lines is the corner.
In the case of a corner lot with a curved street line, the corner is that point on the street lot line nearest to the point of intersection of the tangents
above described.
Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
Irregular Lot: A lot which is not an interior lot, a corner lot, a reverse corner lot, or a through lot.
Reverse Corner Lot: A corner lot, the street side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear.
Through Lot: A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) more or less parallel public streets, and which is not a corner lot.
Zoning Lot: A single tract of land located within a single block which (at the time of filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or developer
as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Therefore, a "zoning lot" may or may not coincide with a
lot or a lot of record.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines of the lot.
LOT COVERAGE: The part or percent of the lot occupied by building or structures, including accessory buildings or structures.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT FRONTAGE: That boundary of a lot along a public or private street.
LOT LINE: A property boundary line of any lot. When a lot extends to an abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be the closest street or alley line.
LOT LINE, FRONT: That boundary of a lot which is along an existing or dedicated public street, or where no public street exists, is along a public way.
That boundary where such public way is not a dedicated street the right of way of such public way shall be deemed to be sixty six feet (66'), unless
otherwise provided.
On a corner lot, the lot line having the shortest length abutting a street line shall be the front lot line.
LOT LINE, INTERIOR: A lot line which does not abut a street right of way line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 202/470
LOT LINE, REAR: That boundary of a lot which is most distant from, and is, or is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been registered in the office of the registrar of titles of Cook County prior to
August 20, 1940, or has been recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County.
A "lot of record" is a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded or registered in either of said offices prior to August 20, 1940.
LOT WIDTH: The minimum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured at the required front setback line.
MAINTAINED: Upholding the appearance so as to be homogenous to the surrounding area.
MARQUEE OR CANOPY: A rooflike structure of a permanent nature which projects from the wall of a building.
MEZZANINE: A partial story occurring between two (2) main stories of a building.
MOBILE HOME: A structure designed for permanent habitation, and so constructed as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently
attached to its frame, from the place of its construction to the location, or subsequent locations, at which it is intended to be a permanent home and
designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one or more persons.
Even if the structure rests on a permanent foundation, with wheels, tongue, hitch and axle or lug bolts permanently removed, it shall be construed as
a mobile home.
A mobile home may be with or without mechanical power.
MOBILE HOME PARK: An area of land or lands upon which three (3) or more independent mobile homes are harbored either free of charge or for revenue
purposes, and shall include any building, structure, tent vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such mobile home
park.
A mobile home park shall not include a sales lot or unoccupied mobile homes for the purpose of inspection and sale.
MOTEL: An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached living or sleeping accommodations with bathroom and closet space, located on a
single zoning lot and designed for use by transient automobile tourists.
A "motel" furnishes customary hotel services such as maid service and laundering of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service, and the use
and upkeep of furniture.
In a "motel", less than twenty percent (20%) of the living and sleeping accommodations are occupied or designed for occupancy by persons other
than transient automobile tourists.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is assembled and/or stored for routing in intrastate or interstate
shipment by motor truck.
NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name and address of a building, or the name of an occupant thereof, and the practice of a permitted occupation
therein.
NONACCESS STRIP (RESERVE STRIP): A strip of land along the rear lot line, adjoining a thoroughfare right of way, of a through lot, and which is
designed on a recorded subdivision plat or a property deed as land over which motor vehicular travel shall not be permitted.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure or portion thereof lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this title, or
amendment thereto, which: a) does not comply with all of the regulations of this title, or of any amendment with all of the regulations of this title, or of any
amendment hereto governing bulk for the zoning district in which such building or structure is located; or b) is designed or intended for a nonconforming
use.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A "lot of record" which, when recorded, met the minimum lot area and other dimension requirements of the zoning ordinance of
Cook County, but which through subsequent amendments to such ordinances or other acts of a public body, has caused the lot of record to be in conflict
with the minimum lot area and other dimension requirements of this title.
NONCONFORMING USE (LEGAL NONCONFORMING USE): Any building or structure and the use thereof or the use of land that does not conform with
the regulations of this title or any amendment hereto governing use in the district in which it is located, but which conformed with all of the codes,
ordinances, and other legal requirements applicable at the time such building or structure was erected, enlarged, or altered, and the use thereof or the use
of land was established.
NURSERY, CHILDCARE, OR NURSERY SCHOOL: A building containing facilities for the part time care of five (5) or more children of preelementary
school age and may include, in addition, the dwelling unit of the family residing therein.
NURSING HOME: A building containing facilities for the care and home of aged, chronically ill, infirm, or incurable persons, or a place of rest for those
persons suffering bodily disorders, in which three (3) or more persons, not members of the family residing on the premises are received, and provided with
food, shelter, and care, but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease or injury,
maternity cases, or mental illness.
OFF STREET PARKING AREA OR LOT: Land which is improved and used or a structure which is designed and used exclusively for the parking of
passenger motor vehicles, either for accessory off street parking spaces or commercial off street parking spaces when permitted herein by district
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 203/470
regulations.
OFF TRACK BETTING FACILITY: An establishment licensed by the Illinois racing board pursuant to 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq., as
amended, to accept legal wagering on the outcome of simultaneously televised horseraces taking place at an off site racetrack.
OPEN SALES LOT: Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling, or renting merchandise stored or displayed out of doors prior to sale.
PARKING SPACE: An area, enclosed in a building or unenclosed, reserved for the parking of one motor vehicle, and which is accessible to and from a
street or alley.
PARTY WALL: An interior wall of adjoining buildings, extending from its footing below grade to the underside of the roof, which divides and is in common
use by such adjoining buildings.
PAWNSHOPS: An establishment licensed by the pawnbroker regulation act1 as amended.
PERSONAL COMMUNICATION SERVICES (PCS): Digital wireless telephone technology such as portable phones, pages, faxes and computers.
PLAN/ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS: The plan/zoning board of appeals of the city of Prospect Heights, Illinois, as created by ordinance.
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS: A portable container, usually transportable by truck, intended for the temporary storage of ordinary household
goods and/or furnishings, but does not include deck boxes, or sheds, garages and other accessory buildings.
PROPERTY LINES: The lines bounding a "zoning lot", as defined herein.
PUBLIC WAY: Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway, or other public thoroughfare.
PUMPING STATION (LIFT STATION): A station at which sewage, stormwater, or water, is pumped to a high level.
RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation, but not including freight depots or stations, loading
platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, or car yards.
RECORDING (Of A Document): To officially record a document in the office of the Cook County recorder or to register a document (in torrens) with the
Cook County registrar.
RECREATION CLUB: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues which owns, hires or leases land or buildings or
portion thereof. The use of the premises is restricted primarily to the principal use, which is a generally recognized sport or recreational activity. The
premises shall be restricted to members and their guests. The affairs and management of such "recreational club" are conducted by a board of directors,
executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting.
It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such premises, providing adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available.
The sale of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed provided it is secondary and incidental to the promotion of some
recognized sport or recreational activity, and further provided that such sale of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable federal, state,
and city of Prospect Heights laws.
RESEARCH LABORATORY: A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation,
but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
RESERVOIR: The term "reservoir" is commonly applied to waters held in storage in either artificial or natural basins and impoundments primarily for a
source of water for power, municipal, industrial, domestic or flood control uses.
RESERVOIR PARKING: Those off street parking spaces allocated to automobiles awaiting entrance to a particular establishment.
RETENTION: Storage of rainwater for an indefinite amount of time without a positive outlet. Runoff is removed only by infiltration or through evaporation.
Infiltration basins and wet ponds with freeboard for flood storage are common examples.
ROADSIDE STAND: A structure erected for the display and sale of agricultural products. These products are generally grown on site or on other premises
owned or used by the operator of the roadside stand. There are two (2) distinct types of roadside stand operations: accessory and commercial.
An "accessory roadside stand" is a stand located on the same premises as a farm which is in conformance with this title. All the products or produce
not grown on land owned by the operator of the roadside stand must be of a purely agricultural nature.
A roadside stand located apart from a functioning farm shall be considered a "commercial roadside stand", and requires appropriate commercial
zoning.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street which is used or intended to be used for the travel of motor vehicles.
SATELLITE ANTENNAS: Any disk antenna, whether flat, concave, or parabolic, which is designed to receive signals from satellites or other sources, or to
transmit such signals to a receiving station for noncommercial purposes.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the front line of the building or structure and the front property line.
SIGNS: See chapter 9, "Signs", of this title.
SINGLE OWNERSHIP: A lot in single ownership is one where the owner does not own adjoining vacant property.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building for the keeping of horses owned by the occupants of the premises and not kept for remuneration, hire
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 204/470
or sale.
STABLES AND/OR RIDING ACADEMIES, COMMERCIAL: The grounds and buildings where horses are bred, raised, boarded or kept for the
remuneration, hire or sale.
STABLES AND/OR RIDING ACADEMIES, NONCOMMERCIAL: The grounds and buildings designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for the
boarding, keeping, or housing of horses for the private use of the owner. Such use may be located on a lot occupied by residential uses or may be located
on a lot occupied by the equestrian facilities of a private riding club. All such uses shall be operated as not for profit facilities.
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a cellar or basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or
if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
The floor of a story may have split levels provided that there are not more than four feet (4') differences in elevation between the different levels of
the floor.
The mezzanine floor shall be counted as a story when it covers over one-third (1/3) the area of the floor next below it, or if the vertical distance from
the floor next below it to the floor next above it is twenty four feet (24') or more.
Rooftop appurtenances, including cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, air conditioning equipment, etc., if enclosed, shall be counted as a
story when it covers over one-third (1/3) the area of the floor next below it.
STREAM: Any natural, artificial, or channelized watercourse that transports continuous or periodic flowing water.
STREET: A public or private right of way or easement which is designated as a permanent right of way easement for common use as the primary means of
vehicular access to properties abutting on it.
STREET LINE: The street right of way line abutting a property line of a lot.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial
change in the roof or in the exterior walls, excepting such repair or replacement as may be required for the safety of the building.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the
form or content of the information as sent and received.
TEMPORARY BUYING LOCATIONS (e.g., Cash For Gold): An establishment used by an unregistered buyer as defined by section 510/15 of the
pawnbroker regulation act2.
TENT: Any structure or enclosure, the roof of which and/or one-half (1/2) or more of the sides, are constructed of silk, cotton, canvas, fabric, or a similar
light material.
TERRACE OR PATIO: An open paved area designed as access to a building entrance or as an open outdoor living space. Such construction may be level
with the surrounding grade or not more than one and one-half feet (11/2') above such grade.
TOURIST HOME: A building designed for or used as a single-family or two-family dwelling in which sleeping rooms are provided or offered to transient
guests for compensation.
TRAILER: Any vehicle, house car, camp car, recreational vehicle, or any portable or mobile vehicle on wheels, jacks, horses, skids, or blocks, and with or
without motive power, which is used, adapted, or designed for living, sleeping, business, trade, occupation, or storage purposes. A permanent foundation
shall not change its character unless the entire structure meets Prospect Heights building code regulations.
TRAILER-CAMPER PARKS: A residential facility designed, used or intended to be used to accommodate the overnight or temporary location, hookup, or
use of its facilities for travel trailers, camp trailers, and recreation vehicles.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land, buildings and structures thereon, are designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or
maintained, and shall include any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the performance standards of this title.
USE, ACCESSORY: See definition of Accessory.
USE, LAWFUL: The use of any building, structure, or land that conforms with all of the regulations of this title or any amendment hereto and which
conforms with all of the codes, ordinances, and other legal requirements, as existing at the time of the enactment of this title or any amendment thereto, for
the structure or land that is being examined.
USE, PERMITTED: Any use which is or may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements,
regulations, and when applicable, performance standards of this title for the district in which such use is located.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The dominant use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use. A principal use may be either "permitted"
or "special".
USE, SPECIAL: A use that has operational, physical and other characteristics that may be different from those of the predominant permitted uses in a
district, but which is a use that complements or is otherwise compatible with the intended overall developments within a district.
VEHICLE, MOTOR: Any passenger vehicle, motorcycle, truck, truck-trailer, or semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical or electromechanical power.
VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL: Any vehicle or trailer propelled or drawn by mechanical or electromechanical power which is designed for recreational activity
or short term living accommodation. (See chapter 8 of this title.)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 205/470
VEHICLE STORAGE: For purposes of this title, "storage" of motor vehicles shall mean the placement of motor vehicles on an approved parking area for a
period of thirty (30) days or more in a continuous inoperative state.
VENDING MACHINE: A machine for dispensing merchandise or services designed to be operated by the customer.
WAREHOUSE: A structure, part thereof, or area used principally for the storage of goods and merchandise.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL: The water service pipe, the water distribution pipes, and the necessary connecting pipes, fittings, control valves,
and all appurtenances in or adjacent to the building or premises.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM, PUBLIC: Collectively all property involved in a water utility including land, water sources, collection systems, dams and
hydraulic structures, distribution systems and other appurtenances, pumping stations, treatment works and general properties, or any parts thereof.
WATERWORKS: Includes a waterworks system in its entirety or any integral part thereof, including hydrants, meters, valves, standpipes, storage tanks,
and all other elements, useful in connection with a water supply or water distribution system.
WELL: An underground source of water made accessible by drilling or digging to the level of the water table, or deeper.
WIRELESS ACCESS: Any one of a number of methods to replace all or part of the wired connections in a community's network to residential and
business subscribers.
YARD: An open space on the same zoning lot with a building or structure, unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as
otherwise permitted in section 5-3-4 of this title. A "yard" extends along a lot line, and to a depth or width specified in the yard requirements for the zoning
district in which such zoning lot is located. Where the zoning lot: a) contains a public right-of-way easement or established public street without a formal
dedication, and b) the property boundary of the zoning lot is actually in a public street, and c) the owner is not required to resubdivide the property in
accord with subsection 5-3-17E of this title and title 6, "Subdivisions", of this Code, a "yard" extends along the line which is the limit of the public right-ofway
easement or thirty three feet (33') from the center of the road, whichever is greater.
YARD, CORNER SIDE: A side yard which faces a public street.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending along the full length of the front lot line between the side lot lines.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: A side yard which is located immediately adjacent to another zoning lot or to an alley separating such side yard from another
zoning lot.
YARD LINE: A line in a lot that is parallel to the lot line along which the applicable yard extends and which is not nearer to such lot line at any point than
the required depth or width of the applicable yard.
A building, structure, or other obstruction shall not encroach into the area between the yard line and such adjacent lot line, except for such permitted
obstructions in yards as are set forth in this title.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side lot lines.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard.
YARD, TRANSITIONAL: That yard which must be provided on a zoning lot in a Business District which adjoins a zoning lot in a Residential District, or that
yard which must be provided on a zoning lot in a Manufacturing District which adjoins a zoning lot in either a Residential or Business District.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The person charged with the responsibility of administering and enforcing this title.
ZONING DISTRICTS: The districts into which the City of Prospect Heights, Illinois, has been divided as set forth on the zoning district map for the
purposes of zoning regulations and requirements.
ZONING MAP: The map or maps incorporated into this title as part thereof, designating zoning districts. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-
15-2003; Ord. 0-08-01, 1-22-2008; Ord. 0-08-24, 6-16-2008, eff. 6-27-2008; Ord. 0-12-06, 3-12-2012; Ord. 0-14-20, 10-28-2014; Ord. 0-17-23, 10-9-2017)
Chapter 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
5-3-1: INTERPRETATION:
A. Minimum Requirements: The provisions herein shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and
welfare.
B. Relationship With Other Laws: Where the conditions imposed by any provision herein upon the use of land or buildings or upon the bulk of buildings are
either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision herein or any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule
or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
C. Effect On Existing Agreements: This title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement, provided that where the
regulations of this title are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easement, covenants, or other private agreements,
the requirements shall govern.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 206/470
D. Existing Violations: No building, structure, or use which was not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this title shall become or be made lawful
solely by reason of the adoption of this title; and to the extent that, and in any manner that said unlawful building, structure or use is in conflict with the
requirements of this title, said building, structure, or use remains unlawful hereunder and shall be discontinued and not reestablished.
E. Appendices: The appendices attached to the ordinance codified herein, which are established solely as a reference guide to this title are not, and shall
not be construed to be, a part of this title.
F. Title Provisions: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provisions of this title not specifically included in said judgment.
G. Property Application: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this title to a particular property,
building or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building, or structure not specifically
included in said judgment.
H. Permit: Nothing contained in the Prospect Heights zoning ordinance shall be deemed to be a consent, license, or permit to use any property or to
locate, construct, or maintain any building, structure, or facility or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation, or activity. Such licenses, consent or
permits must be obtained as are required by this title and other municipal ordinances.
I. Cumulative Regulations: The provisions in the Prospect Heights zoning ordinance are cumulative and additional limitations upon all other laws and
ordinances, heretofore passed or which may be passed hereafter, govern any subject matter in the ordinance. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-3-2: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
A. Changes In Structures Or Use: Within the corporate limits of the city of Prospect Heights, except as may otherwise be provided in chapter 4 of this title,
all buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings established hereafter, all structural alterations or relocation of existing buildings occurring
hereafter, shall be subject to all regulations herein which are applicable to the zoning districts in which such buildings, uses or land shall be located.
B. Nonconforming Buildings, Structures And Uses: Any lawful building, structure or use existing at the time of the enactment of the zoning ordinance may
be continued, even though such building, structure or use does not conform to the provisions herein for the district in which it is located, and whenever
a district shall be changed hereafter, the then existing lawful use may be continued, subject to the provisions of chapter 4, "Nonconforming Buildings,
Structures And Uses", of this title.
C. Existing Uses: Except as may otherwise be provided, all structural alterations or relocation of existing buildings occurring hereafter, and all
enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations herein which are applicable to the zoning districts in
which such buildings, uses or land shall be located.
D. Building Permits: Where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date hereof, and
provided that construction is begun within ninety (90) days of such effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, said building or structure may
be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit was issued, and further may upon completion be
occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use for which originally designated, subject thereafter to the provisions of chapter 4, "Nonconforming
Buildings, Structures And Uses", of this title. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-3-3: USE AND BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Use: No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or part thereof, or other structure, shall be erected, raised,
moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered, except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. See
also chapter 4, "Nonconforming Buildings, Structures And Uses", of this title.
B. Bulk: All new buildings and structures shall conform to the regulations established herein for the district in which each building shall be located, except
that parapet walls, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, stacks and necessary mechanical appurtenances, shall be permitted to
exceed the maximum height provisions. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-3-4: LOT COVERAGE:
A. Maintenance Of Yards, Courts, And Other Open Spaces: The maintenance of yards, courts and other open spaces and minimum lot area legally
required for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner or his successor in title of such building or of the property on which it is located, as
long as the building is in existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts or other open space or minimum lot area allocated to any building
shall, by virtue of change of ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy yard, court, other open space or minimum lot area requirements for
any other building. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
"Maintenance" shall be defined as upholding the appearance so as to be homogenous to the surrounding properties. (Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
B. Division Of Zoning Lots: No zoning lot shall hereafter be divided into two (2) or more zoning lots unless all zoning lots resulting from each such division
shall conform with all the applicable regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located.
If a lot is built upon under one building permit, then divided for selling purposes, it can only be so divided if each saleable lot, or portion of the original
lot, is platted as a lot of record and conforms to Prospect Heights subdivision regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 207/470
C. Two Uses On A Lot: Where two (2) or more permitted or special uses, each requiring a minimum lot area, are provided in the same building or on the
same lot, the required lot area shall be the sum of the areas required for each use individually.
D. Location Of Required Open Space: All yards, courts and other open spaces allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be located on the same
zoning lot as such building or dwelling group.
Where a lot is to be occupied for a permitted use without buildings, the side yards and front yard required for such lot shall be provided and maintained
unless otherwise stipulated in this title, except that side yards shall not be required on lots used for garden purposes without buildings or structures, nor
on lots used for public recreation areas.
E. Required Yards For Existing Buildings: No yards now or hereafter provided for a building existing on the effective date hereof shall subsequently be
reduced below, or further reduced below if already less than, the minimum yard requirements of this title for equivalent new construction.
F. Access Across Residential Property: No land, which is located in a residential district, shall be used for driveway, walkway, or access purposes to any
land which is located in a business district, or used for any purpose not permitted in a residential district. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
G. Permitted Accessory Buildings, Structures And Uses: The following accessory buildings, structures and uses are permitted as projections into or
intrusions upon required yards. Said projections or intrusions shall be allowed for conforming required yards. However, in the case of a variation, a
projection or intrusion shall be not more than two feet (2') into a varied yard, notwithstanding the permitted extent of said projection or intrusion set forth
as follows:
Note:
FDenotes permitted obstruction in front yards and side yards adjoining streets.
SDenotes permitted obstruction in interior side yards.
RDenotes permitted obstruction in rear yards.
CDenotes permitted obstruction in open courts.
Air conditioning equipment:
Central air conditioning units may not project more than 6 feet, provided the unit is adequately screened. F
R
Window units may not project more than 24 inches. F
S
R
C
Aquatic landscape features including ponds not greater than 24 inches in depth. Must have water movement or some type of aeration
(corner side only).
F
S
R
Arbors or trellises. F
S
R
C
Architectural entrance structures on a lot not less than 1 acre in area or at entrance roadways into subdivisions containing 50 or more
lots.
F
S
R
Awnings and canopies:
Awnings may project not more than 4 feet into a required yard or court. F
S
R
C
Awnings for business and commercial use may project into required front or transitional yard and may project into the public way,
but not closer than 4 feet to the curb line and must have a height of not less than 7 feet above the public walk.
F
S
R
C
Canopies serving business, institutional and multiple-family uses may project into a front or corner side yard to the property line,
but must have a minimum height above the established grade of not less than 7 feet.
F
C
Balconies, projecting by not more than 4 feet. F
R
C
Camper, camper trailer, boat or other recreational equipment or vehicle. (See chapter 8, "Off Street Parking And Loading", of this
title.)
Cantilevered windows (1 story) projecting not more than 3 feet into a yard. F
S
R
Chimneys, attached, projecting not more than 18 inches into a yard or court. F
S
R
C
Eaves and gutters on principal buildings or attached accessory buildings, projecting not more than 4 feet into any required yard. F
S
R
C
Fallout shelters. R
Flagpoles (20 foot height maximum). F
S
R
C
Growing a cultivated field of farm and garden crops. S
R
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 208/470
No detached garage, nor carport attached or detached, shall exceed 720 square feet. No accessory building, other than a garage,
may exceed 200 square feet. If 2 or more accessory buildings are constructed, in addition to a detached garage, the first building
may not exceed 200 square feet and the other building(s) may not exceed 80 square feet, with a combined total square footage for
all garages and accessory structures not to exceed 1,000 square feet.
R
"Accessory building" shall be defined as any structure, whether affixed to or resting upon the ground and detached from the
primary residence, having walls (open or enclosed) with or without a roof, and specifically identified as follows: garage, carport,
open side summer house, barn, summer house, accessory storage building, screened structure, dog or animal house/kennel,
playhouse, clubhouse, storage shed, gazebo, fallout shelter, utility toolshed, wood storage shed, greenhouses and any other
similar structure.
The following examples of structures and/or uses are not defined as accessory buildings and shall not be included in the square
foot calculations: decks, patios, outdoor fireplaces, child's tree house, sundial, dog run, lawn furniture, light standards, screening
fence for RV/boat, arbors, trellises, fence, swimming pool, flagpole, statues, sidewalk, stepping stones, tennis/badminton/volleyball
court.
Open entrances, stoops, porches, terraces, when not covered, may project not more than 10 feet and shall not exceed over 4 feet in
height above the average level of the adjoining ground.
F
Open off street loading spaces accessory to nonresidential uses. (See chapter 8, "Off Street Parking And Loading", of this title.)
Open off street parking spaces. (See chapter 8, "Off Street Parking And Loading", of this title.)
Ornamental light standards. F
S
R
C
Recreational and laundry drying equipment. R
C
Satellite antennas. R
Signs and nameplates as herein regulated. (See chapter 9 of this title.) F
S
R
C
Sills, belt courses, cornices, and ornamental features of the principal building projecting not more than 18 inches into a yard or court.
F
S
R
C
Swimming pools, private, when conforming also with other codes or ordinances of the city. R
Tennis courts, private. R
Terraces, patios, and outdoor fireplaces. R
Trees, shrubs and flowers, including fruit trees, berry bushes, and landscaping. F
S
R
C
Water retention and detention areas. S
R
Wireless towers, including antenna element and support structures, but not to exceed 75 feet above grade. R
(Ord. 0-06-17, 6-5-2006)
H. Fences: Fences are permitted accessory uses in all districts. In no district shall a hedge, shrubbery or constructed fence or wall be erected or grown to
a height exceeding three feet (3') above the street grade nearest thereto, within thirty five feet (35') of the intersection of any street line. The following
regulations shall govern the type, location and construction of all fences:
1. Residential Districts: Fences may be erected in all residential districts subject to the following:
a. A constructed fence or wall may be erected, placed, or maintained on residential zoned property as provided in subsection H1f of this section, to a
height not exceeding six feet (6') above the ground level, except that when such residential zoned property abuts property zoned for nonresidential
use or a parking area. Such fence or wall, constructed within ten feet (10') of the abutting lot line, may be erected, placed or maintained to a height
of eight feet (8').
b. A hedge or shrubbery fence may be grown and maintained to its natural height.
c. No hedge or shrubbery or constructed fence which is located in a required corner side yard shall exceed a height of three feet (3') within fifteen
feet (15') of the intersection of a driveway and a street or sidewalk. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
d. A fence which is constructed to screen a patio, swimming pool or dog run (maximum 50 feet long), shall be permitted to a height of eight feet (8').
(Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-3-35, 9-15-2003)
e. In multi-family residence districts, a six foot (6') high solid fence shall be erected to enclose and screen all refuse collection areas or facilities.
f. Constructed fences may be located anywhere on residential property, subject to the following exceptions:
(1) That they shall not be located in front of the front building line, or in front of such line as it extends in either direction to the side lot lines; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 209/470
(2) That they shall not be located beyond the corner side yard building line, or beyond such line as it extends in either direction to the front and rear
lot lines. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
On reverse corner lots, said fence shall not extend beyond the required front setback line of the first lot to the rear of said reverse lot for a
distance equal to the rear yard of the reverse corner lot. The restrictions set forth in subsections H1f(1) and H1f(2) of this section, shall not apply
to any fence which is at least eighty percent (80%) open and not of metal construction. (Ord. 0-91-22, 6-17-1991)
2. Business Districts: Fences erected in all business districts shall be subject to the following:
a. When a business use adjoins a residential district, a solid fence to a height of eight feet (8') above existing grade shall be erected along any lot
line that adjoins the residential district.
b. A six foot (6') high solid fence shall be erected to enclose and screen all refuse collection areas or facilities.
c. An open fence may be erected in the interior side yard or rear yard of any business district to a height of six feet (6') above existing grade.
3. Public, Public Utility And Recreational Uses:
a. Open fences may be installed in any side or rear yard to a height of not more than eight feet (8').
b. Public utility uses such as transformer substations, or other hazardous uses, shall be fenced. The top of such fences may include barbed wire
when deemed necessary for public safety by the zoning administrator.
When the lot line of such utility uses coincides with a lot line in a residential district, the fencing installed shall provide adequate screening. The
screening may be of a solid fence or an open or semiopen fence, or an open fence with shrubbery to a height of not less than five feet (5'). The
plan for such screening shall be approved by the zoning administrator. When a public utility use fronts on a public street, similar fencing and
landscaping shall be installed.
4. Construction And Appearance: The finished side of all fences shall face the front, rear, side and street lot lines. Both sides of all fences shall be
similar in design, construction and appearance.
Fences or walls may be constructed with any of the materials listed below. Materials other than those listed below shall be subject to approval by the
zoning administrator.
a. Fences:
Concrete (panel)
Metal (wrought iron or panel)
Plastic or vinyl
Wood (board, panel, picket, rail)
(Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
Note: No upward facing pointed features allowed on any type of fence. (Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
b. Walls:
Brick (plain or glazed)
Concrete (plain or textured)
Stone (natural, block stone or rubble stone)
Tile or architectural block
(Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-3-5: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Subject to the limitations and restrictions set forth in this section, a home occupation shall be permitted in all residential districts (except that all references
to garages are restricted to the R-1 zoning district only) provided that:
A. It is conducted entirely within the dwelling or from within a garage by a resident member of the family residing in the dwelling, and when such home
occupation is incidental and secondary to the use of dwelling for dwelling purposes.
B. There is no employment on site of more than one person in addition to the occupants of the dwelling.
C. Not more than one-fourth (1/4) of the total floor area of any one story of a dwelling and one-fourth (1/4) of the total area of one garage is devoted to such
home occupation or any storage or other activities in support of or relating to such home occupation.
D. It does not require internal or external alteration not customarily in a dwelling or garage nor shall there be a separate entrance for such uses.
E. There is no display, activity, or noise that will indicate from the exterior of the building that it is being used in whole or in part for any use other than a
dwelling or garage. Displays and signs so located inside so as to be viewed through a window are also prohibited. Further, no stock or trade is kept or
sold, including also such as are made on the premises, or services rendered on the premises that require a receipt or delivery of merchandise, goods
or equipment by other than carrier mail service, United Parcel Service, or similar type delivery service, or a class B license size vehicle of the person
conducting the home occupation.
F. A home occupation conducted by a professional person or persons rendering personal services shall be only for consultation, emergency treatment,
instruction, or performance of religious rites.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 210/470
G. Teaching of musical lessons and dancing shall be conducted only in a single-family detached dwelling, and not more than three (3) pupils at one time in
any other dwelling unit.
H. Permitted home occupations shall not include any of the following:
1. Any manufacturing or processing of goods, materials or products;
2. Machine shops, automobile repair shops, welding shops, restaurants, tourist homes, clinics or hospitals, stables, animal hospitals, dog kennels;
3. Any use which creates objectionable noise, fumes, odor, dust, electrical interference, or more than normal residential traffic;
4. Any use requiring special code requirements for handling or performance due to combustibility, toxicity, radioactivity, or volatility or the use or storage
of any substance or material deemed hazardous by the zoning administrator.
I. There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used in such home occupations.
J. Any activity, which is not a permitted home occupation under this section shall be considered as a business use and is prohibited in all residential
districts. (Ord. 0-92-25, 6-1-1992)
5-3-6: LOT AREA AND DIMENSION:
A. Contiguous Parcels: When two (2) or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area and dimension to qualify for a permitted use under the
requirements of the use district in which they are located, are contiguous and are held in one ownership, they shall be used as one zoning lot for such
use. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-3-7: ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREET:
Every residential building shall be constructed or erected upon a lot or parcel of land which abuts upon a public street unless a permanent easement of
access to a public street was of record prior to the adoption of this title. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-3-8: NUMBER OF STRUCTURES ON A ZONING LOT:
Not more than one principal structure shall be located on a zoning lot, except in the case of a planned unit development. (Ord. 0-05-01, 1-18-2005, eff. 1-
28-2005)
More than one principal detached building, other than residential buildings, may be located on a zoning lot provided the requirements of this title are met
separately for each individual use. Lot area, or other criteria, used to satisfy one use cannot be counted again and used to satisfy a separate use.
Not more than three (3) accessory buildings shall be located on a zoning lot. No detached garage shall exceed seven hundred twenty (720) square feet.
No accessory building, other than a garage, may exceed two hundred (200) square feet. If two (2) or three (3) accessory buildings are constructed, one
building may not exceed two hundred (200) square feet and the other building(s) may not exceed eighty (80) square feet, combined for a maximum of one
thousand (1,000) square feet (including the 720 square foot garage). Further, in an R-1 or R-1A zoning district, one additional accessory building not
exceeding two hundred (200) square feet shall be permitted for each additional ten thousand (10,000) square feet of the zoning lot over twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet. (Ord. 0-94-39, 9-7-1994)
5-3-9: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
A detached garage is considered an accessory structure. (Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
A. Location: When a side yard is required, no part of an accessory building or structure shall be located closer than five feet (5') to the side lot line along
such side yard and within one hundred twenty feet (120') of the front lot line. When a rear yard is required, no part of an accessory building or structure
shall be located closer than five feet (5') to the rear lot line or to those portions of the side lot line abutting such required rear yard. (Ord. 0-82-13, 1982)
B. Time Of Construction: No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the start of construction of the principal building to
which it is accessory.
C. Percentage Of Required Rear Yard Occupied: The total area of all accessory buildings or structures shall not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of
the area of a required rear yard.
D. Height Of Accessory Buildings In Required Rear Yards, Overall: No accessory building or structure or portion thereof located in a required rear yard
shall exceed the height of the principal structure at its highest point. However, in no case shall the accessory building or structure exceed fifteen feet
(15') at any point.
E. On Reversed Corner Lots: On a reversed corner lot in a residential district and within fifteen feet (15') of any adjacent property to the rear in a
residential district, no accessory building or structure or portion thereof located in a required rear yard shall be closer to the side lot line abutting the
street than a distance equal to the least depth that would be required under this title for the front yard on such adjacent property to the rear. Further, in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 211/470
the above instance, no such accessory buildings or structures shall be located within five feet (5') of any part of a rear lot line which coincides with the
side lot line, or portion thereof, of property in any residential district. No accessory building shall be erected in or encroach upon the required side yard
of a corner lot which is adjacent to the street, nor upon the required side yard of a reverse corner lot which is adjacent to the street. (See also
subsection 5-6-1E of this title.) (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-3-10: EXISTING SPECIAL USES:
Where a use is classified as a special use and exists as a permitted or special use at the date of the adoption of this title, it shall be considered a legal
special use, without further action of the city council, the zoning administrator or the plan/zoning board of appeals.
A special use permit issued in accordance with procedures herein set forth shall be required only for any expansion or major alteration of such existing
legal special use.
Where a use is not allowed as a special or permitted use in the district in which it is zoned under this title, and exists as a special use under the terms of
this title immediately prior to the date of the adoption of this title, it shall be considered to be a nonconforming use and shall be subject to the applicable
nonconforming use provisions of chapter 4 of this title.
If the special use ceases for a period of more than one year, the special use permit shall be void. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
5-3-11: USES NOT SPECIFICALLY PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS:
When a use is not specifically listed as a permitted use, such use is hereby expressly prohibited, unless by application and authorization as provided for
under special uses it is determined that said use is similar to and compatible with listed permitted uses. Such uses may then be permitted as special uses.
(Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-3-12: LANDSCAPING ADJACENT TO TRAFFICWAYS:
No landscape planting, hedge, shrubbery or constructed fence, shall exceed a height of three feet (3') within fifteen feet (15') of the intersection of a
driveway and a street or sidewalk. (Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
5-3-13: FLOOD CONTROL AND MINIMUM STORM WATER DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS:
The land use regulations contained in this title shall be supplemented by any flood control ordinance enacted by the city of Prospect Heights. (Ord. 0-77-
27, 7-18-1977)
5-3-14: STRUCTURE HEIGHT:
The following requirements qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this title:
A. Public Buildings: Public and semipublic hospitals, public institutions, public and parochial schools, and/or public utility and service buildings, when
permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding sixty feet (60'), provided said specified buildings shall be set back from the front, rear,
and side lot lines on the ratio of two feet (2') for every one foot (1') of building height greater than forty feet (40'); provided, however, that said specified
requirements shall apply in addition to the other requirements for building line setbacks and for rear and side yards specifically set forth in this title.
(Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
B. Building Appurtenances. Chimneys, parapet walls, skylights, steeples, flagpoles, smokestacks, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers,
monuments, water towers, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, ornamental towers and spires, roof gardens, recreational facilities, wireless
towers, necessary mechanical appurtenances, or penthouses to house mechanical appurtenances, may be erected above the height limits prescribed
and shall not be included in calculation of building height. All heights are subject to state and federal approval. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-
03-35, 9-15-2003)
C. Airports: No building or structure shall be constructed which is subject to notice under federal aviation administration (FAA) regulations part 77, until it is
determined by the FAA not to be a hazard to aerial navigation. All petitions for zoning amendments, special uses, or variations, dealing with the height
of structures on property located within two (2) miles of any airport in or adjacent to the city of Prospect Heights shall be forwarded to the FAA for their
review and comment. In addition, plans to construct any structure or building to a height exceeding one hundred sixty feet (160'), regardless of location,
shall be forwarded to the FAA for their review and comment.
The zoning administrator shall make available to the FAA any data relating to the petitioner's request to construct a building or structure within two (2)
miles of any airport in or adjacent to the city of Prospect Heights. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-3-15: REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC USES:
A. Fallout Shelters:
1. Fallout shelters shall be used for the purpose defined, and for no other use.
2. Fallout shelters shall be located:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 212/470
a. Within any new or existing principal building or structure; or
b. Attached to any new or existing principal building or structure with direct access from such building or structure; or
c. Wholly underground.
B. Junk Cars: Junk cars may be kept on private property only when in a fully enclosed structure.
C. Mobile Homes: The following regulations shall apply to mobile homes:
1. Accessory Building: A mobile home shall not be permissible as an accessory building.
2. Nonresidential Use: A mobile home may be used as a temporary office or shelter incidental to construction on or development of the premises on
which the mobile home is located, only during the time construction or development is actively underway.
3. Temporary Storage: A mobile home may be parked temporarily in a driveway or parking lot of a residential use for a period of not to exceed two (2)
weeks. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
D. Temporary Uses: Upon application to the zoning administrator and approved by the plan/zoning board of appeals, a permit may be issued for the
following temporary uses: (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
1. Real estate development sign, advertising the sale or rental of real property in the development on which the sign is located, not to exceed one
hundred (100) square feet for each face, may be permitted. Each permit shall be valid for a period of not more than two (2) years and shall not be
renewed for more than three (3) successive periods at the same location.
2. A highway contractor may be permitted to locate and operate from a temporary contractor's yard in any zoning district during the period that is
required for highway construction. Such yard shall be located at least eight hundred feet (800') from any residence, other than the lessor of the site,
and/or four hundred feet (400') from any commercial use. The site must be returned to a condition at least as usable and aesthetically pleasing as it
was before the yard was constructed.
3. Temporary buildings or yards for construction materials and/or equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning district, may
be permitted. The permit shall specify the location of the building or yard and the area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a
period of not more than six (6) calendar months and shall not be renewed for more than four (4) successive periods at the same location. There shall
not be undue interference with the use and enjoyment of neighboring property.
4. Temporary real estate office or model dwelling, incidental and necessary for the sale or rental of real property in the development in which such
office or model dwelling is located, may be permitted. The permit shall specify the location of the office or model dwelling. Each such permit shall be
valid for a period of not more than two (2) years and shall not be renewed for more than three (3) successive periods at the same location.
5. Carnivals, bazaars, dances and/or similar type of activities; provided, however, that the permit shall be valid for a period of not more than seven (7)
days; and provided, further, that a period of at least ninety (90) days shall intervene between the termination of one permit and the issuance of
another permit for the same location, and/or organization.
6. Christmas tree sales. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more than sixty (60) days.
7. Parking lot designated for a special event; provided, however, that the permit shall be valid only for the duration of the designated special event.
8. Temporary mobile sign.
E. Tents: No tent shall be erected, used or maintained for permanent type living quarters. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
F. Satellite Antennas: Satellite antennas may be ground mounted or building mounted subject to the following conditions: (Ord. 0-93-33, 8-2-1993)
1. Residential districts: No roof mounted antennas larger than three feet (3') shall be permitted. Wall mounted antennas are permitted only on the rear
wall of the house, provided they are less than three feet (3') in diameter. Ground mounted antennas shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height above
grade (including supports) and shall not exceed eight feet (8') in diameter. Screening shall be with a solid fence or dense planting of evergreen
shrubs to a height of six feet (6'). Receiving area in front of dish need not be screened. Ground mounted antennas shall be located only in the rear
yard or buildable area behind the house. (Ord. 0-93-33, 8-2-1993; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
2. Business and office/industrial districts: The antenna and its support structure shall not be mounted or attached to the front of any building or to the
side of any building facing a street, including any portion of the building roof facing any street. Roof installation shall be considered on flat roofs
provided that the antenna is completely screened from all sides and its total height does not exceed twelve feet (12'). Ground mounted antennas
shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height above grade and shall not exceed eight feet (8') in diameter and shall not be located in front of the
principal face of the building. Screening shall be required if visible from surrounding properties similar to residential districts above. (Ord. 0-93-33, 8-
2-1993)
3. Only one satellite antenna per band shall be permitted on a zoning lot with a maximum of two (2), with the exception that direct broadcast satellite
(dbs) antennas less than three feet (3') in diameter, a maximum of two (2) are permitted. (Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
4. Only solid harmonious colors are permitted for dish and supports.
5. Antennas shall not be used for advertising purposes.
6. Exemption: Satellite antennas less than three feet (3') in diameter are exempt from screening requirements. (Ord. 0-93-33, 8-2-1993)
G. Commercial Communication Towers And Antennas: Commercial communication towers and antennas may, under special use, be ground mounted or
building mounted subject to the following conditions: (Ord. 0-96-73, 10-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 213/470
1. No ground base communications antenna or tower shall exceed eighty feet (80') from grade to top of structure. (Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
2. No communications antenna or tower shall protrude upon the public right of way or adjoining property. (Ord. 0-96-73, 10-1996)
3. The number of commercial roof mounted communications antennas or towers allowed on commercial zoned property shall not exceed one in
number. (Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
4. The height of commercial roof mounted communications antennas or towers allowed on commercial zoned property shall not exceed twelve feet
(12') from mounting base.
5. No commercial communication antenna or tower shall be located within five hundred (500) linear feet of any zoning lot containing existing or planned
churches, synagogues, temples or other places of worship.
6. No commercial communication antenna or tower shall be located within five hundred (500) linear feet of any zoning lot containing existing residential
zoning district.
7. Commercial communication antenna or tower site locations will be adequately screened and secured as to minimize any potential adverse impact on
adjacent uses and safeguard the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
8. The height of commercial earth stations shall not exceed eight feet (8') in diameter or fourteen feet (14') above the grade level in height. (Ord. 0-96-
73, 10-1996)
9. Commercial towers (including monopoles) used for cellular/pcs applications, shall be three (3) carrier capable and shall be neutral in color including
antennas and mounting hardware. (Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
10. Commercial earth stations shall be permitted in rear yards only.
11. No advertising, logos, or symbols will be permitted on any earth station surface.
12. Commercial earth stations shall have a minimum setback of twenty five feet (25') from property lines. (Ord. 0-96-73, 10-1996)
5-3-16: EXEMPTIONS:
A. Public Utility Exemption: The following uses are permitted in any district: poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, pipelines, laterals, or any other
similar distributing equipment of a public utility.
B. Underground Installations Exemption: Pipelines and other underground installations, to the extent that the same are completely buried beneath the
surface of the soil, are exempt from the requirements of this title, provided that any incidental or associated structures, installations, or equipment,
except markers, used in connection with such pipelines or other underground installations, and which protrude or are extended above the surface of
the soil, shall, to the extent of such protrusion or extension, be subject to all of the applicable provisions thereof.
C. Accessory Farm Buildings: All accessory farm buildings, with the exception of roadside stands, may be erected without specific city approval provided
that:
1. The property upon which the building is constructed is in conformance with all provisions of this title.
2. The principal use of the property upon which the building is constructed is agricultural.
3. The structure to be built will be used only for agricultural purposes. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-3-17: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Municipal Boundary Lines: Boundary lines of incorporated villages, cities, and municipalities for the purpose of this title shall be those lines which shall
have been determined upon adoption by due process of law, and made a matter of record in the office of the Cook County recorder.
B. Sewage Disposal And Water Supply: Regardless of other provisions of this title, in all classifications and in all districts there shall always be sufficient
ground area left unoccupied by a structure or paving for a proper system of sewage disposal and water supply conforming with the standards and
requirements of the city of Prospect Heights and of other governmental bodies or agencies having jurisdiction.
C. Sediment And Erosion Control: Sedimentation and erosion control shall be in accordance with any sediment and erosion control ordinance enacted by
the city of Prospect Heights.
D. Right Of Way Acquisition: When the city grants a zoning amendment for an individual applicant, and where there is evidence at the public hearing that
additional right of way is needed adjacent to the parcel being rezoned for the widening and improvement of a street, the city may require and obtain the
required right of way as a part of the rezoning process. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
E. Resubdivision Into Lots Of Record: All zoning lots shall consist of a single lot of record. Zoning lots which existed prior to July 1, 2008, may continue to
be used as zoning lots without the need to subdivide into a single lot of record subject to the following:
1. If any construction or alteration to the principal building on the zoning lot increases the floor area (for determining area ratio) of the principal building
by fifty percent (50%) or more, no permit for the alteration or construction of any building shall be issued until such time as the owner submits a plat
of subdivision in recordable form which consolidates the property into a single lot of record and complies with title 6, "Subdivisions", of this code; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 214/470
2. If the proposed construction is the demolition of an existing principal building and replacement with a new principal building or the cost of any
construction or alteration to the principal building exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the assessed value of the combined land and building for that zoning
lot as determined by the Cook County assessor, no permit for the alteration or construction of any building shall be issued until such time as the
owner submits a plat of subdivision (which complies with title 6, "Subdivisions", of this code) in recordable form which consolidates the property into a
single lot of record. (Ord. 0-08-24, 6-16-2008, eff. 6-27-2008)
5-3-18: PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS:
A. All portable storage containers are prohibited in any zoning district unless the size, location and duration of placement comply with the provisions of this
section.
B. Portable storage containers:
1. Shall be constructed of steel, fiberglass or similar structurally sound and durable material, and shall be fully enclosed, weathertight and capable of
being locked;
2. Shall not exceed eight feet (8') in width, eight feet (8') in height, and sixteen feet (16') in length;
3. Shall be placed entirely on private property, on a solid, dust free surface;
4. Shall not be placed in any easement or within five feet (5') of any lot line;
5. Shall be placed as close to the principal structure or detached garage as possible;
6. Shall not remain on any residential or commercially zoned property for more than sixty (60) consecutive days in any twelve (12) month period. (Ord.
0-11-03, 2-14-2011)
Chapter 4
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
5-4-1: CONTINUANCE OF USE:
A. Established Use: Any lawfully established use of a building or land, on the effective date of this title or of amendments thereto, that does not conform to
the use regulations for the district in which it is located, shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise
provided herein.
B. Legal Building Or Structure: Any legal, nonconforming building or structure may be continued in use except as otherwise permitted herein.
C. Building Permit Lawfully Granted: Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date of this title or of amendments
thereto, may be completed in accordance with the approved plans, provided construction is started within ninety (90) days and diligently prosecuted to
completion. Such building shall thereafter be deemed a lawfully established building. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-4-2: DISCONTINUANCE OF USE:
A. Change To Conforming Use: Whenever any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a nonconforming use is changed to or replaced by a use
conforming to the provisions of this title, such premises shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a nonconforming use, even though the building may
have been originally designed and constructed for the prior nonconforming use.
B. Use Discontinued: Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or structure or part thereof, has been discontinued for a period of twelve (12)
consecutive months, or whenever it is evident a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming use, such use shall not, after being
discontinued or abandoned, be reestablished, and the use of the premises thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district.
Where no enclosed building is involved, discontinuance of a nonconforming use for a period of six (6) months shall constitute abandonment, and shall
not thereafter be used in a nonconforming manner. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-4-3: CHANGE TO ANOTHER NONCONFORMING USE:
The nonconforming use of any building, structure or portion thereof, which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is
located, may be changed to another nonconforming use only if such other use is authorized by a special use permit as authorized by this title. (Ord. 0-77-
27, 7-18-1977)
5-4-4: TERMINATION AND REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
A. Damage Or Destruction: If a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of fifty
percent (50%) or more of its replacement value at that time, the building or other structure can be rebuilt and/or used thereafter only for a conforming
use and in compliance with the provisions of the district in which it is located. In the event the damage or destruction is less than fifty percent (50%) of
its replacement value, based upon prevailing costs, the building may then be restored to its original condition and the occupancy or use of such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 215/470
building may be continued which existed at the time of such partial destruction. All initial determinations regarding this subsection will be made by the
zoning administrator.
In either event, restoration or repair of the building or other structure must be started within a period of six (6) months from the date of damage or
destruction, and diligently prosecuted to completion.
B. Signs: In any zoning district, all signs made nonconforming by the adoption of this zoning ordinance shall be removed or made conforming not later than
ten (10) years after its adoption. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-4-5: REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
A. Normal Maintenance: Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary
nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use.
B. Structural Alteration: No structural alteration shall be made in a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use, except in the following
situations:
1. When the alteration is required by law.
2. When the alterations will either result in eliminating the nonconforming use or would not increase the degree and/or extent or its nonconformity.
3. A building in a residential district containing residential nonconforming uses may be altered in any way to improve livability provided no structural
alteration shall be made which would increase the number of dwelling units or the bulk of the building. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
4. Structural alterations, such as room additions, may be made if the alteration is located in a lot area where it would have been permissible but for
some nonconforming aspect of the principal structure. (Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
5-4-6: ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
A. Wholly Occupied By Use: A building occupied by a nonconforming use may be enlarged or extended only if the entire building is thereafter devoted to a
conforming use, and is made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located.
B. Partially Occupied By Use: No building partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be altered in such a way as to permit the enlargement or
expansion of the space occupied by such nonconforming use.
C. Extension Of Use: No nonconforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to occupy any required open space, or any land beyond the
boundaries of the zoning lot as it existed on the effective date hereof, or to displace any conforming use in the same building or on the same parcel.
D. Expansion Of Building Or Structure: A nonconforming building or structure which is nonconforming with respect to yards or any other element of bulk
regulated herein shall not be altered or expanded in any manner which would increase the degree or extent of its nonconformity with respect to the bulk
regulations for the district in which it is located. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-4-7: CONVERSION TO SPECIAL USE:
Any nonconforming use may be converted to a conforming special use by the granting of a special use permit, as authorized in chapter 10, "Administration
And Enforcement", of this title, if such use is a permitted special use in the district in which it is located. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
Chapter 5
ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING DISTRICT MAP
5-5-1: DISTRICTS:
For the purpose and provisions of this title, Prospect Heights, Illinois, is hereby organized into the following zoning district classifications:
R-1 Single-family residential district
R-1A Residential transition district (PUDs)
R-2 General residential district
O-1 Office/research park district
B-1 Retail business district
B-2 General commercial district
B-2A General commercial district (direct access to major arterial streets)
B-3 Commercial, wholesale and general service district
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 216/470
B-4 Office/industrial zone
(Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-5-2: MAPS:
The boundaries of the zoning districts designated above are established as shown on the map entitled "official zoning map of Prospect Heights, Illinois",
which map is attached as exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein and is made a part hereof, and shall have the same force and effect as if the zoning
map, together with all notations, references, other information shown thereon, and any subsequent amendments were fully set forth and described herein.
(Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-5-3: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
A. District boundary lines are either the centerlines of railroads, highways, streets, alleys or easements, or the boundary line of sections, quarter sections,
divisions of sections, tracts, or lots, or such lines extended or as indicated.
B. In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district is indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a street or highway, the depth of such
strips shall be measured at right angles from the centerline of the street or highway and the length of frontage shall be in accordance with the
dimensions shown on the map from section, quarter section, or division lines, or centerlines of streets, highways or railroad rights of way unless
otherwise indicated.
C. Where a lot held in one ownership of record on the effective date hereof is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be construed to be
within either district at owner's discretion, provided that this shall not apply if it increases the less restricted frontage of the lot by more than twenty five
feet (25'). (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-5-4: ZONING OF STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC WAYS, WATERWAYS AND RAILROAD RIGHTS OF WAY:
All streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad rights of way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as
the property immediately abutting on such alleys, streets, public ways and railroad rights of way, or waterways. Where the centerline of a street, alley,
public way, waterway or a railroad right of way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be
deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-5-5: ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND:
Any land hereafter annexed to the city of Prospect Heights shall automatically be zoned R-1. Any rezoning of newly annexed land or land to be annexed
pursuant to an annexation agreement shall follow the procedures as outlined in chapter 10, "Administration And Enforcement", of this title. (Ord. 0-77-27,
7-18-1977)
Chapter 6
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
5-6-1: R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
A. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted:
Accessory uses, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
Family community residences, provided, an application for occupancy is filed with the City Administrator or his designee. An occupancy permit will be
granted, provided, the following conditions are met:
1. The sponsoring agency is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 Illinois Compiled Statutes
35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 Illinois Compiled Statutes 135/1 et seq., or
other similar statutes as may be required.
2. The family community residence is not located closer than one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') to another licensed family community
residence or group community residence.
3. All other applicable codes and ordinances are met.
Fences, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
Home occupations, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 217/470
Off street parking facilities, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 8 of this title.
Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, when publicly owned and operated.
Signs, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 9 of this title.
Single-family detached dwellings. (Ord. 0-17-23, 10-9-2017)
B. Special Uses: The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 5-10-9 of this title:
Agricultural uses, as defined in chapter 2 of this title.
Artificial lake, private recreation.
Assisted living facility.
Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, rectories, and convents and similar religious institutions, and other accessory uses required for operation.
Community center buildings, clubhouses, recreation buildings, swim clubs for indoor pools, tennis buildings for indoor tennis, noncommercial and not
for profit.
Golf courses, not including driving ranges, miniature golf courses, or illuminated par 3 golf courses.
Governmental office buildings.
Greenhouses, no retail sales.
Libraries, public.
Public service uses including:
Electric substations.
Fire stations.
Gas regulator stations.
Police stations.
Pumping stations.
Railroad rights-of-way.
Reservoirs.
Telephone exchanges, repeater stations and microwave relay towers.
Water towers, waterworks, and wells.
Schools, public or private, denominational, elementary and high, including playgrounds and athletic fields auxiliary thereto noncommercial.
Stables, private, when lot size is three (3) acres or more.
C. Prohibited Uses: All uses not expressly authorized in subsections A and B of this section are expressly prohibited.
D. Lot Size:
1. Every single-family dwelling hereafter erected shall be located and continuously maintained on a lot having an area of not less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet, and a width at the established front building line of not less than one hundred feet (100').
2. Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed and conditions stipulated at the time a special use permit is authorized, but in no case shall
any such lot have an area less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and a width of one hundred feet (100') at the established building line.
Each assisted living facility shall have a maximum density of twenty two (22) units per acre.
3. Every assisted living facility shall be located on a lot having a minimum area of two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet.
E. Yard Areas: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure
or enlargement:
1. Front Yard: A front yard equal to not less than forty feet (40').
2. Interior Side Yards: A side yard on each side of the principal building of not less than fifteen feet (15').
3. Corner Side Yard:
a. Generally: A side yard along the side street equal to not less than twenty five feet (25').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 218/470
b. Irregular Lots: For an irregular lot, a lot line abutting a street which has the greatest dimension shall be a side lot line, which required yard shall be
a corner side yard and shall have a yard of not less than twenty five feet (25').
4. Reversed Corner Side Yard: The street line with the greatest dimension shall be the exterior side lot line. Along said lot line, a side yard shall be
provided equal to the required front yard of the lot to the rear, for a distance equal to required rear yard of the reversed corner lot. Along the
remaining distance of said side lot line there shall be provided a side yard equal to fifty percent (50%) of the depth of the front yard required on the lot
to the rear but shall not be less than twenty five feet (25'). See also subsection 5-3-9E of this title regarding accessory buildings.
5. Rear Yard: A rear yard equal to not less than fifty feet (50'). An accessory structure may be located in the rear yard but not closer than five feet (5') to
any lot line, providing such accessory structure, excluding a garage, is appropriately screened.
6. Stables, Private: Private stables shall be set a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any lot line.
F. Height:
1. The maximum height of the principal building shall not exceed thirty feet (30') or two (2) stories.
2. For all assisted living facilities, the maximum height of the principal building shall not exceed forty five feet (45') or three (3) stories.
G. Lot Coverage: The maximum coverage of a zoning lot shall not exceed the percentages set forth below:
1. General requirements: Twenty five percent (25%), including accessory buildings.
2. Assisted living facilities: Forty three percent (43%), including accessory buildings.
H. Floor Area Ratio: The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall be as set forth below:
1. Single-family detached dwellings: Twenty five percent (25%). The FAR applicable to the principal building only shall be twenty percent (20%).
2. Assisted living facilities: Forty three percent (43%).
I. Minimum Size Of Dwelling:
1. General Requirements: Each single-family dwelling and other such structures occupied in whole or in part for residential purposes shall contain at
least one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of livable floor area, exclusive of basement or garage space.
2. Assisted Living Facilities: Each assisted living facility shall contain at least three hundred thirty (330) square feet of livable floor area, exclusive of
basement or garage space.
J. Sewer And Water: All dwellings and uses requiring sanitary facilities shall be served by either a Municipal sewer and water system, a private community
sewer and water system, or a private individual sewage disposal system and water supply system approved by the appropriate governmental agency.
However, if both an individual sewage disposal system and an individual water supply system are used to serve the same lot, then a minimum lot area
of forty thousand (40,000) square feet is required.
K. Temporary Uses: Temporary uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title. (Ord. 0-14-20, 10-28-2014)
5-6-2: R-1A RESIDENTIAL TRANSITION DISTRICT:
A. Description Of District: The R-1A Residential Transition District is intended to be used for parcels which are suitable for residential development. It is
designed to allow development options in conjunction with planned unit development provisions of this title so as to permit uses to be developed and
arranged in a manner which will facilitate a transition between R-1 land uses and other more intense developments so as to minimize any adverse
impact on existing developments which are permitted within the R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
B. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted:
Accessory uses in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
Fences, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
Off street parking facilities in accordance with the provisions of chapter 8 of this title.
Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas when publicly owned and operated.
Single-family detached dwellings.
C. Special Uses: The following uses may be permitted by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of chapter 10 of this title:
Artificial lake(s), private recreation. Noncommercial, not for profit uses limited to community center buildings, clubhouses, recreational buildings, swim
clubs for indoor pools, tennis buildings for indoor tennis.
Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, rectories and convents, and similar religious institutions and other accessory uses required for their
operation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 219/470
Community center buildings, clubhouses, recreation buildings, swim clubs for indoor pools, tennis buildings for indoor tennis, noncommercial and not
for profit.
Golf courses not including the following: driving ranges, miniature golf courses, or illuminated par 3 golf courses.
Governmental office buildings.
Home occupations, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
Libraries, public.
Planned unit developments (PUDs).
Public service uses including:
Electric substations.
Fire stations.
Gas regulator stations.
Police stations.
Pumping stations.
Railroad rights of way.
Reservoirs.
Telephone exchanges, repeater stations and microwave relay towers.
Water towers, waterworks, and wells.
Schools, public or private, denominational, elementary and high, including playgrounds and athletic fields auxiliary thereto noncommercial.
Signs, in accordance with provisions of chapter 9 of this title.
D. Lot Size:
1. Every single-family dwelling hereafter erected shall be located and continuously maintained on a lot having an area of not less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet, and a width at the established front building line of not less than one hundred feet (100').
2. Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed and conditions stipulated at the time a special use permit is authorized, but in no case shall
any such lot have an area less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and a width of one hundred feet (100') at the established building line.
E. Yard Areas: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure
or enlargement:
1. Front Yard: A front yard equal to not less than forty feet (40').
2. Interior Side Yards: A side yard on each side of the principal building of not less than fifteen feet (15').
3. Corner Side Yard: A side yard along the side street equal to not less than twenty five feet (15').
4. Reversed Corner Side Yard: The street line with the greatest dimension shall be the exterior side lot line. Along said lot line, a side yard shall be
provided equal to the required front yard of the lot to the rear, for a distance equal to required rear yard of the reversed corner lot. Along the
remaining distance of said side lot line there shall be provided a side yard equal to fifty percent (50%) of the depth of the front yard required on the lot
to the rear but shall not be less than twenty five feet (25'). See also subsection 5-3-9E of this title regarding accessory buildings.
5. Rear Yard: A rear yard equal to not less than fifty feet (50'). An accessory structure may be located in the rear yard but not closer than five feet (5') to
any lot line, providing such accessory structure, excluding a garage, is appropriately screened.
F. Height: The maximum height of buildings shall not exceed thirty feet (30') or two (2) stories.
G. Lot Coverage: The maximum coverage of a zoning lot shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%), including accessory buildings.
H. Floor Area Ratio: The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for single-family detached dwellings and accessory buildings shall be twenty five percent (25%).
The FAR applicable to the principal building only shall be twenty percent (20%).
I. Minimum Size Of Dwelling: Each single-family detached dwelling and other such structures occupied in whole or in part for residential purposes shall
contain at least one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of livable floor area, exclusive of basement or garage space.
J. Sewer And Water: All dwellings and uses requiring sanitary facilities shall be served by either a municipal sewer and water system, a private community
sewer and water system, or a private individual sewage disposal system or water supply system approved by the appropriate governmental agency.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 220/470
However, if both an individual sewage disposal system and an individual water supply system are used to serve the same lot, then a minimum lot area
of forty thousand (40,000) square feet is required.
K. Temporary Uses: Temporary uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
L. Requirements For Special Uses And Planned Unit Developments (PUDs): Minimums for lot size, front yard, interior side yard, corner side yard, reversed
corner side yard, rear yard, and requirements for lot coverage, maximum height of buildings, floor area ratio, and minimum dwelling size, for special
uses, or PUDs shall be prescribed and the conditions stipulated to at the time a special use permit, or PUD is authorized.
M. Criteria For Rezoning To R-1A: The general purpose and intent of this zoning district is to permit a PUD which is primarily residential on property
originally within an R-1 zoning district, if substantial and sufficient justification exists to show that the proposed development is the best alternative to
the R-1 district and if that justification arises from conditions or circumstances other than economic ones. (Ord., 11-17-1987)
The plan/zoning board of appeals shall not recommend a rezoning to R-1A for purposes of a PUD unless it shall make findings of fact that the
proposed development meets all the following criteria: (Ord., 11-17-1987; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
1. Special conditions and circumstances exist as a result of surrounding property or within the land itself and which are not generally applicable to other
similarly zoned properties.
2. The proposed PUD will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare or injurious to other property or
improvements in the neighborhood.
3. The proposed PUD shall provide adequate utilities, roads, drainage, and/or other facilities and not substantially increase congestion in the public
streets, increase the danger of fire, or flooding, nor diminish and impair property valuations in the vicinity of the subject property with due
consideration of the existing permitted uses.
4. The proposed PUD will not alter the essential character of the locality, nor impede or discourage the development or adjacent land in accord with
their current zoning district within which they lie. It is not the intent of the R-1A zoning district to foster different land uses on adjacent properties or
create spot zoning.
5. The proposed PUD is in harmony with the spirit and intent of this title, and the city's comprehensive plan. (Ord., 11-17-1987)
The plan/zoning board of appeals shall not recommend a rezoning to R-1A unless it makes findings of fact that the reasons set forth in the
application justify the granting of the PUD, and that each variation from the normal zoning requirements for that district is the minimum variation that
will make possible the reasonable use of the land.
The plan/zoning board of appeals shall further make a finding that the granting of the PUD will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
this title, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental of the public welfare. (Ord., 11-17-1987; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-
2003)
The board may recommend that such conditions and restrictions are imposed upon the location, construction, design and use of property benefited
by a granting of the rezoning as may be necessary or appropriate to comply with the foregoing standards and to protect adjacent property and
property values. (Ord., 11-17-1987)
The special use permit granted under this title shall be valid for one year. If substantial construction of the developer has not been initiated within one
year of the date of the passage of an ordinance granting a special use permit, said permit shall be terminated and the zoning shall revert to R-1. The
plan/zoning board of appeals may accept an application to extend the effective special use permit for a period of ninety (90) days, and may
recommend to the city council such an extension, and the city council may approve the extension. A maximum of two (2) such extensions may be
approved. (Ord., 11-17-1987; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
Violation of such conditions and restrictions, when made a part of the terms under which an R-1A zoning is granted, shall be deemed a violation of
this title and punishable under chapter 12, "Violations; Penalties", of this title. (Ord., 11-17-1987)
5-6-3: R-2 GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
A. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted:
Accessory uses, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
Fences, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
Home occupations, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Off street parking facilities in accordance with the provisions of chapter 8 of this title.
Parks, forest preserves and recreation areas, when publicly owned and operated.
Signs, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
B. Special Uses: The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with provisions of chapter 10 of this title:
Artificial lakes, private recreation.
Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, rectories and convents, and similar religious institutions, and other accessory uses required for operation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 221/470
Community center buildings, clubhouses, recreation buildings, swim clubs for indoor pools, tennis buildings for indoor tennis, noncommercial and not
for profit.
Governmental office buildings.
Hospitals and sanitariums, not including institutions for the care or treatment of the insane, feebleminded, retarded, alcoholic or drug addict patrons,
rest homes, nursing or convalescent homes.
Libraries, public.
Nursery schools, children's day schools, day nurseries, childcare centers, and daycare centers, provided at least two hundred (200) square feet of
outdoor play area is provided for each child that is cared for.
Nursing homes.
Public service uses including:
Electric substations.
Fire stations.
Gas regulator stations.
Police stations.
Pumping stations.
Railroad rights of way.
Reservoirs.
Telephone exchanges, repeater stations and microwave relay towers.
Water towers, waterworks, and wells.
Schools, public or private, denominational, elementary and high, including playgrounds and athletic fields auxiliary thereto noncommercial. (Ord. 0-77-
27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-40, 11-3-2002, eff. 11-13-2003)
C. Prohibited Uses: All uses not expressly authorized in subsections A and B of this section are expressly prohibited.
D. Lot Area Requirements:
1. All buildings erected or structurally altered containing three (3) or more dwelling units shall be located on a lot which provides minimum lot area per
dwelling unit as follows:
a. Dwelling units with four (4) or more bedrooms: Four thousand (4,000) square feet;
b. Dwelling units with three (3) bedrooms: Three thousand (3,000) square feet;
c. Dwelling units with two (2) or less bedrooms: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet;
provided, however, that in no event shall a project's minimum lot area be less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
2. Any room other than a living room, dining room, bath, kitchen, utility room or other accessory room such as a closet shall be counted as a bedroom
for purposes of determining land area per dwelling unit.
3. The minimum lot width for all permitted uses in this R-2 district shall not be less than sixty feet (60').
4. Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed and conditions stipulated at the time a special use permit is authorized, but in no case shall
any such lot have an area less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet and a width less than sixty feet (60') at the established building line.
E. Yard Areas: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure
or enlargement:
1. Front Yard: For each building on a zoning lot, a front yard shall be provided equal to not less than twenty percent (20%) of the lot depth, but need not
exceed twenty feet (20'). The minimum front yard shall be increased by one foot (1') for each three feet (3') or fraction thereof by which the building
height exceeds forty feet (40').
2. Interior Side Yard: Multiple-family dwellings shall be set in from the side lot line a distance of not less than ten feet (10'), unless the building height
exceeds twenty five feet (25'), in which case the interior side yard shall equal forty percent (40%) of the building height; however, buildings fifty feet
(50') or more in overall width, as projected upon the front lot line, shall have side yards not less than twenty percent (20%) of the building width or
forty percent (40%) of the building height, whichever is greater. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
Special uses may require an interior side yard greater than ten feet (10') when specified by the plan/zoning board of appeals. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-
1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
3. Corner Side Yard: Multiple-family dwellings shall be set in from the side lot line adjacent to the street right of way a distance of not less than ten feet
(10'), except that buildings fifty feet (50') or more in overall width, as projected upon the front lot line, shall have corner side yards not less than
twenty percent (20%) of the building width or forty percent (40%) of the building height, whichever is greater. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 222/470
Special uses may require a corner side yard greater than ten feet (10') when specified by the plan/zoning board of appeals. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-
1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
4. Rear Yard: Multiple-family dwellings shall be set back from the rear lot line at least thirty feet (30'). Community center buildings and recreation
buildings shall be set back from the rear lot line at least fifty feet (50') or ten percent (10%) of the lot depth, whichever is less.
Buildings accessory to multiple-family dwellings may be located in the rear yard but not closer than five feet (5') to any lot line. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-
1977)
Special uses may require a rear yard greater than thirty feet (30') when specified by the plan/zoning board of appeals. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977;
amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
J. Minimum Size Of Dwelling: The minimum size of a multiple-family dwelling unit shall be five hundred (500) square feet of livable floor space exclusive of
basement or garage space.
F. Required Open Space: All required open space shall be adequately dispersed to facilitate ease of use by all residents.
1. Open space: Any lot area not covered by buildings, streets, or parking areas.
2. Minimum open space: The percentage of zoning lot that must be devoted to landscaping, lawns, recreation areas and similar uses. Off street parking
and loading space and driveways shall not be included as part of the required minimum open space.
3. Minimum usable open space: The percentage of a zoning lot that must be provided and maintained as a permanent open space for active and
passive recreation. These areas may include lakes, swimming pools, tennis and volleyball courts, lawn expanses and walkways. Balconies and
terraces may also be included as usable open space.
4. Required open space: In the R-2 district, the following percentages of the zoning lot shall be provided and maintained as adequately dispersed open
space:
a. Minimum open space: Forty percent (40%).
b. Minimum usable open space: Twenty percent (20%).
G. Height: The maximum height of buildings shall not exceed forty five feet (45') or four (4) stories.
H. Lot Coverage: The maximum coverage of a zoning lot shall not exceed forty percent (40%) including accessory buildings.
I. Floor Area Ratio: The maximum floor area ratio for a multi-family building is eighty percent (80%).
K. Maximum Dwelling Unit Density: Maximum dwelling unit density of a multiple-family dwelling shall be 17.4 units per acre.
L. Sewer And Water: All dwellings and uses requiring sanitary facilities shall be served by either a municipal sewer and water system, a private community
sewer and water system, or a private individual water supply system. Individual sewage disposal units are not permitted. Individual water supply
systems must be approved by the appropriate governmental agency.
M. Temporary Uses: Temporary uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
Chapter 7
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
5-7-1: O-1 OFFICE/RESEARCH PARK DISTRICT:
A. Description And Purpose Of District: The office/research park district is a specialized classification in which large office and research complexes are
encouraged. In addition, given the relative distance of the area from the residential districts in the city and the buffer provided by the Cook County
forest preserve district lands along the western side of the district, the O-1 district provides regulation of the location of sexually oriented businesses so
as to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this section have neither the
purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly,
it is not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the first amendment, or to
deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this
section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials.
B. Adult Uses: Adult uses shall include, but not necessarily be limited to those uses defined below. Adult uses are prohibited in any district other than the
O-1 office/research park district. As used in this zoning code, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ADULT BOOTH: Any area of an adult entertainment establishment set off from the remainder of such establishment by one or more walls or other
dividers or partitions and used to show, play, or otherwise demonstrate any adult materials or to view any live performance that is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified
sexual activities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 223/470
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT: Any of the following commercial establishments, as defined herein:
Adult Cabaret: Any commercial establishment that as a substantial or significant portion of its business regularly features any of the following:
1. Persons who appear nude or seminude.
2. Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
Adult Store: Any commercial establishment: 1) that contains one or more adult booths; 2) that as a substantial or significant portion of its business
offers for sale, rental, or viewing any adult materials; or 3) that has a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of adult materials.
Adult Theater: Any commercial establishment that as a substantial or significant portion of its business regularly features for presentation films,
motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer displays, or other visual representations or recordings that are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified
sexual activities.
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT EMPLOYEE: Any individual, including entertainers, who work in or at, or render any services directly related to the
operation of, an adult entertainment establishment; provided, however, that this definition shall not include persons delivering goods, materials (other
than adult materials), food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs, to the licensed premises.
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT PATRON: Any individual, other than an adult establishment employee, present in or at any adult entertainment
establishment at any time when such adult entertainment establishment is open for business; provided, however, that this definition shall not include
persons delivering goods, materials (other than adult materials), food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs, to the licensed
premises.
ADULT MATERIAL: Any of the following, whether new or used:
1. Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or digitally stored materials; or
2. Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer displays, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind; or
3. Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities; or
4. Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, or that depict or
describe specified anatomical areas.
NUDE OR STATE OF NUDITY: A state of dress or undress that exposes to view: 1) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals;
pubic region; anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the
female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not exposed; or 2) human
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn, simulates human
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress or undress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolas of the female breast, as well
as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices or by other minor accessory apparel such as hats, gloves, and socks.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Any of the following:
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region; buttocks; anus; or female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areolas, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit,
or other wearing apparel, provided the areolas are not exposed.
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn,
simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following:
1. Actual physical touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts.
2. Actual physical sexual acts, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy.
3. Actual masturbation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 224/470
4. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence.
5. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in this definition.
STRADDLE DANCE: The use by any person, including specifically, but without limitation, an adult establishment employee, of any part of his or her
body to deliberately touch the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast of any adult establishment patron or any other person, or the
deliberate touching of the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast of any person by any adult establishment patron. Conduct shall be a
"straddle dance" regardless of whether the "touch" or "touching" occurs while the person is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area.
Conduct shall also be a "straddle dance" regardless of whether the "touch" or "touching" is direct or through a medium. Conduct commonly referred
to by the slang terms "lap dance", "table dance", and "face dance" shall be included within this definition of straddle dance.
SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION OF ITS BUSINESS: For purposes of the definitions in this section, the phrase "substantial or significant
portion of its business" shall be deemed to apply to any commercial establishment that satisfies one or more of the following criteria:
1. Gross Sales: Ten percent (10%) or more of the retail dollar value of the commercial establishment's annual gross sales derives from the sale,
rental, or viewing of adult materials.
2. Floor Area: Five percent (5%) or more of the floor area of the commercial establishment is devoted to the display, viewing, or presentation of
adult materials, not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any other portion of the commercial establishment not open to
the public.
3. Merchandise Displayed: Ten percent (10%) or more of the retail dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any one time is attributable to adult
materials.
4. Inventory: Ten percent (10%) or more of all inventory of the commercial establishment (whether measured by retail dollar value or number of
items) consists at any one time of adult materials.
5. Stock In Trade: Ten percent (10%) or more of the stock in trade at the commercial establishment consists at any one time of adult materials.
6. Live Performances: Live performances by persons appearing nude; live performances that are otherwise distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities; or
live performances by persons appearing seminude and that are taking place during ten percent (10%) or more of the time which the commercial
establishment is open for business.
C. Additional Restrictions On Adult Uses:
1. All adult uses shall be subject to the following restrictions:
a. No adult use shall be allowed within five hundred feet (500') of another existing adult use.
b. No adult use shall be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of any residential land use.
c. No adult use shall be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a preexisting school, childcare facility, or place of worship.
d. No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to "specified
anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities", from any public way. This shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other
opening.
e. Straddle dances are prohibited.
D. Permitted Uses: The following uses of land of buildings are permitted:
Accessory uses, as defined in chapter 3 of this title.
Adult uses, including:
Adult cabaret;
Adult stores;
Adult theaters;
Erotic dance schools;
Erotic dance studios;
Escort agencies;
Massage parlors;
Massage schools;
Massage services;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 225/470
Uses similar to those above.
Business, professional and governmental offices.
Fences, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 and subsection L3 of this section.
Off street parking with loading facilities, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 8 of this title.
Professional and business schools, but not including those of an industrial character.
Research and development laboratory facilities.
Signs, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 9 of this title.
E. Special Uses: The following special uses are permitted:
Agricultural uses as defined in chapter 2 of this title.
Artificial lakes.
Banks, with or without drive-in facilities.
Bookstores, and office supply stores.
Business colleges, commercial schools.
Convention halls and centers.
Dwellings, of the proprietor of a commercial use.
Financial institutions.
Health clubs.
Heliports; private, commercial.
Investment companies.
Labor unions and organizations.
Parks and playgrounds.
Personnel training centers.
Philanthropic and eleemosynary (charity) institutions.
Post offices, and post office substations.
Public service uses:
Electric substations, gas regulator stations.
Police and fire stations.
Public water towers, waterworks and wells.
Pumping station and reservoir.
Railroad rights of way, not including railroad yards and maintenance shops.
Telephone exchanges, repeater stations and microwave relay towers.
Other similar public service uses.
Savings and loan associations, with or without drive-in facilities.
Universities.
F. Prohibited Uses: All uses not expressly authorized in subsections D and E of this section are expressly prohibited.
G. Conditions Of Use: In the office/research park district, there shall be no storage, wholesale, retail, shipping or display of goods or merchandise on the
premises except for:
1. Incidental and minor storage and retail which is clearly accessory to and customarily associated with the operation of a professional office, such as
the dispensing of medicines by physicians on an individual patient basis.
2. Displays limited to floor samples in a business office.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 226/470
3. All business and professional activities shall take place within enclosed buildings.
H. Lot Size: A minimum area of five (5) acres is required for each permitted use.
I. Required Yards:
1. Front Yard: All structures shall be set back from the front lot line at least one hundred feet (100').
2. Interior Side Yard (Adjacent To A Zoning Lot): All structures shall be set in from the side lot line a distance of not less than fifty feet (50').
3. Corner Side Yard (Adjacent To A Street): All structures shall be set in from the side lot line adjacent to the street right of way a distance of not less
than one hundred feet (100').
4. Rear Yard: All structures shall be set back from the rear lot line at least fifty feet (50').
5. Transitional Yard: The minimum transitional yard requirements for all structures shall be not less than those specified below:
a. Where a rear lot line coincides with a rear lot line in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard
shall be not less than fifty feet (50') in depth.
J. Lot Coverage: Not more than thirty percent (30%) of the lot area may be occupied by buildings and structures including accessory buildings.
K. Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The maximum FAR shall be 1.0. The FAR of accessory buildings shall be included in the total allowable floor area permitted on
the zoning lot. However, any floor area devoted to off street parking or loading facilities shall not be counted in the floor area used to determine FAR.
L. Special Provisions:
1. Trucks: The parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted business, shall be limited to vehicles of not over one
and one-half (11/2) tons capacity when located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residential district boundary line.
2. Sewer And Water: All uses requiring sanitary facilities shall be served by either a municipal sewer and water system, a private community sewer and
water system, or a private individual water supply system approved by the appropriate governmental agency.
3. Temporary Uses: Temporary uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
4. Screening And Landscaping: Where the O-1 district use abuts or is across the street from a residential district, adequate buffering in the form of
screening and landscaping shall be provided. The entire site shall be adequately and attractively landscaped in accordance with plans prepared by a
recognized landscape architect. The landscape design may incorporate native plant materials and existing site amenities or new forms and vistas
may be introduced by the use of plant materials, earth sculptures and/or structures.
5. Business Requirement:
a. All business, servicing, or processing, except for off street parking and off street loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
b. All activities involving the production, processing, or cleaning, servicing, testing, or repair of materials, goods, or products shall conform with the
performance standards established for the B-3 commercial, wholesale and general service district provided that performance standards shall in
every case be applied at the boundaries of the zoning lot on which such activities take place. (Ord. 0-06-01, 1-23-2006)
5-7-2: B-1 RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT:
A. Description Of District: The B-1 retail business district is intended to provide for the convenience shopping of persons residing in adjacent residential
areas, and to permit such uses as are necessary to satisfy most of the basic shopping needs which occur daily or frequently and so require shopping
facilities in relative proximity to places of residence. Also allowed are compatible uses that, while not visited frequently, would be desirable if located in
close proximity to potential users. The district is designed to encourage the development of small neighborhood shopping centers with planned off
street parking and loading, as well as to provide for existing individual shops or small groups of local stores. The district is normally located on primary
or secondary thoroughfares, is relatively small in size, and has bulk standards that provide for compatibility with residential uses.
B. Permitted Uses: The following retail business and service uses are permitted, provided they are operated entirely within a building, except for off street
parking and loading facilities:
Accountants' offices.
Appliance stores.
Architects' offices.
Art supply stores.
Artist's studio.
Attorneys' and law offices.
Auditors' offices.
Bakeries (manufacturing of goods limited to those retailed on premises).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 227/470
Banks (including drive-in facilities).
Barbershops.
Beauty parlors.
Bicycle sales and repair shops.
Bookkeeping services.
Bookstores.
Business and professional offices, miscellaneous.
Business machine sales and service.
Camera and photographic supply stores.
Candy and confectionery stores.
Carpet and rug stores.
Chambers of commerce.
China and glassware stores.
Chiropodists' offices.
Chiropractors' offices.
Clothes pressing establishments.
Clothes rental agencies.
Clothes repair stores.
Coffee kiosks (drive-through).
Coin, philatelic, stamp, and numismatic stores.
Conservatories (private).
Dairy products stores.
Delicatessens.
Dental clinics.
Dental laboratories.
Dentist's offices.
Detective agencies.
Doctor's, surgeon's and/or physician's offices.
Drapery stores.
Dressmaking shops.
Drugstores (drive-through prescriptions).
Dry cleaners and laundries, launderettes (self-service only).
Dry cleaners and laundries (not a central plant serving more than one retail outlet).
Dry goods stores.
Electrical appliance stores.
Employment agencies.
Engineer's offices.
Fast foods (with drive-through).
Fish markets, retail.
Fix it shops, general minor repair.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 228/470
Florists.
Food stores.
Furniture stores.
Furrier shops (including storage).
Garden supply stores.
Gift shops.
Grocery stores.
Haberdasheries.
Hardware stores.
Hat repair stores.
Hearing aid stores.
Hobby shops (retail sales and repairs only).
Household appliance stores.
Ice cream stores.
Insurance agencies.
Interior decorating studios.
Jewelry stores.
Labor unions and organizations.
Land surveyors' offices.
Landscape architectural services.
Launderettes, self-service.
Leather goods and luggage stores.
Liquor stores (package).
Loan companies.
Locksmith shops.
Meat markets.
Medical appliance stores (not including manufacturing or assembly of such articles).
Medical clinics.
Merchant associations.
Millinery shops.
Musical instrument sale and repair shops.
News syndicates.
Newspaper offices.
Notions stores.
Office buildings, public.
Office supply stores.
Offices, business and professional; miscellaneous.
Optician sales (retail).
Opticians' offices.
Orthopedic appliance stores (not including manufacturing or assembly of such articles).
Orthopedic brace and limb fitting and assembly.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 229/470
Osteopaths' offices.
Package liquor stores.
Paint and wallpaper stores.
Pharmacies.
Philanthropic and eleemosynary (charity) institutions.
Phonograph record, tape, CD, and sheet music stores.
Photographic studios.
Picture framing (when conducted for on premises retail trade).
Political organization offices.
Post offices and post office substations.
Radio sales.
Radio service and repair shop.
Real estate offices.
Regional sales offices.
Religious reading rooms.
Savings and loan associations (including drive-in facilities).
School supply stores.
Secretarial services.
Security and commodity brokers.
Shoe repair stores.
Shoe stores.
Sporting goods stores.
Stationery stores.
Tailor shops.
Telegraph offices.
Television sales.
Television service and repair shops.
Ticket agencies (amusement).
Tobacco shops.
Toy stores.
Trading stamp stores.
Travel agencies, bureaus and transportation ticket offices.
Wearing apparel shops.
Other permitted uses:
Accessory uses as defined in chapter 3 of this title.
Fences, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
Off street parking and loading facilities, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 8 of this title.
Signs, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 9 of this title.
C. Special Uses: The following uses may be allowed by special use in accordance with the provisions of chapter 10 of this title:
Antique shops.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 230/470
Athletic fields (including stadiums and grandstands, noncommercial).
Automobile accessory stores, automobile diagnostic center or clinics, automobile service stations.
Bus passengers stations.
Childcare centers, children's day schools, daycare centers, day nurseries, nursery schools.
Cleaners (drive-in).
Clubs (private, nonprofit).
Community center buildings, clubhouses, recreation buildings, swim clubs for indoor pools, tennis buildings for indoor tennis (noncommercial and not
for profit).
Ice and milk machine sales.
Linoleum and tile stores.
Lodges and fraternal organizations.
Music schools.
Parks and playgrounds.
Pet shops.
Public services uses:
Electric substations, gas regulator stations.
Police and fire stations.
Public water towers, waterworks and wells.
Pumping stations and reservoirs.
Railroad rights of way (not including railroad yards and maintenance shops.
Telephone exchanges and repeater stations.
Other similar public service uses.
Residence of the proprietor of a commercial use.
Restaurants (excluding drive-in and fast food).
Secondhand (thrift) stores.
D. Prohibited Uses: All uses not expressly authorized in subsections B and C of this section are expressly prohibited.
E. Lot Size: 
1. A minimum lot area in the retail buisiness district of five (5) acres is required for agricultural buildings and structures.
2. A minimum lot width of three hundred feet (300') is required.
F. Required Yards:
1. Front Yard: All structures shall be set back from the front lot line at least thirty feet (30') except when parking is provided in the front yard in which
case all structures shall be set back from the front lot line at least sixty feet (60').
2. Interior Side Yard (Adjacent To A Zoning Lot): An interior side yard is not required.
3. Corner Side Yard (Adjacent To Street): All structures shall be set in from the side lot line adjacent to the street rights of way a distance of not less
than thirty feet (30').
4. Rear Yard: A rear yard is required sufficient to allow access for regular and emergency services. If a residential use is located above the first floor,
such rear yard shall be not less than thirty feet (30') in depth and shall begin at a level no higher than the level of the finished floor of the lowest
residential unit.
5. Transitional Yard: The minimum transitional yard requirements for all structures shall not be less than those specified below:
a. Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such side lot line. Such
yard shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which would be required under this title for a residential use on the adjacent residential
lot.
b. Where a rear lot line coincides with a side lot line in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard
shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which would be required under this title for a residential use on the adjacent residential lot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 231/470
c. Where a rear lot line coincides with a rear lot line in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard
shall be not less than twenty feet (20') in depth.
d. Where the extension of a front or side lot line coincides with the front lot line of an adjacent lot located in a residential district, a yard equal in depth
to the minimum front yard required by this title on such adjacent residential lot shall be provided along such front or side lot line for a distance of at
least fifty feet (50'), including the width of an intervening alley, from such residential lot.
G. Height: The maximum height of buildings and structures shall not exceed thirty feet (30') or two (2) stories.
H. Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The maximum FAR shall be 1.2.
I. Minimum Size Of Dwelling: Every structure occupied in whole or in part for residential purposes shall contain at least five hundred (500) square feet of
livable floor area, exclusive of basement or garage space.
J. Special Provisions:
1. Trucks: The parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted business, shall be limited to vehicles of not over one
and one-half (11/2) tons capacity when located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residential district boundary line.
2. Sewer And Water: All dwellings and uses requiring sanitary facilities shall be served by either a municipal sewer and water system, a private
community sewer and water system, or a private individual water supply system approved by the appropriate governmental agency.
3. Temporary Uses: Temporary uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
4. Business Requirements:
a. A mezzanine may be provided by a business establishment as an intermediate, fractional story between the floor and ceiling of the first story.
b. All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be
sold at retail on the premises where produced. All business, servicing, storage or processing, except for off street parking or loading shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building.
c. Establishments of the "drive-in" type offering goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles are not permitted except in
the case of automobile service stations (special).
d. All activities involving the production, processing, or cleaning, servicing, testing, or repair of materials, goods, or products shall conform with the
performance standards established for the B-3 commercial, wholesale and general service district, provided that performance standards shall in
every case be applied at the boundaries of the zoning lot on which such activities take place. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-7-3: B-2A GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
A. Description Of District: The B-2 general commercial district provides for the location of most services and businesses especially those requiring direct
access to major arterial streets. Structures located in this district vary from freestanding buildings to neighborhood or community shopping centers.
Diverse commercial activities, business, service and office uses, are permitted in this district. This district is located along the frontage of major arterial
thoroughfares.
B. Permitted Uses: The following retail and service uses are permitted provided they are operated entirely within a building, except for off street parking,
loading facilities, or outdoor storage which is adequately buffered:
Any business use permitted in the B-1 retail business district.
Animal hospital.
Antique shops.
Blueprinting and photocopying establishments.
Bowling alleys.
Credit unions.
Dancing schools or studios.
Department stores.
Financial institutions.
Frozen food stores.
Home supply centers.
Hotels.
Ice machine sales.
Investment companies.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 232/470
Linoleum and tile stores.
Medical laboratories.
Motels.
Newspaper distribution agencies.
Pet shops.
Recording studios.
Schools, dance.
Taxidermists.
Theaters (indoor).
Tire, battery and accessory dealers.
Vending machines.
Veterinary clinics.
Other permitted uses:
Accessory uses as defined in chapter 3 of this title.
Fences, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
Off street parking and loading facilities, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 8 of this title.
Signs, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 9 of this title.
C. Special Uses: The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of chapter 10 of this title:
The same special uses as are allowed by special use permit in the B-1 retail business district.
Artificial lakes, private recreation.
Automobile laundries and car washes.
Automobile repair garages.
Automobile sales.
Automobile undercoating service.
Banks (drive-in facilities).
Bars and cocktail lounges (including live entertainment and dancing).
Billiard and pool halls.
Boat and marine showroom and sales.
Bus terminals, turnarounds and lots.
Business colleges, commercial schools.
Catering establishments.
Dance halls.
Equipment rental and leasing service.
Funeral parlors.
Health clubs.
Motorcycle sales.
Parcel delivery and pick up service.
Recreational vehicle sales and rentals.
Restaurants (drive-in).
Roadside stands.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 233/470
Savings and loan associations (drive-in facilities).
Taverns.
Trade schools.
Trailer sales and rentals.
Truck sales and rentals.
Undertaking establishments.
Used car lots.
Vocational schools.
D. Prohibited Uses: All uses not expressly authorized in subsections B and C of this section are expressly prohibited.
E. Lot Size: A minimum lot area is not required, except that each residential use shall have a separate ground area designated, provided for, and
continuously maintained in accord with the following:
1. There shall be provided not less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of lot area per room in an apartment hotel and five hundred (500) square
feet of lot area per suite for hotels and/or motels.
2. A minimum lot width of one hundred feet (100') is required.
F. Required Yards:
1. Front Yard: All structures shall be set back from the front lot line at least thirty feet (30'). Except for driveways, no portion of a parking lot or parking
area shall be located within the first ten feet (10') of the required front yard.
2. Interior Side Yard (Adjacent To A Zoning Lot): An interior side yard is not required.
3. Corner Side Yard (Adjacent To A Street): All structures shall be set in from the side lot line adjacent to the street right of way a distance of not less
than thirty feet (30').
4. Rear Yard: A rear yard is required sufficient to allow access for regular and emergency services.
5. Transitional Yard: The minimum transitional yard requirements for all structures shall be not less than those specified below:
a. Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such side lot line. Such
yard shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which would be required under this title for a residential use on the adjacent residential
lot.
b. Where a rear lot line coincides with a side lot line in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard
shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which would be required under this title for a residential use on the adjacent residential lot.
c. Where a rear lot line coincides with a rear lot line in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard
shall be twenty feet (20') in depth and shall be kept free of parking and unscreened outdoor storage.
d. Where the extension of a front or side lot line coincides with the front lot line of an adjacent lot located in a residential district, a yard equal in depth
to the minimum front yard required by this title on such adjacent residential lot shall be provided along such front or side lot line for a distance of at
least fifty feet (50'), including the width of any intervening alley from such residential lot.
G. Height: The maximum height of buildings or structures shall not exceed thirty five feet (35').
H. Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The maximum floor area ratio shall be 1.2.
I. Special Provisions:
1. Trucks: The parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted business, shall be limited to vehicles of not over one
and one-half (11/2) tons capacity when located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residential district boundary line.
2. Sewer And Water: All dwellings and uses requiring sanitary facilities shall be served by a municipal or a private community sewer and a utility water
system or a private individual water supply system approved by the appropriate governmental agency. Hotels and/or motels must be served by either
a municipal or a private community sewer system, not by a private individual sewage disposal system.
3. Temporary Uses: Temporary uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
4. Business Requirements:
a. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. All business, servicing or processing, except for off
street parking, loading, and adequately screened outdoor storage shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
b. Establishments of the "drive-in" type offering goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles are not permitted, except in
the case of automobile service stations and drive-in dry cleaners, restaurants, banks, and savings and loans for which special uses have been
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 234/470
granted.
c. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products shall be enclosed by a fence, wall or plant materials adequate to conceal such
facilities from adjacent properties and the public right of way.
d. All activities involving the production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, or repair of materials, goods, or products shall conform with the
performance standards established for the B-3 commercial, wholesale and general service district, provided that performance standards shall in
every case be applied at the boundaries of the zoning lot on which such activities take place.
5. Landscaping Of Required Yards: Required yards of developed lots shall be landscaped and unpaved except for necessary drives, parking areas and
walks. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
J. Existing Special Uses: Where a use is classified as a special use and exists as a permitted or special use at the date of the adoption of this section, it
shall be considered a legal special use, without further action of the city council, the zoning administrator, or the plan/zoning board of appeals. (Ord. 0-
77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
A special use permit issued in accordance with procedures herein set forth shall be required only for any expansion or major alteration of such existing
legal special use. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-7-4: B-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
A. Description Of District: The B-2 general commercial district provides for the location of most services and many small businesses, including sites to be
used as primary shopping areas. Structures located in this district vary from freestanding buildings to larger, neighborhood or community shopping
centers. Diverse commercial activities, including business, service, and office uses, are permitted in this district. Normally this district is located at the
convergence of primary thoroughfares.
B. Permitted Uses: The following retail and service uses are permitted, provided they are operated entirely within a building, except for off street parking or
loading facilities:
Any business use permitted in the B-1 retail business district.
Animal hospitals.
Antique shops.
Automobile accessory stores.
Blueprinting and photostating establishments.
Bowling alleys.
Credit unions.
Dancing schools or studios.
Department stores.
Financial institutions.
Frozen food stores.
Home supply centers.
Hotels.
Ice machine sales.
Investment companies.
Linoleum and tile stores.
Medical laboratories.
Milk machine sales.
Motels.
Newspaper distribution agencies.
Pet shops.
Recording studios.
Schools, dance.
Taxidermists.
Theaters, indoor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 235/470
Tire, battery, and accessory dealers.
Veterinary clinics.
Other permitted uses:
Accessory uses as defined in chapter 3 of this title.
Fences, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
Off street parking and loading facilities, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 8 of this title.
Signs, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
C. Special Uses: The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of chapter 10 of this title:
The same special uses as are allowed by special use permit in the B-1 retail business district.
Amusement establishments, including archery ranges and shooting galleries, games, etc.
Artificial lakes, private recreation.
Automobile laundries and car washes.
Automobile repair garages.
Automobile undercoating service.
Banks, drive-in facilities.
Bars and cocktail lounges, including live entertainment and dancing.
Billiard and pool halls.
Bus terminals, turnarounds, and lots.
Business colleges, commercial schools.
Catering establishments.
Dance halls.
Equipment rental and leasing service.
Funeral parlors.
Health clubs.
Off track betting facilities in conjunction with eat-in restaurants, serving alcohol.
Parcel delivery and pick up service.
Pawnshops.
Restaurants, drive-in or drive-through facilities, fast foods.
Savings and loan associations, drive-in facilities.
Taverns.
Temporary buying locations (e.g., cash for gold).
Trade schools.
Undertaking establishments.
Vocational schools. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-12-06, 3-12-2012)
D. Prohibited Uses: All uses not expressly authorized in subsections B and C of this section are expressly prohibited.
E. Lot Size: A minimum lot area is not required, except that each residential use shall have a separate ground area designated, provided, and continuously
maintained in accordance with the following:
1. There shall be provided not less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of lot area per room in an apartment hotel and five hundred (500) square
feet of lot area per suite for hotels and/or motels.
2. A minimum lot width of three hundred feet (300') is required.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 236/470
F. Required Yards:
1. Front Yard: All structures shall be set back from the front lot line at least sixty feet (60').
2. Interior Side Yard (Adjacent To A Business Zoned Lot): An interior side yard is not required.
3. Corner Side Yard (Adjacent To A Street): All structures shall be set in from the side lot line adjacent to the street right of way a distance of not less
than thirty feet (30').
4. Rear Yard: A rear yard is required sufficient to allow access for regular and emergency services.
5. Transitional Yard: The minimum transitional yard requirements for all structures shall be not less than those specified below:
a. Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such side lot line. Such
yard shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which would be required under this title for a residential use on the adjacent residential
lot.
b. Where a rear lot line coincides with a side lot line in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard
shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which would be required under this title for a residential use on the adjacent residential lot.
c. Where a rear lot line coincides with a rear lot line in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard
shall be not less than twenty feet (20') in depth.
d. Where the extension of a front or side lot line coincides with the front lot line of an adjacent lot located in a residential district, a yard equal in depth
to a minimum front yard required by this title on such adjacent residential lot shall be provided along such front or side lot line for a distance of at
least fifty feet (50'), including the width of any intervening alley from such residential lot.
G. Height: The maximum height of buildings or structures shall not exceed sixty feet (60'), provided, however, that all buildings shall be set in from the rear
and side lot lines at least two feet (2') for every one foot (1') of building height in excess of forty feet (40'). The building line setbacks herein required
shall apply in addition to all other requirements of this section.
H. Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The maximum FAR shall be 1.2.
I. Special Provisions:
1. Trucks: The parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted business, shall be limited to vehicles of not over one
and one-half (11/2) tons capacity when located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residential district boundary line.
2. Sewer And Water: All dwellings and uses requiring sanitary facilities shall be served by a municipal or a private community sewer and a utility water
system or a private individual water supply system approved by the appropriate governmental agency. Hotels and/or motels must be served by either
a municipal or a private community sewer system, not by a private individual sewage disposal system.
3. Temporary Uses: Temporary uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
4. Business Requirements:
a. All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be
sold at retail on the premises where produced. All business, servicing, storage or processing, except for off street parking and loading shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building.
b. Establishments of the "drive-through" type offering goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles are not permitted,
except in the case of automobile service stations (special), and drive-through dry cleaners, banks, and savings and loans (special), or by special
use permit as listed herein.
c. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products shall be enclosed by a fence, wall or plant materials adequate to conceal such
facilities from adjacent properties and the public right of way.
d. All activities involving the production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, or repair of materials, goods, or products shall conform with the
performance standards established for the B-3 commercial, wholesale and general service district, provided that performance standards shall in
every case be applied at the boundaries of the zoning lot on which such activities take place. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-7-5: B-3 COMMERCIAL, WHOLESALE AND GENERAL SERVICE DISTRICT:
A. Description Of District: The B-3 commercial, wholesale and general service district is intended to provide sites to accommodate those uses that serve
large segments of the population with a wide variety of business and commercial uses. Included in the permitted uses are certain wholesale and
warehousing uses, and some limited industrial activities that are normally associated with commercial uses. Also permitted are industrial firms that
have high standards of performance and that can locate in close proximity to residential and business uses without creating nuisances and with
sufficient control of external effects to protect one industry from another. In this district outdoor storage must be completely screened and all industrial
operations must be in an enclosed building, except as permitted under special uses in this section. The district is normally located on primary
thoroughfares, and contains parcels that are relatively large in size.
B. Permitted Uses: The following business and service uses are permitted:
Any uses permitted in the B-2 general commercial district except those uses listed as permitted in B-1 retail business district.
Assembly firms, without fabrication of completely fabricated parts.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 237/470
Automobile repair garages.
Automobile undercoating service.
Automotive vehicle sales and leasing, new, including sales of used vehicles in conjunction therewith.
Bakeries, manufacturing of goods.
Beverage distributors.
Boat and marine showroom and sales.
Bottled gas dealers.
Bottling works.
Building material supplies, sales, and service.
Business, professional and governmental offices.
Contractor or construction offices and yards.
Dry cleaning establishments, central plant serving more than one retail outlet.
Electrical shops.
Equipment rental and leasing service.
Funeral parlors.
Furnace supplies and service.
Furniture cleaning, upholstering and repair shops.
Glazing shops.
Greenhouses, retail sales.
Laundries, central plant serving more than one retail outlet.
Lawn mower sales and repair shops.
Linen, towel, diaper and similar supply services.
Machine shops.
Machinery sales.
Motorcycle sales, service and repair shops.
Music schools.
Nurseries, retail sales.
Personnel training centers.
Plumbing and heating showrooms and shops.
Printing, publishing, and lithography establishments.
Public services uses:
Electric substations, gas regulator stations.
Police and fire stations.
Public water towers, water works and wells.
Pumping stations and reservoirs.
Railroad rights of way (not including railroad yards and maintenance shops.
Telephone exchanges and repeater stations.
Other similar public service uses.
Roofing sales and service.
Schools, music, trade, vocational.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 238/470
Sewer and septic tank cleaning and rodding service.
Sheet metal shops.
Sign contractors.
Snowmobile sales and service.
Swimming pool sales and service.
Trade schools.
Truck sales and service.
Undertaking establishments.
Vocational schools.
Warehouses.
Water softener service.
Welding shops.
Wholesale establishments.
Window cleaning firms.
Other permitted uses:
Accessory uses as defined in chapter 3 of this title.
Fences, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
Off street parking and loading facilities, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 8 of this title.
Signs, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 9 of this title.
C. Special Uses: The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of chapter 10 of this title:
Same special uses as are allowed by special use permit in the B-2 general commercial district.
Air freight terminals.
Airports.
Automobile paint shops.
Automobile rentals.
Automobile sales, new and used, permitted in enclosed buildings and on open lot areas.
Automobile storage facilities.
Dairy products manufacturing.
Extermination shops.
Filtration plants, public.
Greenhouses, wholesale.
Heliports, private and commercial.
Highway maintenance shops and yards.
Indoor skating rinks.
Launderers, industrial.
Mobile home dealers.
Nurseries, wholesale.
Recreational vehicle sales.
Residence of the proprietor, caretaker, or watchman of a commercial or industrial use.
Skating rinks, indoor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 239/470
Swim clubs, swimming pools and buildings for indoor swimming pools.
Telephone microwave relay towers.
Tennis clubs, tennis courts and buildings for indoor tennis and similar establishments.
Trailer sales and rentals.
Woodworking and wood products manufacturing. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
D. Prohibited Uses: Massage parlors are hereby prohibited. "Massage parlors" shall mean any establishment, club, or business by whatever name
designated which offers or advertises or is equipped or arranged so as to provide as part of its services massages, body rubs, alcohol rubs, baths or
other similar treatment. The following uses shall not be included within the definition of "massage parlors":
1. Establishments which routinely provide such services by a licensed physician, a licensed chiropractor, a licensed osteopath, a licensed practical
nurse or a registered professional nurse.
2. Electrolysis treatment by a licensed operator of electrolysis equipment.
3. Continuing instruction in martial or performing arts or in organized athletic activities.
4. Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics or medical offices.
5. Barbershops, beauty parlors or health clubs which offer massage to the scalp, the face, the neck or shoulders only.
All uses not expressly authorized in subsections B and C of this section are expressly prohibited. (Ord. 0-95-34, 8-21-1995)
E. Lot Size: A separate ground area, of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet shall be designated, provided, and continuously maintained for
each permitted and special use.
There shall be provided not less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of lot area per room in an apartment hotel and five hundred (500) square
feet of lot area per suite for hotels and/or motels.
A minimum lot width of one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be provided for each lot.
F. Required Yards:
1. Front Yard: All structures shall be set back from the front lot line at least sixty feet (60').
2. Interior Side Yard (Adjacent To A Business Zoned Lot): An interior side yard is not required.
3. Corner Side Yard (Adjacent To A Street): All structures shall be set in from the side lot line adjacent to the street right of way a distance of not less
than thirty feet (30').
4. Rear Yard: A rear yard is required sufficient to allow access for regular and emergency services.
5. Transitional Yard: The minimum transitional yard requirements for all structures shall be not less than those specified below:
a. Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such side lot line. Such
yard shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which would be required under this title for a residential use on the adjacent residential
lot.
b. Where a rear lot line coincides with a side lot line in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard
shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which would be required under this title for a residential use on the adjacent residential lot.
c. Where a rear lot line coincides with a rear lot line in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard
shall be not less than twenty feet (20') in depth.
d. Where the extension of a front or side lot line coincides with the front lot line of an adjacent lot located in a residential district, a yard equal in depth
to a minimum front yard required by this title on such adjacent residential lot shall be provided along such front or side lot line for a distance of at
least fifty feet (50'), including the width of any intervening alley, from such residential lot.
G. Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The maximum FAR shall be 1.2.
H. Special Provisions:
1. Trucks: The parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted business, shall be limited to vehicles of not over one
and one-half (11/2) tons capacity when located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residential district boundary line.
2. Sewer And Water: All dwellings and uses requiring sanitary facilities shall be served by a municipal or a private community sewer and a utility water
system or a private individual water supply system approved by the appropriate governmental agency. Hotels and/or motels must be served by either
a municipal or a private community sewer system, not by a private individual sewage disposal system.
3. Temporary Uses: Temporary uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
4. Business Requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 240/470
a. Enclosure Of Use: All business, servicing, processing, or industrial operations shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, unless
otherwise indicated hereinafter.
b. Outdoor Storage: All outdoor storage, except of motor vehicles and aircraft in operable condition shall be effectively screened and enclosed by a
fence, wall or plant materials adequate to conceal such facilities from adjacent properties and the public right of way. The outdoor storage of
uncontained bulk material is prohibited.
c. Surfacing: All outdoor storage space shall be provided with a permanent, durable, and dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained as to
dispose of all surface water, at a rate not to exceed the rate of drainage prior to the original development of the property.
d. Setback Standards: Setback on properties or portions thereof located directly across a street from a business or residential district, if any point on
the exterior surface of any building or structure is at a greater height than thirty five feet (35') above curb level, such point projected vertically upon
the ground shall in no case be nearer to the business or residential district boundary line than a horizontal distance equal to one and one-half
(11/2) times the height of such point above curb level. However, stacks, tanks, bulkheads, or ventilating equipment, including towers enclosing
same, shall be exempt from such limitation if not exceeding in the aggregate twenty five feet (25') in linear dimension parallel to the street for any
one hundred feet (100') of street frontage. Parapets not exceeding three feet (3') in height shall also be exempt from such limitations.
On properties or portions thereof located adjacent to a side or rear property line in a business or residential district, if any point on the exterior
surface of any building or structure is at a greater height than thirty five feet (35') above curb level, the vertical projection of such point upon the
ground shall in no case be nearer to the side or rear lot line of any property in the adjacent business or residential district than a horizontal
distance equal to the height of such point above curb level. However, stacks, tanks, bulkheads, or ventilating equipment, including towers
enclosing same, shall be exempt from such height limitations if not exceeding in the aggregate twenty five feet (25') in linear dimension parallel to
such business or residential lot line(s) for any one hundred feet (100') of length of such lot line(s). Parapets not exceeding three feet (3') in height
shall also be exempt from such limitations.
I. Performance Standards:
1. Purpose: The purpose of performance standards in regulating industrial uses is to:
a. Permit industrial nuisances to be measured factually and objectively.
b. Ensure that all industries will provide methods to protect the community from hazards which can be prevented by processes of control and
nuisance elimination.
c. Protect industries from arbitrary exclusion or persecution based solely on the nuisance protection by any particular type of industry in the past.
2. Application Of Performance Standards: After the effective date hereof:
a. Any use established or changed to, and any building, structure, or land developed, constructed or used for, any permitted principal use, or any use
permissible as a special use, or any accessory use, shall comply with all the performance standards herein set forth for the district involved with
the exception of airports and heliports.
b. If any existing use or building or other structure is extended, enlarged, or reconstructed, the performance standards for the district involved shall
apply with respect to such extended, enlarged, or reconstructed portion or portions of such use, building, or other structure.
c. Within one year from the enactment of this title, all presently existing uses of lands, buildings, or other structures shall comply with the
performance standards herein set forth for the districts involved.
3. Administration And Enforcement Of Performance Standards:
a. Intent Concerning Determinations Involved In Administration And Enforcement Of Performance Standards: Determinations necessary for
administration and enforcement of performance standards set forth herein range from those which can be made with satisfactory accuracy by a
reasonable person using normal senses and no mechanical equipment to those requiring great technical competence and complex equipment for
precise measurement. It is the intent of this title that:
(1) Where determinations can be made by the administrative official or other city employee, using equipment normally available to the city or
obtainable without extraordinary expense, such determinations shall be so made before notice of violation is issued.
(2) Where technical complexity or extraordinary expense makes it unreasonable for the city to maintain the personnel or equipment necessary for
making difficult or unusual determinations, procedures shall be available for causing corrections of apparent violations of performance
standards, for protecting individuals from arbitrary, capricious, and unreasonable administration and enforcement of performance standard
regulations, and for protecting the general public from unnecessary costs for administration and enforcement.
b. Performance Standards Relating To Emission Of Smoke, Fire, And Explosive Hazards Where Flash Point Of Flammable Materials Is Known,
Humidity, Heat, Glare, And Electromagnetic Interference: If the zoning administrator finds, after making determinations in the manner set forth in
this title that there is violation of performance standards relating to emission of smoke, fire and explosive hazards where flash point of flammable
materials is known, humidity, heat, glare, or electromagnetic influence, he shall take or cause to be taken lawful action to cause correction to within
the limits set by such performance standards. Failure to obey lawful orders concerning such correction shall be punishable as provided in chapter
12, "Violations; Penalties", of this title.
c. Performance Standards Relating To Measurement Of Particulate Matter, Vibration, Noise, Fire, And Explosive Hazards Where Flash Point Of
Flammable Materials Is Not Known, Toxic Or Noxious Matter, Odorous Matter, And Radiation Hazards: If, in the considered judgment of the zoning
administrator, there is probable violation of the performance standards as set forth herein concerning emission of particulate matter, vibration,
noise, fire, and explosive hazards where flash point of flammable materials is not known, toxic or noxious matter, odorous matter, or radiation
hazards, the following procedures shall be followed:
(1) The zoning administrator shall give written notice, by registered mail or other means ensuring a signed receipt for such notice, to the person or
persons responsible for the alleged violation. The notice shall describe the particulars of the alleged violation and the reasons why the zoning
administrator believes there is a violation in fact, and shall require an answer or correction of the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the
zoning administrator within a time limit set by the zoning administrator. The notice shall state, and it is hereby declared, that failure to reply or to
correct the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator within the time limit set constitutes admission of violation of the terms
of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 241/470
The notice shall further state that upon request of those to whom it is directed, technical determinations as described in this title will be made,
and that if violations as alleged are found, costs of such determinations shall be charged against those responsible for the violation, in addition
to such other penalties as may be appropriate, but that if it is determined that no violation exists, the cost of the determination will be paid by the
city.
(2) If there is no reply within the time limit set, but the alleged violation is corrected to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator, he shall note
"violation corrected" on his copy of the notice, and shall retain it among his official records, taking such other action as may be warranted.
(3) If there is no reply within the time limit set and the alleged violation is not corrected to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator within the time
limit set, he shall proceed to take or cause to be taken such action as is warranted by continuation of a violation after notice to cease.
(4) If a reply is received within the time limit set indicating that the alleged violation will be corrected to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator,
but requesting additional time, the zoning administrator may grant an extension if he deems it warranted in the circumstances of the case and if
the extension will not, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life, health, or property.
(5) If reply is received within the time limit set requesting technical determination as provided in this title, and if the alleged violations continue, the
zoning administrator may call in properly qualified experts to make the determinations. If expert findings indicate violation of the performance
standards, the costs of the determinations shall be assessed against the properties or persons responsible for the violation, in addition to such
other penalties as may be appropriate under the terms of chapter 12, "Violations; Penalties", of this title.
If no violation is found, the costs of the determinations shall be paid by the city without assessment against the properties or persons involved.
d. Required Data: Following the initiation of an investigation, the zoning administrator may require the owner or operator of any proposed or existing
use to submit such data and evidence as needed to make an objective determination. The evidence may include, but is not limited to, the following
items:
(1) Plans of the existing or proposed construction and development.
(2) A description of the existing or proposed machinery, processes and products.
(3) Specifications for the mechanisms and techniques used or proposed to be used in restricting the possible emissions of any of the dangerous
and objectionable elements as set forth in this chapter.
(4) Measurements of the amount or rate of emission of said dangerous and objectionable elements.
Failure to submit data as requested by the zoning administrator shall constitute grounds for denying a permit. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
e. Report By Expert Consultants: The zoning administrator may require any person, firm or corporation to retain an expert consultant or consultants
to study and report as to compliance or noncompliance with the performance standards, and to advise how a proposed or existing use can be
brought into compliance with the performance standards. Such consultants shall be fully qualified to give the required information and shall be
persons or firms mutually agreeable to the zoning administrator, and to the owner or operator of the use in question. In the event of the inability to
select a mutually agreeable consultant, the plan/zoning board of appeals shall select the consultant. The cost of such consultant's services shall
then be borne by the owner or operator of said use. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
f. Action Of Zoning Administrator: Within thirty (30) days following the receipt of the required evidence or the receipt of the reports of expert
consultants, the zoning administrator shall make a determination as to compliance or noncompliance. If he determines the existing or proposed
use is in compliance, he shall recommend the issuance of any permits which may have been withheld pending said determination. Such permits
shall then be issued or be denied within fifteen (15) days from such determination.
g. Required Alterations: The zoning administrator may require modification or alterations in the existing or proposed construction or the operational
procedures to ensure that compliance with the performance standards shall be given a reasonable length of time to effect any changes presented
by the zoning administrator for the purpose of securing compliance with the performance standards. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
h. Appeal: The action of the zoning administrator with respect to the performance standards may be appealed to the Prospect Heights plan/zoning
board of appeals within thirty (30) days following said action. In the absence of such appeal, the zoning administrator's determination shall be final.
(Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 03-35, 9-15-2003)
i. Continued Enforcement: The zoning administrator shall investigate any purported violation of performance standards and, if there are reasonable
grounds for the same, shall investigate the alleged violation. For such investigation the zoning administrator may employ qualified experts. If, after
a public hearing on due notice, the zoning administrator finds that a violation occurred or exists, a copy of said findings shall be forwarded to the
owner or operator with instructions to correct the violation. The services of any qualified experts employed by the zoning administrator shall be
paid by the violator if said violation is established.
j. Cancellation Of Permits: If, after the conclusion of the time granted for compliance with the performance standards, the zoning administrator finds
the violation is still in existence, any permits previously issued shall be null and void and operator shall be required to cease operation until the
violation is remedied.
4. Industrial Performance Standards: Uses shall comply with the following:
a. Noise: For the purpose of measuring the intensity and frequency of sound, the sound level meter, the octave band analyzer, and the impact noise
analyzer shall be employed. The flat network and the fast meter response of the sound level meter shall be used. Sounds of short duration which
cannot be measured accurately with the sound level meter shall be measured with the impact noise analyzer.
Octave band analyzers calibrated in the preferred frequencies (American Standards Association S1 6-1960, "Preferred Frequencies For Acoustical
Measurements") shall be used with the following tables:
Exceptions: The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level regulations:
(1) Noises not directly under control of the property user.
(2) Noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Such activities
are those which are temporary in nature, or conducted infrequently.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 242/470
(3) The noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief valves.
(4) Transient noises of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks, airplanes and railroads.
At no point along the boundary of a "residential district" or along an "adjacent lot" shall the sound pressure level of any operation or plant exceed
the decibel limits in the octave bands designated below:
MAXIMUM PERMITTED SOUND LEVEL
(In Decibels)
Daytime Hours 7:00 A.M. - 10:00 P.M. Local Time
Octave Band Preferred
Center Frequency (Hertz)
Along Residential
District Boundaries
Along Adjacent
Lot Boundaries
31.5 76 79
63 71 74
125 65 69
250 57 64
500 51 58
1,000 45 52
2,000 39 47
4,000 34 43
8,000 32 40
Nighttime Hours 10:00 P.M. - 7:00 A.M. Local Time
Octave Band Preferred
Center Frequency (Hertz)
Along Residential
District Boundaries
Along Adjacent
Lot Boundaries
31.5 72 79
63 67 74
125 61 68
250 53 60
500 47 53
1,000 41 47
2,000 35 41
4,000 30 36
8,000 28 34
Impact noises shall not exceed the following peak intensities:
Overall peak:
Along residence district boundaries 80
Along adjacent lot boundaries 86
b. Vibration: Any industrial operation or activity which shall cause, at any time and at any point along the nearest adjacent lot line, earthborn
vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in column 1 of the table in this subsection is prohibited.
In addition, any industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any point along a residential district boundary line, earthborn vibrations in
excess of the limits set forth in column 2 of the table in this subsection is prohibited.
Exceptions: The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the vibration level regulations:
(1) Vibrations not directly under the control of the property user.
(2) Vibrations emanating from construction and maintenance activities between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. Such
activities are those which are nonroutine operations accessory to the primary activities and which are temporary in nature, or conducted
infrequently.
(3) Transient vibrations of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks, airplanes, and railroads.
Vibrations shall be expressed as displacement in inches and shall be measured with a three (3) component measuring system approved by the
department of building and zoning.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 243/470
ALLOWANCE FOR VIBRATION
Frequency
(Cycles Per Second)
I1 Displacement
(Inches)
II1 Displacement
(Inches)
0 to 10 .0008 .0004
10 to 20 .0005 .0002
20 to 30 .0002 .0001
30 to 40 .0002 .0001
40 and over .0001 .0001
Note:
1."Steady state vibrations", for purposes of this title, are vibrations which are continuous, or vibrations in discrete impulses more frequent than 100
per minute. Discrete impulses which do not exceed 100 per minute, shall be considered impact vibrations and shall not cause in excess of twice
the displacements stipulated.
c. Smoke And Particulate Matter: Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards, roads, and so
forth within lot boundaries shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, or of other acceptable means.
For the purpose of grading the density equivalent opacity of smoke, the Ringelmann chart, published by the United States bureau of mines, shall
be employed.
The emission of more than twenty (20) smoke units per hour per stack is prohibited, including smoke of a density in excess of Ringelmann no. 2.
However, once during any six (6) hour period each stack may emit up to thirty five (35) smoke units, not to exceed Ringelmann no. 2, when
blowing soot or cleaning fires. Only during the fire cleaning periods, however, shall smoke of Ringelmann no. 3 be permitted, and then for not more
than four (4) minutes per period.
The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a net figure of one pound per acre of lot
area during any one hour, after deducting from the gross hourly emission per acre the correction factor set forth in the following table:
ALLOWANCE FOR HEIGHT OF EMISSION
Height Of Emission
Above Grade (Feet)
Correction (Pounds Per
Hour Per Acre)
50 0.01
100 0.06
150 0.10
200 0.16
300 0.30
400 0.50
Interpolate for intermediate values not shown in table.
Determination of the total net rate of emission of particulate matter within the boundaries of any lot shall be made as follows:
(1) Determine the maximum emission in pounds per hour from each source of emission and divide this figure by the number of acres of lot area,
thereby obtaining the gross hourly rate of emission in pounds per acre.
(2) From each gross hourly rate of emission derived in subsection I4c(1) of this section, deduct the correction factor (interpolating as required) for
height of emission set forth in the table in this subsection, thereby obtaining the net rate of emission in pounds per acre per hour from each
source of emission.
(3) Add together the individual net rates of emission derived in subsection I4c(2) of this section, to obtain the total net rate of emission from all
sources of emission within the boundaries of the lot. Such total shall not exceed one pound per acre of lot area during any one hour.
d. Toxic Matter: The measurement of toxic matter shall be made at ground level or habitable elevation and shall be the average of any twenty four
(24) hour sampling period. The release of any airborne toxic matter shall not exceed the fractional quantities permitted of those toxic matters
currently listed in the threshold limit values adopted by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists. If a toxic substance is not
contained in this listing, the applicant shall satisfy the county that the proposed levels will be safe and not detrimental to the general population nor
injurious to plant or animal life.
The release of airborne toxic matter shall not exceed one-thirtieth (1/30) of the threshold limit values across lot lines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 244/470
e. Noxious And Odorous Matter: No activity or operation shall cause at any time, the discharge of matter across lot lines in such concentrations as to
be noxious. The emission of matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable as an odor at any point along lot lines is prohibited.
f. Fire And Explosive Hazards:
(1) Flammable Solids: The storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is
permitted.
The storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted provided
the following condition is met:
Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized, or manufactured within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior walls
and protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system.
(2) Flammable Liquids And Gases: The storage, utilization, or manufacture of flammable liquids, or materials which produce flammable or
explosive vapors or gases, shall be permitted in accordance with the following table, exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed
containers, which shall be unrestricted.
The manufacture of liquid or gaseous oxygen is prohibited. Liquid or gaseous oxygen may be stored or utilized:
(A) In accordance with National Fire Protection Association standard no. 566, as from time to time in force and effect, herein adopted by
reference.
(B) The total quantity stored of gaseous or liquid oxygen shall not exceed five hundred fifty thousand (550,000) standard cubic feet.
(C) Activities involving the storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation are prohibited.
TOTAL CAPACITY OF FLAMMABLE MATERIALS PERMITTED
(IN GALLONS)
Flammable Materials Aboveground1 Underground1
Industries engaged in storage only:
Materials having a closed cup flash point of 187F Prohibited 30,000
From and including 105F to and including 187F Prohibited 30,000
Materials having a closed cup flash point of less than 105F Prohibited 30,000
Industries engaged in utilization and manufacture of flammable materials:
Materials having a closed cup flash point over 187F 30,000 30,000
From and including 105F to and including 187F 20,000 30,000
Materials having a closed cup flash point of less than 105F 5,000 30,000
Note:
1.Airports may store up to 50,000 gallons of aircraft fuel aboveground and up to 100,000 gallons of aircraft fuel underground.
g. Glare And Heat: Any operation or activity producing glare shall be performed within a completely enclosed building and be conducted so that
direct and indirect illumination from the source of light on the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of one-half (1/2) foot-candle when measured
at the lot line. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded and flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled so as not to cause a nuisance
across lot lines. Any operation producing intense heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such a manner as not to create
a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
h. Radiation Hazards; Release Outside Property Lines: The release of radioactive materials or the emission of ionizing radiation outside of property
lines shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
i. Unsealed Radioactive Materials: Unsealed radioactive materials shall not be manufactured, utilized, or stored (except when such materials are
stored in a fireproof container at or below ground level) in excess of the updated list of quantities of radioactive materials appearing in exhibit A
attached to ordinance 0-03-35. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
5-7-6: B-4 OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
A. Description Of District: The B-4 office/industrial district is intended to provide sites to accommodate those production and service related uses which
serve large segments of the resident population and nonresidential activities located in the general area. Such uses must have high standards of
performance such that they can locate in close proximity to residential and business uses without creating nuisances and with sufficient control of
external effects to protect the character and value of one property from another. In this district outdoor storage must be completely screened in a
manner approved by the site plan review committee, loading docks shall not be visible from public roadways, and all industrial operations shall be
conducted within an enclosed building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 245/470
B. Permitted Uses: The following business and service uses are permitted:
Business, professional and governmental offices.
Educational institutions. (Ord. 0-87-59, 11-16-1987)
C. Special Uses: The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of chapter 10 of this title:
Artificial lakes.
Business colleges, commercial schools.
Convention halls and centers.
Daycare facilities.
Enclosed arena, sports facility and entertainment complex, including indoor and outdoor accessory uses as approved by the city council.
Governmental uses including offices and public works facilities.
Health clubs.
Parking lots and decks, municipal and private.
Parks and playgrounds (private).
Planned unit developments.
Public service uses:
Police and fire.
Public water towers, waterworks and wells.
Pumping stations and reservoirs.
Other similar public service uses.
Recreational facilities (indoor).
Residence of caretaker or watchman of an industrial use.
Restaurant facilities. (Ord. 0-87-59, 11-16-1987; amd. Ord. 0-96-28; Ord. 0-98-32, 9-8-1998)
D. Lot Size: A separate ground area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet for each permitted or special use.
E. Required Yards: The provisions for required yards shall be the same as those in the B-1 district.
F. Transitional Yards: The provisions for transitional yards shall be the same as those in the B-1 district.
G. Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.5.
H. Special Provisions: The special provisions required for the B-3 district shall also apply herein. In addition, no use shall be established that contains
loading docks located such that they can be seen from the public right of way. The location of access points, building and sign location, design of
parking lots and landscape improvements, shall be reviewed and approved by the site plan review committee or its agent.
I. Performance Standards: The provisions for performance standards shall be the same as those in the B-3 district. (Ord. 0-87-59, 11-16-1987)
Chapter 8
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
5-8-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Scope Of Regulations: The off street parking and loading provisions herein shall apply as follows:
1. For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established after the effective date hereof, accessory parking and loading facilities shall
be provided as required by the regulations of the district in which such buildings or uses are located.
2. When the intensity of use of any building, structure, or premises shall be increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating
capacity (a horizontal unit of width of 18 inches per seat), or other units of measurement specified herein for required parking or loading facilities,
parking and loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 246/470
3. For land, structures or uses actually used, occupied or operated on the effective date hereof, there shall be provided such off street parking space as
was required for such land, structures or uses by any previous ordinance. If such land, structures or uses are enlarged, expanded or changed, there
shall be provided, for that increment of expansion only, at least the amount of off street parking space that would be required hereunder if the
increment were a separate land, structure or use established or placed into operation after the effective date hereof.
4. Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter be changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as
required for such new use.
B. Existing Parking And Loading Facilities: Accessory off street parking or loading facilities that are located on the same lot as the building or use served,
and that were in existence on the effective date hereof or were provided voluntarily after such effective date, shall not thereafter be reduced below the
requirements of this title for a similar new building or use.
C. Permissive Parking And Loading Facilities: Nothing in this title shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off street parking or loading
facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings provided that all regulations herein governing the location, design, improvement and operation of
such facilities are adhered to.
D. Damage And Destruction: For any conforming or legally nonconforming building or use which is in existence on the effective date hereof, which
subsequent thereto is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or other cause, and which is reconstructed, reestablished or repaired, off
street parking and loading facilities need not be provided, except that parking or loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such
damage or destruction shall be restored or continued in operation. However, in no case shall it be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading
facilities in excess of those required by this title for equivalent new uses or construction.
E. Control Of Off Site Parking Facilities: When required parking facilities are provided on land other than the zoning lot on which the building or use served
by such facilities is located, they shall be and remain in the same possession and ownership as the zoning lot occupied by the building or use to which
the parking facilities are accessory. No such off site parking facilities shall be authorized and no occupancy permit shall be issued, where the plans call
for parking other than on the same zoning lot until and unless the plan/zoning board of appeals has reviewed the plans and has heard the applicant
and has made findings that the common ownership or possession of the zoning lot and that the site of the parking facilities are reasonably certain to
continue and that the off site parking facilities will be maintained at all times during the life of the proposed use or building. A covenant to this effect
shall be recorded with the Cook County recorder and registrar of titles.
F. Submission Of Site Plan: Any application for a building permit, or for a certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required, shall include
therewith a site plan, drawn to a minimum scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') and fully dimensioned, showing any parking or loading facilities to
be provided in compliance with this title. Such site plan shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for approval when the required off street parking
is for more than three (3) parking spaces and shall indicate ingress and egress to the area, traffic patterns in adjacent streets and alleys, and
landscaping.
G. Responsibility: The duty to provide and maintain off street parking and loading space shall be the joint and/or separate responsibility of the operator
and/or owner of the use and/or land for which off street parking and loading space is required to be provided and maintained. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-8-2: ADDITIONAL PARKING REGULATIONS:
A. Use Of Parking Facilities: Off street parking facilities accessory to single-family residential use and developed in any single-family residential district in
accordance with the requirements of this section shall be used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles, station wagons and vans up to a gross
vehicle weight of eight thousand (8,000) pounds or a class B license used principally as passenger vehicles by the occupants of the dwelling structures
to which such facilities are accessory.
Under no circumstances shall required parking facilities accessory to residential structures be used for the storage of trucks or commercial vehicles
except when located in a garage or a fully enclosed structure and except as follows: (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
1. Vans, trucks, and commercial vehicles over eight thousand (8,000) pounds gross vehicle weight and up to twelve thousand (12,000) pounds gross
vehicle weight, may be parked in the open on the front driveway or in the buildable area behind the front building line or in the rear yard under the
following conditions:
a. No more than one of these vehicles shall be parked in a nongarage site.
b. In no instance shall these vehicles be parked within five feet (5') of any lot line.
c. Such above mentioned vehicles must be screened from view to any adjacent property with a direct view of where the vehicle will be parked.
Screening shall be done in a manner that conforms to the aesthetic and natural condition of the premises. Said screening shall conform to all
applicable city codes.
Note: It is recommended that screening be nondeciduous or similar plantings or fences. (Ord. 0-89-09, 6-5-1989)
2. Under no circumstances shall more than two (2) vehicles, made up of any combination of those vehicles mentioned in subsection 5-8-4B of this
chapter be parked in the open, except that only one vehicle mentioned in subsection A of this section may be parked in the open. (Ord. 0-89-09, 6-5-
1989)
3. Vehicles in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds gross vehicle weight may not be parked or stored in a residential district. (Ord. 0-86-28)
B. Joint Parking Facilities: Off street parking facilities for different buildings, structures or uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided collectively in any
zoning district for which separate parking facilities for each constituent use would be permitted, provided that the total number of spaces so located
together shall not be less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 247/470
C. Computation: When the required number of off street parking spaces results in a fractional space, one additional parking space shall be required.
D. Structure: Enclosed buildings and carports containing off street parking shall be subject to applicable yard and accessory building requirements. (Ord.
0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
E. In Yards:
1. Front Yards: Except as provided in subsection F of this section, no vehicle shall be parked in any R-1 district front yard except upon a regularly
constructed driveway no wider than twenty two feet (22'). Parking lots may be allowed in the front yard of other than R-1 districts if authorized by the
plan/zoning board of appeals and provided that the district does not require that the front yard be landscaped and devoted to any other use, and
further provided that the parking is in accord with all other ordinance provisions. The maximum width specified for driveways in the R-1 district is not
intended to prohibit turnarounds, circular driveways, or the fanning out of a driveway to match the entrance of a multicar garage. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-
1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
2. Side And Rear Yards:
a. Parking space that is open to the sky may be located in a required side or rear yard, but only if an unobstructed space of at least five feet (5') is left
along the lot line. If the specific district regulations are more permissive, their requirements shall apply.
b. In any business district, when a rear yard is adjacent to a residential district, there shall be no parking in the five feet (5') adjacent thereto.
F. Design, Development And Maintenance: Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area, including a commercial parking lot and
also an automobile or trailer sales lot, shall be designed, developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
1. Shall not be used for the sale, major repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies, except for minor repairs and
maintenance and except when parking is a permitted or special use. However, in residential districts, vehicles with two (2) "For Sale" signs may be
parked in parking areas for a time not to exceed one month. No more than two (2) vehicles shall be advertised for sale per residence per calendar
year.
2. Shall be graded for proper drainage and maintained at all times in such a manner as to prevent the release of dust and to be free of dust, trash and
debris. Excepting for single-family residential and industrial uses, all open off street parking areas shall be improved with six inch (6") Portland
cement concrete pavement, class I, or two inch (2") bituminous concrete surface, class I, over a four inch (4") bituminous aggregate mixture; two inch
(2") bituminous concrete surface class I over ten inch (10") aggregate base course, type B (crushed stone or igneous gravel); two inch (2")
bituminous concrete surface class I, over six inch (6") cement aggregate mix base course; or two inch (2") bituminous concrete surface class I, over
five inch (5") pozzuolanic base course, type A. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
For industrial uses, all open off street parking areas shall be improved with seven inch (7") reinforced Portland cement concrete pavement, class I, or
two inch (2") bituminous concrete surface, class I, over six inch (6") bituminous aggregate mixture; two inch (2") bituminous concrete surface class I,
over a fifteen inch (15") aggregate base course, type B (crushed stone or igneous gravel); two inch (2") bituminous concrete surface class I, over a
nine inch (9") cement aggregate mix base course; or two inch (2") bituminous concrete surface class I, over a seven inch (7") pozzuolanic base
course, type A. Materials and method of construction to conform to standard specifications of the Illinois department of transportation. (Ord. 0-80-32)
3. Shall be screened as follows:
a. Except for single-family zoning lots, off street parking areas for more than four (4) vehicles, that adjoin or are across the street from property zoned
for any residential use, shall have a dense planting, fence, masonry wall, and/or such other screening, of a height and location which will
effectively screen the adjoining residences from unreasonable glare and excessive exhaust emissions and reasonably screen the view of the
parking facility. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
b. In all zoning districts, except in the R-1 district, off street parking facilities shall be suitably screened on each side and rear lot line by a landscaped
buffer, fence, or wall not less than four feet (4') in height, plus a planting strip of five feet (5') minimum width in accordance with the following, or on
an alternative arrangement as approved by the plan/zoning board of appeals. Suitable landscaping and ground cover shall be provided and
maintained on a continuing basis within the planting strip. On the street lot line a landscaped buffer, fence, or wall not less than three feet (3') in
height shall be installed. Such wall or fence shall not be closer than four feet (4') from the street line right of way. Suitable landscaping and ground
cover shall be provided and maintained on a continuing basis between the fence or wall and the curb line. At least one tree of not less than three
inch (3") diameter size class shall be provided for every one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of pavement area up to six thousand
(6,000) square feet. At least one tree of not less than three inch (3") diameter size class shall be provided for every three thousand (3,000) square
feet of pavement area over six thousand (6,000) square feet. (Ord. 0-83-18; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
4. Shall be designed such that each required off street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to
provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space.
5. Shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in such a manner as to minimize interference with traffic
movement. Such design shall be in accord with fire lane access as required in the city building code.
6. Shall be provided with entrances and exits not less than twelve feet (12') in width and not more than twenty five feet (25') in width.
7. Shall, except in the R-1 district, be provided with wheel guard or bumper so located that no part of parked vehicles will extend beyond the parking
space. Parking spaces shall be designated, outlining each parking space and direction of traffic in access aisles, or to and from public right of way.
Parking spaces which abut six inch (6") concrete curbs at the head end of the space shall not be required to provide wheel guards or bumpers
provided that a two foot (2') strip of grass, paved walkway or gravel is provided immediately adjacent to the curbing opposite the parking stall. (Ord.
0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
8. Where hazards exist which can be eliminated or lessened by lighting, the plan/zoning board of appeals may require lighting at such hours and in
such manner as deemed necessary in the interest of public safety and security. The illumination of a parking lot shall be designed so that the light
from lighting fixtures in the parking lot does not reflect direct rays or spill over into adjacent residential districts. All parking lot lighting arrangements
shall be installed as approved by the building director and city engineer. The following standards shall apply to all off street parking lots. (Ord. 0-77-
27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
a. All lighting fixtures shall not be placed higher than twelve feet (12') above the finished grade.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 248/470
b. Fixtures shall be of the nonspill type, hooded to prevent glare.
c. Candle power per fixture shall not be less than 2.0 foot-candles and not more than 3.0 foot-candles measured at grade level under the fixtures.
d. Minimum security lighting shall be provided from eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to sunrise, as approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-
1977)
9. May not have more than one attendant shelter building conforming to setback requirements for structures in the district in which it is located. (Ord. 0-
83-18)
10. Each off street parking space and adjacent access aisle shall be the size identified in the off street parking chart contained within section 5-8-6 of
this chapter.
11. Finished grade and drainage shall be in accordance with subsection F2 of this section.
12. Parking ancillary to office uses may be designed to accommodate compact automobiles in up to thirty five percent (35%) of those parking stalls that
would be attributable to the office use, if such office related parking exceeds twenty five (25) parking stalls. Parking spaces for compact cars shall be
clearly identified by signs stating "Compact Car Parking". A minimum of one such sign per five (5) compact parking spaces is required.
G. Handicapped Accessibility: Parking ancillary to all uses, except single-family detached housing, shall be accessible to the handicapped. Such parking
shall correspond to the following provisions:
Total Parking Spaces In Lot
Required Number Of
Accessible Spaces
Up to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2 percent of total
(20, plus 1 for each
100 over 1,000 spaces)
1. Parking spaces reserved for handicapped shall be at least twelve feet six inches (12'6") wide. Where two (2) adjacent spaces are planned, and entry
can be gained by the car going in forward or reverse, the width of both spaces plus the access aisle shall be a minimum of twenty feet six inches
(20'6"), with the access aisle located between the two (2) spaces. If access can only be gained by going in forward, each space reserved for a
disabled driver shall have an access aisle. The access aisle shall be at least forty six inches (46") wide and preferably be level, but may have a slope
for drainage not exceeding one to fifty (1:50). The surface shall be firm. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
2. In parking structures, a minimum headroom of eighty inches (80") shall be provided for circulation and parking of vans used by disabled persons.
The number of parking spaces to be provided with this clearance shall be half the number of handicapped parking spaces computed as indicated in
subsection G1 of this section. The access aisle shall be sixty inches (60") wide, though it may extend into the vehicular circulation route when
parallel parking is provided. (Ord. 0-83-18)
3. Multi-story parking structures without elevators shall have spaces reserved for disabled drivers on an accessible floor.
4. Where curbs are required around the parking area, curb ramps shall be provided along the route of pedestrian circulation.
5. Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be marked to indicate that they are reserved for disabled drivers using the international symbol for
accessibility. Such markings shall be placed on a pole or wall mounted at the head of the parking stalls and may be accompanied by markings
painted on the surface.
6. All of the above handicapped parking requirements can be waived if attendant parking is provided at all times. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-8-3: LOCATION OF ACCESSORY OFF STREET PARKING FACILITIES:
The location of off street parking spaces in relation to the use served shall be as prescribed hereinafter. All distances specified shall be walking distances
between such parking spaces and main entrance to the use served.
A. For uses in a residential district: Parking spaces accessory to dwellings shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 249/470
B. For uses in business district: All required parking spaces shall be within three hundred feet (300') of the use served. However, no parking spaces
accessory to a use in a business district shall be located in a residential district. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-8-4: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of administering this section, the following definitions shall be applicable:
BOAT OR RAFT: Any unit that is used for water travel or pleasure.
MOTOR HOME: A portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
PICKUP COACH: A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use
as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation uses.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES: Vehicles or other similar facilities used primarily for recreational purposes. Such vehicles include travel trailers, pickup
coaches, camper trailers, motor homes, boats and rafts.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation
uses.
B. Parking Requirements. The parking and storage of recreational vehicles in a single-family residential district owned by residents of the zoning lot, shall
be subject to the following regulations: (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
1. Travel trailers, pickup coaches, camper trailers, motor homes, boats, rafts, boat trailers, and miscellaneous recreational vehicles and trailers shall
not be parked or stored on a zoning lot, except when located in a garage or fully enclosed structure, or within the buildable area to the rear of the
front building line under the following conditions:
a. Such above mentioned vehicles up to a length of thirty two feet (32') and a maximum total of one such vehicle, may be parked or stored in the
open in the front driveway or in the buildable area behind the front building line or in the rear yard. If parked or stored in the front driveway, they
shall be parked or stored as close to the garage as possible, but in no case may they be parked or stored within five feet (5') of any lot line.
b. All vehicles must be screened from view to any adjacent property with a direct view of where the vehicle will be parked. Screening shall be done in
a manner that conforms to the aesthetic and natural condition of the premises. Said screening shall conform to all applicable city codes.
Note: It is recommended that screening be nondeciduous or similar plantings or fences. (Ord. 0-89-09, 6-5-1989)
2. No more than two (2) vehicles made up of vehicles covered in this section may be stored in the open on a zoning lot, except that a boat may also be
permitted provided it can be transported within or on top of a camper or motor vehicle. In no instance may more than one recreational vehicle of a
length between twenty two feet (22') and thirty two feet (32') be stored in the open on a zoning lot. In the event a vehicle covered by subsection 5-8-
2A2 of this chapter is parked in the open on a zoning lot, no recreational vehicle of a length in excess of twenty two feet (22') may be parked in the
open on the same zoning lot.
3. Recreational vehicles exceeding thirty two feet (32') in length may not be stored in any residential district.
4. At no time shall any parked recreational vehicle be occupied or used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes except for occasional overnight
sleeping by residents of the zoning lot or their guests, provided that such overnight sleeping does not violate any other ordinance of the city of
Prospect Heights.
5. Recreational vehicles owned by guests may be stored or parked on a zoning lot up to a period of two (2) weeks and used only as sleeping quarters,
provided that such vehicles do not violate this or any other ordinance of the city of Prospect Heights. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-8-5: MOBILE HOMES:
Mobile homes are not permitted to be parked or stored in any zoning district except as may be specifically provided for in a district governing mobile home
parks or mobile home sales, or as specified under chapter 3, "General Provisions", of this title. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-8-6: SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
All off street parking spaces hereinafter required by this title, except those required for single-family dwellings, shall be designed in accordance with one of
the formulae set forth in the following off street parking chart. Off street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the specific parking classes.
Parking spaces for accessory uses not specifically enumerated within a parking class shall be assumed to be included in the principal (permitted or
special) use requirement.
If, for any reason the classification of any use, for the purpose of determining the amount of off street parking, or the number of spaces to be provided by
such use, is not readily determinable hereunder, the parking class of such use shall be fixed by the zoning administrator. Uses included shall not be
construed as an approved or recommended use unless otherwise specifically so identified in a district. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
A. Parking Classes:
OFF STREET PARKING TABLE
Parking
Class
Uses
(Permitted Or Special)
Required Spaces
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 250/470
Class 1
Dwelling, multiple-family
Dwelling, single-family
2 per dwelling unit
Class 2
Apartment hotels
Lodging houses
1 space per lodging room or dwelling unit, plus 1 per each 2 employees
Class 3
Hotels
Motels
1 per each room or suite of rooms comprising 1 dwelling unit, plus 1 per
each 2 employees, plus 1 per 100 square feet retail sales and dining area
Class 4
Hospitals:
100 beds
101_300 beds
301_500 beds
500 beds
1.0 per bed
1.1 per bed
1.2 per bed
1.3 per bed
Class 5
Assisted living facility
Convalescent home, extended care facility or rest home,
nursing home, sanatorium
1 per each 2 beds, plus 1 per each 2 employees
Convent, monastery, nunnery
Home for the aged
Institutions - for the care and residence of children and
adults; for the treatment of alcoholism, drug addiction, or
treatment and care of the insane or feebleminded
Parsonage, rectory or parish house
Religious retreat
Class 6
Medical and dental clinics 2 per each office or exam room, plus 1 per 500 square feet contained in
waiting room or lobby
Class 7
Aquarium 3 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Library, museum or art gallery (public)
Office building
Philanthropic and charitable institutions
Class 8
Animal hospital and veterinarian 4 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Animal kennels
Art studio
Blueprinting
Bus terminal
Business machine sales and service
Catering services
Civil defense - fire and police stations
Clothing and costume rental
Club or lodge, private, operated for benefit of members
and not for gain
Custom dressmaking
Diaper service
Dry cleaning plant employing not more than 6 persons
Frozen food locker plants, including sale of frozen foods
Interior decorator
Labor union offices and lodges
Laboratory, medical, dental or optical
Laboratory, research and testing
Lithographing
Massage salon
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 251/470
Office machine sales and service
Photostating
Physical culture and health services
Post office
Recording studio
Recreational and community center buildings
Repair of shoes, clothing and hats
School - music, dance and vocal
Small animal grooming establishments
Tailor shop
Telephone exchanges and equipment
Ticket agency
Travel agency
Class 9
Dormitory 5 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Fish market
Fraternity house
Furniture store
Furrier
Hearing aid store
Leather goods and luggage store
Lodging house
Orthopedic and medical appliance sales
Photography studio
Picture framing
Rummage shop
Sorority house
Class
10
Antique store 6 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Apparel store
Art and school supply store
Art store, retail
Auto accessory store
Bakery, retail
Bank, savings and loan
Barbershop
Beauty shop
Book and stationery store
Bus depot
Camera and photographic supply
Candy, nut and confectionery store
Carpet and floor covering store
China and glassware store
Coin store, currency exchange
Dairy products store
Delicatessen
Department store
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 252/470
Drugstore
Dry cleaning, laundry services
Electrical and household appliance store
Employment agency
Financial institutions and uses
Florist
Funeral parlor
Garden supply, tool and seed store
Gift store
Government administration buildings, without garages or
shops
Grocery or food store
Haberdasheries
Hardware store
Hobby shop
Home furnishings
Household appliance store
Ice cream store
Jewelry store
Laundry, self-service
Liquor store
Locksmith
Meat market
Millinery shop
Musical instruments sales and service
Newspaper distribution
Paint, glass and wallpaper store
Pawnshop
Pet shop
Railroad passenger station
Class
11
Auction halls
Auditoriums and auditoriums as accessory to churches,
schools and other institutional establishments
1 space per 5 seats or 90 linear inches of seating
Churches, temples and synagogues
Convention halls or exhibition halls
Racetracks
Stadiums
Note to class 11:
When the number of parking spaces as required herein is provided for an auditorium or other place of public assembly accessory to a
school, and when, approved by the plan/zoning board of appeals, additional parking spaces for such auditorium or other places of public
assembly must be equal to or in excess of the applicable requirements set forth in classes 12, 13 and 14 of this table.
Class
12
Nursery schools
Elementary schools
Middle schools
1 per each employee, plus 1 per each 3 classrooms
Class
13
High schools 1 space per each employee, plus 1 space per each 4 students based on the
maximum number in accordance to design capacity
Class
14
Junior colleges
4 year colleges
1 space per each 2 employees, plus 1 space per each 4 students
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 253/470
Universities
Class
15
Business schools
Commercial or trade schools
Music or dance schools
1 space per each 2 employees, plus 1 space per each 2 students
Class
16
Cocktail lounges
Restaurant, carryout only
10 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Restaurant, family dining type, where food is consumed on
premises
Taverns
Class
17
Drive-in type restaurants where:
Food is consumed on the premises but not within a
completely enclosed building, or
Food is served directly to customers in parked motor
vehicles
30 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class
18
Boarding school, elementary 1 space per each employee
Concrete mixing plans
Correctional institution
Dry cleaning plant
Exterminator
Machinery sales and/or service
Mail order house
Microwave relay towers
Radar installation and tower
Radio and TV stations and towers
Taxidermist
Class
19
Greenhouses and nurseries, retail
Golf driving ranges
1 per 1,000 square feet gross floor area, plus 1 per 2,000 square feet of
gross land area
Class
20
Golf courses, public/private 100 per 9 holes regular golf or par 3
Par 3 golf courses
Pitch and putt golf courses
Class
21
Commercial camping grounds 1 per 2,000 square feet of gross land area
Outdoor rifle range, trap or skeet shooting range
Zoos and zoological gardens
Class
22
Athletic field 1 per 5,000 square feet of gross land area
Botanical gardens
Forest preserve
Grounds of recreational clubs, noncommercial
Polo fields
Public parks and playgrounds
Class
23
Bowling alley
Dance halls
Skating rinks
1 space per 2 persons based on the maximum persons that can be
accommodated at the same time in accordance with design capacity and 1
space per each 2 employees
Swimming pools
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 254/470
Tennis courts and clubs
Class
24
Indoor theaters 1 space per each 4 seats up to 400 seats, plus 1 space per each 6 seats
over 400 seats
Class
25
Drive-in theaters (outdoor) Reservoir of 10 percent of capacity of use
Class
26
Drive-in banking facility Reservoir space sufficient to accommodate a number of automobiles equal
to 5 times the number of teller windows
Class
27
Auto laundry (mechanical) 1 per each 2 employees, plus 1 per manager-owner, plus parking spaces
equal to 5 times the maximum capacity of auto washing unit
Class
28
Auto service station 1 space per each island of pumps, plus 2 spaces each stall
Class
29
Battery and tire service shops
Garage for storage, servicing and repair of motor vehicles,
including body repair, painting and engine rebuilding
5 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per 2,000 square feet of
land area
Mobile home display and sales and service
Model garage display and sales
Motor vehicles sales and service
Motorcycle, bicycle, and other outdoor recreational vehicle
Trailer, boat, and camper or camper-trailer sales, rental
and service
Class
30
Abrasives manufacturing
Air, motor, railroad, and water freight terminal
Asphalt manufacturing
1 per each 2 employees or not less than 25 percent of the zoning lot,
whichever is larger. Requests for variances shall be liberally considered by
the circumstances attendant a particular use on a particular lot
Bakery
Bedding manufacturing
Boot and shoe manufacturing
Bottling companies
Brick and structural clay products manufacturing
Carpet manufacturing
Cartage and express facilities
Cement, bulk, storage
Chemical processing manufacturing
Cloth products manufacturing
Cosmetic manufacturing
Electric substation
Electronic, scientific and precision instrument
Electroplating
Feed and seed store
Feed mills
Food manufacturing, packaging and processing
Fuels, solid or liquid, storage and wholesale distribution
Fur processing
Gas regular station
Glass products production and sales
Grain storage and processing
Graphite products manufacturing
Gypsum manufacturing
Heavy machinery manufacturing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 255/470
Insulating material manufacturing
Laundry
Light machinery production, appliances and business
machines
Linoleum manufacturing
Machine shop
Meatpacking
Metal reduction and refinement
Metal stamping
Musical instrument manufacturing
Orthopedic and medical appliance manufacturing
Paint products manufacturing
Paper products manufacturing
Petroleum products, refining, storage and processing
Plastics manufacturing
Pottery and ceramics manufacturing
Printing and publishing
Rope, cord and twine manufacturing
Sewage treatment plant
Soap manufacturing
Sporting goods manufacturing
Steel manufacturing
Warehousing and storage and distribution
Warehousing and wholesaling establishments
Waterworks, reservoir, pumping and filtration plant
Wearing apparel manufacturing
Woodworking, planing mills and wood products
manufacturing
Any similar production processing, cleaning, servicing,
testing, storage, and repair
Class
31
Amusement parks and establishments
Billiard and pool halls
3 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 3 per 1,000 square feet of
gross land area
Indoor amusements, including indoor archery, rifle range
Kiddie parks
Miniature golf
Class
32
Air conditioning and heating contractor 2 per each 1 employee
Building materials and products sales and storage
Contractors and construction yards and offices
Dumps and sanitary landfills
Electrical showrooms and shops
Engineers and architects offices and yards
Greenhouse, wholesale
Junkyard and auto graveyard
Linen supply
Plumbing showroom and shops
Class
33
Airports and landing fields
Spaces as required by zoning administrator after review by the plan/zoning
board of appeals
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 256/470
Cemeteries, columbaria, crematories, and mausoleums
Heliports, public and private
Public stables
Riding academy
Class
34
Shopping centers under unified control or ownership on a
tract of land 4 acres or more in area
The number of parking spaces shall be the sum of the required number of
spaces as heretofore set forth for such uses
Mixed
uses
When 2 or more uses are located on the same zoning lot, or within the same building, parking spaces equal in number to the sums of the
separate requirements for each such use shall be provided. No parking space or portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more
than 1 use unless otherwise authorized by variation by the plan/zoning board of appeals and city council.
(Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003; Ord. 0-14-20, 10-28-2014)
B. Chart:
OFF STREET PARKING CHART
C. Parking Lot Dimensions For Compact Cars:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 257/470
MINIMUM PARKING LOT DIMENSIONS: COMPACT CARS1
Angle
Stall Width
Stall Depth Perpendicular To Aisle
Aisle Width
Double
Stall Width
Parking Module
(Curb To Curb)
0 19' 7.0' 10.0' - -
30 8' 14.4' 10.0' 12.0' 39.0'
45 8' 16.3' 12.0' 13.4' 46.4'
60 8' 17.0' 15.0' 15.0' 49.0'
90 8' 15.0' 24.0' 30.0' 54.0'
Note:
1.All handicapped parking stalls shall comply with the Illinois accessibility code.
D.Parking Lot Dimensions For Standard Cars:
MINIMUM PARKING LOT DIMENSIONS: STANDARD CARS1
Angle
Stall Width
Stall Depth Perpendicular To Aisle
Aisle Width
Double
Stall Width
Parking Module
(Curb To Curb)
0 22.0' 8.0' 12' - -
30 8.5' 16.7' 11' 12.8' 44.4'
45 8.5' 18.8' 13' 13.8' 50.6'
60 8.5' 19.9' 18' 17.8' 57.8'
90 8.5' 18.0' 24' 36.0' 60.0'
Note:
1.All handicapped parking stalls shall comply with the Illinois accessibility code.
(Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-8-7: OFF STREET LOADING:
A. General Requirements:
1. Location: All required loading berths shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served. All motor vehicle loading berths which abut a
residential district or an intervening alley separating a residential district from a district other than a residential district, shall be completely screened
therefrom by building walls, or by a uniformly painted solid fence, wall, or door, or any combination thereof, not less than eight feet (8') in height. No
permitted or required loading berth shall be located within thirty feet (30') of the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets. No loading berth
shall be located in a required front or side yard, and any loading berth located in a required rear yard shall be open to the sky.
2. Size: Unless otherwise specified, a required off street loading berth shall be at least twelve feet (12') in width by at least thirty feet (30') in length,
exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fifteen feet (15').
3. Access: Each required off street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movement, and shall be subject to approval by the zoning administrator.
4. Surfacing: All open off street loading berths shall be surfaced with a dustless all weather material capable of bearing a live load of two hundred (200)
pounds per square foot.
5. Repair And Service: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities except emergency
repair service necessary to start vehicles.
6. Utilization: Space allocated to any off street loading use shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off street
parking facilities or portions thereof.
B. Specific Requirements:
1. Residential Districts: Off street loading facilities accessory to uses allowed in the several residential districts shall be provided in accordance with the
following minimum requirements:
a. Health, medical and institutional uses: One loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square
feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. Each such loading berth for buildings in excess of two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet in gross
floor area shall be not less than twelve feet (12') in width by fifty five feet (55') in length.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 258/470
b. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to two hundred thousand
(200,000) square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof.
(1) Educational and cultural institutions.
(2) Philanthropic and charitable institutions.
(3) Religious institutions.
c. Recreational and social facilities: For buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor
area, one loading berth shall be provided, and for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area up to five
hundred thousand (500,000) square feet, one additional loading berth shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each additional five
hundred thousand (500,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof in excess of five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet.
d. For all other nonresidential uses, loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) For buildings containing less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area, there shall be provided on the same zoning lot
adequate receiving facilities, accessible by motor vehicles, off any adjacent alley, service drive, or open space.
(2) For buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area, one off street loading berth
shall be provided.
(3) For buildings containing over one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area, there shall be provided one loading berth for
each one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
e. Multiple-family dwellings and rooming houses: For buildings containing twenty thousand (20,000) to two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet
of gross floor area, one off street loading berth shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each additional two hundred thousand
(200,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
2. Business Districts: Off street loading spaces accessory to uses permitted in the several business districts shall be provided in accordance with the
following minimum requirements:
a. Any use listed in a residential district that also is permitted in any of the several business districts shall provide loading spaces as established for
that use in the preceding section for residential districts.
b. Establishments containing less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet of gross floor area shall be provided with adequate facilities, accessible
by motor vehicle off any adjacent alley, service drive, or open space on the same zoning lot.
c. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing seven thousand (7,000) to forty thousand (40,000)
square feet of gross floor area. For buildings containing forty thousand (40,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor
area, two (2) loading berths shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof. Each such loading berth for buildings in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor
area shall be not less than twelve feet (12') in width by fifty five feet (55') in length.
(1) Cartage and express facilities.
(2) Mail order houses.
(3) Printing and publishing.
(4) Restricted production and repair.
(5) Warehousing, storage, and wholesale establishments.
d. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet of gross floor area; for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area up to five hundred
thousand (500,000) square feet, one additional loading berth shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each additional five hundred
thousand (500,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof in excess of five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet.
(1) Banks and financial institutions.
(2) Medical and dental clinics.
(3) Offices, business and professional.
(4) Recreation buildings and community centers, noncommercial.
e. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred fifty thousand
(150,000) square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet of
gross floor area, or fraction thereof. Each such loading berth for buildings in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area
shall be not less than twelve feet (12') in width by fifty five feet (55') in length.
(1) Clubs and lodges (not for profit) containing retail shops, convention halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls, or business or professional offices (other
than accessory).
(2) Convention halls.
(3) Exhibition halls.
(4) Radio and television stations and studios.
(5) Recording studios.
(6) Hotels and motels - containing retail shops, convention halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls, or business or professional offices.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 259/470
f. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to two hundred thousand
(200,000) square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof.
(1) Clubs and lodges (not for profit) containing no retail shops, convention halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls, or business or professional offices
(other than accessory).
(2) Hotels and motels containing no retail shops, convention halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls, or business or professional offices.
(3) Meeting halls.
(4) Schools - music, dance business, and trade.
(5) Theaters, indoor.
g. Amusement establishments; bowling alleys, swimming pools, and skating rinks: For buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area, one loading berth shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each additional one
hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
h. Parking lots and garages: There shall be no requirements for off street loading.
i. Stadiums, auditoriums, and arenas: For buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor
area, one loading berth shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof. Each such loading berth for buildings in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area
shall be not less than twelve feet (12') in width by fifty five feet (55') in length.
j. Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors: For buildings containing seven thousand (7,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet
of gross floor area, one loading berth shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
k. Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair, or storage of materials, goods, or products: For buildings containing seven
thousand (7,000) to forty thousand (40,000) square feet of gross floor area, one loading berth shall be provided. For buildings containing forty
thousand (40,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area, two (2) loading berths shall be provided, plus one additional
loading berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. Each such loading berth for
buildings in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area shall be not less than twelve feet (12') in width by fifty five feet (55') in
length.
l. For uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet of gross floor area. For each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area up to five hundred thousand
(500,000) square feet, one additional loading berth shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each additional five hundred thousand
(500,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof in excess of five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet.
(1) Medical and dental clinics.
(2) Offices of labor organizations.
(3) Recreation buildings or community centers.
m. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof. Each such loading berth for buildings in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area
shall be not less than twelve feet (12') in width by fifty five feet (55') in length.
(1) Airports and commercial heliports.
(2) Air, railroad, and water freight terminals, railroad switching and classification yards, repair shops, and roundhouses.
(3) Radio and television stations and studios.
(4) Sewage treatment plants - municipal.
(5) Stadiums, auditoriums, and arenas.
n. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to two hundred thousand
(200,000) square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof.
(1) Lodges of labor organizations.
(2) Trade schools.
o. For the uses listed hereunder, there shall be no requirements for off street loading.
(1) Parking lots.
(2) Weighing stations.
p. For all other uses, loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule:
Gross Floor Area Of
Establishments In Square Feet
Required Number And
Size Of Berths
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 260/470
7,000 to 10,000 1 (12' x 30')
11,000 to 24,000 2 (12' x 30' each)
25,000 to 40,000 2 (12' x 55' each)
41,000 to 100,000 3 (12' x 55' each)
For each additional two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof, over one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet
of gross floor area, one additional loading berth shall be provided, such additional loading berth to be at least twelve feet (12') in width by fifty five feet (55')
in length. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
Chapter 9
SIGNS
5-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the following definitions shall apply:
ABANDONED SIGN: Any sign which no longer correctly directs or exhorts any person, advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, entity, product, or
activity conducted, or product available on the premises where such sign is displayed.
AREA OF A SIGN: The area within a perimeter, which forms the outside shape, including any part of the display, but excluding the necessary supports or
uprights on which the sign may be placed. If the sign consists of more than one section or module, all areas will be totaled, including spaces between each
module. In the case of a sign with two (2) or more visible surfaces, the gross area shall be the square footage of the largest side of the sign.
BUSINESS SIGN: Any sign placed on the building or in front of the building or on the premises to designate the name and nature of the business or
profession or tradesman occupying the building or premises upon which the sign appears.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A sign for the purpose of identification of a site as a construction site. Only the owner's, general contractor's, subcontractors',
architect's and engineer's names, hours of work and safety information shall be permitted on the sign.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: Any sign which serves solely to designate location or direction.
FASCIA SIGN: Any sign attached to a building, wall or canopy.
FLASHING SIGN: A sign or accessory light which is illuminated on an intermittent cycle. Flashing sign is different from a moving message sign.
GROUND SIGN: A sign mounted on freestanding pylons, pipes, piers, posts, or other self-supporting structures not attached to a building.
HEIGHT OF SIGN: The vertical distance measured from the adjacent public street grade to the highest point of the sign.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign containing only the name and address of the occupant or business establishment.
ILLUMINATED OR ELECTRIC SIGN: Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, or outlines illuminated by electric lights, luminous tubes, or any other
means of internal or external illumination.
MANSARD ROOF: An architectural designation of a roof/wall design which exhibits a vertical or nearly vertical face. For the purposes of this title, the
vertical or nearly vertical face shall be considered a wall.
MOVING MESSAGE SIGN: A sign, display or device capable of showing a series of different messages, either in a predetermined or programmed
sequence or via real time operator selection where the message changes more frequently than once in twelve (12) hours.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign which advertises goods, services or facilities which are not available on the premises where the sign is located.
OPEN WALL SIGN: A wall sign that consists of formed or shaped letters, numerals, or trademarks that are attached to a wall and between which the wall
is exposed.
PARAPET WALL: That portion of a wall which projects above the roofline intersecting it.
PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign other than a wall sign suspended from or supported by a building or structure or sign structure and projecting out therefrom.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: Any sign pertaining to the sale, lease, rental of land or buildings, which is erected or displayed on the lot or parcel to which it
applies.
ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected, constructed and maintained upon or over the roof or top of the wall, wall tower or turret of any building with the principal
support on the roof structure.
SIGN: Any identification, display, device, notice, drawing, message, placard, poster, billboard, or other thing which is designated, intended, or used to
advertise or inform and shall include every ground sign, wall sign, roof sign, illuminated sign, pylon or pole sign, marquee, awning, canopy, and street
clock, and shall further include any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, or insignia used to advertise or promote the interest of
any person which is visible from any public place or is located on private property and exposed to the public.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign advertising or announcing an event that is to be in existence for a limited period of time, including banners, pennants, flags
(not intended to include flags of any nations, states, countries or municipalities) searchlights, twirling or sandwich type signs, sidewalk or curb signs and
balloons or other air filled or gas filled objects.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 261/470
TEMPORARY WINDOW OR BUILDING SIGN: Any sign painted on the interior of a window or constructed of paper, cloth, or other like material and
attached to the interior side of a window or displayed on the exterior of a building wall in order to direct attention of persons outside the building to a sale of
merchandise or a change in the status of the business.
TRACT DEVELOPMENT SIGN: A sign advertising the development or conversion of a tract of land.
TRACT IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A permanent sign placed at the major entrances to a tract or planned unit development (PUD) identifying that tract or
PUD.
WALL SIGN: Any sign attached or applied flush to the exterior wall of any building. (Ord., 7-1989)
5-9-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permits Required: No person shall erect, alter or relocate within the city any sign without first obtaining a sign permit from the building department and
making payment of the required fee. No permit shall be required for cleaning and other normal maintenance or repair of a sign structure so long as the
sign or sign structure is not modified in any way. The repainting or refacing of an existing sign, if performed in a professional manner, shall not
constitute a modification as long as the sign area remains unchanged.
B. Application: Application for a permit shall be made to the city upon a form provided by the building department as may be required to assure compliance
with all appropriate ordinances and regulations of the city including, but not by way of limitation:
1. Legible drawings with description clearly showing location of the sign which is the subject of the permit and all other existing signs whose
construction and installation require permits, when such signs are on the same property or zoning lot.
2. Drawings showing the dimensions, colors, construction supports, sizes, electrical wiring and components, materials of the sign, method of
attachment and character of structural members to which attachment is to be made. The design, quality, materials, and loading shall conform to the
requirements of the city. If required by the city, engineering data shall be supplied on plans by a licensed architect or structural engineer licensed by
the state of Illinois.
C. Fees: Application for permits shall be filed with the building department. The schedule of fees for sign permits shall be as follows based upon the size of
the sign:
Sign Area
(Square Feet)
Permanent
Permit Cost
Temporary
Permit Cost
0 to 25 $ 45.00 $45.00
26 to 50 75.00 45.00
51 to 75 100.00 45.00
76 to 100 150.00 45.00
101 and over $150.00, plus $5.00 per square foot over 100 square feet 45.00
(Ord. 0-03-18, 6-2-2003, eff. 6-12-2003)
D. Inspection: The person erecting, altering or relocating a sign shall notify the building department upon completion of the work for which permits are
required. All ground signs shall be subject to a footing inspection and all signs to a final electrical inspection by the city. Said inspection will verify
proper location and compliance with all approved specifications and conditions of the permit.
E. Exemptions: The only signs exempted from the permit requirements are as follows:
1. Signs six (6) square feet in area or smaller in residential districts are exempt from the permit requirements, but must comply with all other regulations
in this chapter.
2. Real estate signs, not to exceed six (6) square feet and not illuminated and located entirely within the property to which the sign applies. Such signs
shall be removed within seven (7) calendar days of the date of sale.
Real estate open house sign, provided such sign is not located on public right of way, is not illuminated, and does not exceed six (6) square feet.
Such signs are only permitted on Saturdays and Sundays.
3. Temporary political signs are exempt from permit requirements, but must comply with subsection 5-9-4B of this chapter.
4. Temporary public and quasi-public signs are exempt from permit requirements, but must comply with subsection 5-9-4C of this chapter.
5. Directional or instructional signs which are located entirely on the property to which they pertain and do not in any way advertise a business and do
not exceed three (3) square feet in area, signs identifying restrooms, public telephones, or signs providing direction such as parking lot entrance and
exit signs and those of similar nature, but must comply with subsection 5-9-3A4 of this chapter.
6. Memorial signs and tablets displayed on private property.
7. Address numerals and signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in area and bearing the names of the occupants of the premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 262/470
8. Government flags and insignia and signs erected by a governmental body, or under the direction of such a body, and bearing no commercial
advertising, such as traffic signals, railroad crossing signs, safety signs, and signs identifying public schools, churches, parks, libraries, and
playgrounds.
9. Government flags flown by any person on their premises.
10. Legal notices.
11. Holiday decorations which are clearly incidental and customary and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday; provided that
such signs are not erected or maintained more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the holiday and shall be removed within ten (10) days after
the termination thereof. (Ord., 7-1989)
12. Temporary signs of activity sponsors placed on public baseball fields on the outfield fences, provided that no such signs shall extend beyond the
boundaries of any such facility for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. No signs containing alcoholic beverage, firearms, tobacco, or sexual
related materials/advertising will be permitted. The signs shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet and shall not extend above or below the fence.
The advertising shall be shown on one side only facing the playing field. No such signs shall be permitted on more than one field per parcel of
property. The signs shall be maintained in good condition and no self-illumination is allowed. (Ord. 0-01-10, 4-16-2001, eff. 4-26-2001)
F. Construction: All signs shall be constructed in accordance with applicable provisions of the city building code.
G. Planned Unit Developments (PUDs): Within residential PUDs for which the approved site plan allows nonresidential land uses, the signs allowed within
such nonresidential uses shall comply with other provisions of this chapter relating to the specific use.
H. Maintenance: Every sign in the city, including, but not limited to, those signs for which permits or for which no permits or permit fees are required, shall
be maintained in good structural condition at all times. All signs, including those exempted, shall be kept neatly painted, including all metal parts and
supports. The city shall inspect and have the authority to order the painting, repair, alteration or removal of signs which become dilapidated or are
abandoned, or which constitute physical hazard to the public safety.
I. Obsolete Signs: Any sign that advertises a business, event, or a product that no longer exists or sign pylons that no longer support a sign, shall be taken
down and removed by the owner, or agent, within ten (10) days after written notification from the city. Upon failure to comply with such notice within the
time specified, the city shall cause the removal of such sign from the property to which such sign is attached at the expense of the property owner,
including all court costs incurred by the city.
J. Abandoned Signs: All signage relating to structures that have been demolished shall be deemed abandoned and must be removed.
K. Unsafe Signs:
1. If any sign is found to be unsafe or insecure, or is a hazard to the public, the city shall given written notice to the owner or operator of the sign. If he
fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within ten (10) days after such notice, such sign shall be removed
or altered to comply, by the city, at the expense of the property owner, including all court costs incurred by the city. The city may cause any sign that
is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and with notice.
2. No sign, advertising structure, marquee, canopy or awning shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as to interfere with, obstruct the view of,
or be confused with, any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. Accordingly, no sign, advertising structure, marquee, canopy or awning shall make
use of the words, "stop", "go", "look", "slow", "danger", or any similar word, phrase, symbol, or character.
3. No sign, advertising structure, marquee, canopy or awning shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, or as
to distract the attention of the driver of any vehicle by reason of position, shape, or color thereof.
4. No fluttering or wind actuated sign, bunting, banners, streamers, pennants or flags shall be erected or maintained except as permitted in subsection
5-9-4G of this chapter.
L. Miscellaneous:
1. No sign shall block any required exit, fire escape, door opening, or window; nor obstruct any opening required for ventilation.
2. No sign or any part thereof shall be in the public right of way.
3. No sign shall be painted or pasted or similarly applied on exterior building walls, roofs or fences.
4. Illuminated signs shall be shaded so as not to shine or reflect light on adjacent residential properties.
5. No flashing signs, animated signs, signs with moving lights or signs creating the illusion of movement shall be permitted in any zoning district,
whether located within or without a building if plainly visible from the outside. A sign whereon the current time and/or temperature is indicated by
intermittent lighting shall not be deemed to be a prohibited sign because of its flashing. Rotating signs may be permitted by a special use permit.
6. An off premises sign shall be prohibited unless approved as set forth in section 5-9-5, "Special Uses", of this chapter.
7. It shall be unlawful for any person to display on any sign or other advertising structure any matter in writing or in picture which, considered as a
whole, predominately appeals to prurient (lewd) interest and goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or representation of
such matters, and advertising matter which is untruthful.
8. Portable or wheeled signs are prohibited. (Ord., 7-1989)
5-9-3: PERMANENT SIGNS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 263/470
A. Residential Districts: In all residential districts house number signs shall be clearly readable from the street (especially at night). The following classes of
signs are permitted in accordance with the regulations set forth herein:
1. Identification signs: There may be only one nameplate or open wall sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area, indicating the name and/or
address of the occupant.
2. Tract identification signs:
a. Only one such sign may be permitted at each major entrance to the tract.
b. Only open wall and ground signs are permitted for use as a tract identification sign.
c. Only the name and/or address of the tract shall be permitted on the sign.
d. Signs shall be no more than five feet (5') in height.
e. No such sign shall have an area greater than thirty two (32) square feet.
3. Signs accessory to parking areas shall be subject to the following requirements:
a. Area And Number: Signs, designating parking area entrances or exits, are limited to two (2) signs for each such exit or entrance and to a
maximum size of three (3) square feet each. One sign per parking stall designating the condition of use or identity of such parking area and limited
to a maximum size of three (3) square feet, shall be permitted.
b. Height: No sign shall be higher than four feet (4') above the established average grading of the parking area.
c. Projection: No sign shall project beyond the property line.
4. Public Or Quasi-Public Use: Church bulletins and signs for public or quasi-public buildings shall be subject to the following requirements:
a. Area And Number: There shall be no more than one such sign per zoning lot, except that on a corner lot two (2) signs, one facing each street,
shall be permitted. No sign shall exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area.
b. Height: No ground sign shall be higher than six feet (6') above the established average grade.
c. Projection: All signs shall be set back at least fifteen feet (15') from any lot line.
B. Business Districts: In all business districts all signs are subject to the provisions stated herein and in section 5-9-2 of this chapter, as well as the specific
requirements of the type of sign. The types of signs listed in this section are permitted in addition to those permitted in residential districts. Tract
development signs are not permitted in business districts.
1. Business District General Provisions: In all business districts, the permitted signs are subject to the following:
a. Area: The area of any sign shall be limited by the specific requirements of that particular type of sign but, in no case, shall exceed one hundred
(100) square feet in area.
b. Location: The sign or signs shall be located on the zoning lot and shall front the principal street or parking area. In the case of corner buildings,
located on both principal and side streets, signs shall be permitted on the portion of the side street wall within forty feet (40') of the principal street.
Signs in direct line of vision of any traffic signal shall not have red, green or amber illuminations.
c. Projection: Signs suspended from any building may project four feet (4') from the face of the building but shall not project into the public way, or
building setback area; and the bottom of such signs shall not be less than ten feet (10') above the finished grade of the sidewalk.
d. Height: No sign shall be located higher than thirty feet (30') above the mean grade of the property. Specific types of signs may have more
restrictive height limitations.
e. Illumination: Signs shall be shaded whenever necessary to avoid casting light upon adjacent property. Flashing signs are not permitted. Rotating
signs may be permitted by a special use permit.
f. Placement: No signs shall be painted, pasted or similarly posted directly on the surface of any wall nor shall any sign be permitted to be placed on
any wall, fence or stand facing the side of any adjoining lot located in a residential district.
g. Setback: All ground signs used for any purpose shall be set back fifteen feet (15') from any lot line.
2. Permitted Business Signs:
a. Marquee And Canopy Signs: Signs located on a marquee or canopy shall be affixed to the surface thereof and shall not extend vertically or
horizontally beyond the limits of said marquee or canopy. Marquees or canopies shall have a headroom of not less than eight feet (8').
b. Awning Signs: Signs located on awnings shall be affixed to the surface thereof, and shall indicate only the name, address and telephone number
of the establishment on the premises. No sign shall exceed eight (8) square feet in area. Further, no such sign shall extend vertically or horizontally
beyond the limit of said awning. Awnings shall have a headroom of not less than eight feet (8').
c. Wall And Fascia Signs: No more than one wall sign on each wall fronting on a public street, public right of way or easement, except for
identification signs, not to exceed four (4) square feet, except for multiple tenant buildings, which shall be permitted to have one wall sign on the
ground floor for each business or professional use in the building. The maximum area in square feet shall not exceed one square foot for each
linear foot of building occupancy. No wall sign shall project beyond the top and edges of the wall to which it is affixed.
No attached sign shall exceed ten feet (10') in vertical dimension and shall be subject to the city's approval for location and arrangement. No
attached sign shall extend in height above the top of an exterior wall, except in the case of a mansard, mansard type roof, or parapet wall. The
height of the sign attached to such mansard/parapet shall not extend above the top of such mansard/parapet nor shall it extend more than three
feet (3') in height above the roofline immediately behind the mansard/parapet at the point to which the sign is to be attached. The maximum size of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 264/470
any wall sign shall not exceed sixty four (64) square feet.
Buildings with multiple street frontage shall be permitted to have one wall sign on the secondary street frontage, provided this sign shall not exceed
one-half (1/2) the sign area permitted on the principal frontage, and shall not exceed one square foot for each linear foot of the side of building to
which said secondary sign is affixed.
d. Ground Signs: No more than one ground sign shall be permitted on a zoning lot. No ground sign shall have a total height greater than fifteen feet
(15') above the mean grade level of the property. The area of a ground sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. All parts of the
ground sign, including its supports, shall be entirely within the property line of the premises upon which it is located.
Ground signs in areas of vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be set at a height to allow safe passage.
e. Permanent Window Signs: Permanent signs painted, posted or displayed by any other means in a window, together with all other signs, shall not
exceed the gross area permitted for signs on the zoning lot, and shall not occupy more than thirty three and one-third percent (331/3%) of the
gross window area.
f. Signs Accessory To Automobile Service Stations: Automobile service stations are hereby declared to be an activity which requires certain
additional regulations regarding signs.
(1) Matter appearing on gasoline pumps regulating safety and use shall not be considered as signs for the purposes of this title.
(2) In addition to all other permitted signs, there may be one sign, not larger than six (6) square feet, above each pump area stating whether the
area is a "self-service" or a "full service" area and the current price per gallon of the gasoline sold at the station. No element of the cost to the
customer of the gasoline shall be omitted from the statement of the price per gallon.
(3) Items for sale on the premises may be openly displayed within ten feet (10') of the principal building. Products may be displayed under group
island canopies or between pumps within the area of the pump island base. (Ord., 7-1989)
5-9-4: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
The city shall impose, as a condition for the issuance of a permit for temporary signs, such requirements as to the material, manner of construction and
method of erection of a sign as are reasonably necessary to ensure the safety and convenience of the public. Temporary signs may be erected and
maintained in accordance with the following provisions:
A. Permitted Business Signs: No window business sign, other than one displayed on the interior side of a window, shall be erected or maintained except
pursuant to a permit issued by the city.
1. A temporary business sign is a sign calling attention to a special, unique or limited activity, service, product or sale of limited duration.
2. A temporary business sign is permitted in business districts in accordance with the provisions regulating the height and location of permanent
business signs.
3. The total area of a temporary business sign(s) shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet; and, if displayed in a window, shall not occupy more
than thirty three and one-third percent (331/3%) of the gross window area.
4. A temporary business sign may be displayed on a zoning lot for not more than sixty (60) days in any calendar year.
5. A temporary business sign shall not be a projecting sign.
B. Permitted Political Signs:
1. The total area of all political signs on a zoning lot shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet.
2. A "political sign" is a sign advertising political candidates or parties, provided that such signs may not be erected or maintained more than thirty (30)
days prior to the next election to which such signs are applicable and shall be removed within seven (7) days following such election.
3. Political signs may be erected and maintained within the boundaries of a zoning lot in any zoning district, but shall not be located within any public
right of way.
C. Quasi-Public Signs:
1. A quasi-public sign is a sign giving notice of events and activities sponsored by civic, patriotic, religious or charitable organizations for
noncommercial purposes.
2. Nonprojecting wall or ground type quasi-public signs, having an area not exceeding twenty four (24) square feet, may be erected on the zoning lot on
which the event or activity advertised is to occur or be conducted.
3. A quasi-public sign may not be erected or maintained more than thirty (30) days prior to the date(s) on which the event or activity advertised is to
occur or be conducted and shall be removed within seven (7) days after the termination thereof.
4. A quasi-public sign may be displayed in a window in any zoning district. Said sign may not be erected or maintained more than thirty (30) days prior
to the event and shall be removed within seven (7) days after the termination thereof.
5. No quasi-public sign shall be erected or maintained within any public right of way except pursuant to a permit authorized by the city council.
D. Permitted Tract Development Signs: One tract development sign on each frontage of a zoning lot of at least five (5) acres advertising the sale, rental or
conversion of real property in the development on which the sign is located, not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet for each face, may be permitted in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 265/470
any zoning district. Each permit shall be valid for a period of not more than two (2) years and shall not be renewed for more than two (2) successive
periods at the same location.
E. For Sale/Lease Signs (Business District): One sign is permitted on each frontage of a zoning lot advertising the sale, rental or conversion of real
property in the development on which the sign is located, not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet for property of one acre or less. Signs located on
property in excess of one acre may have a maximum size of thirty two (32) square feet per face.
F. Construction Signs: There shall be permitted one sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area in R-1 districts. All other districts not to exceed
thirty two (32) square feet. On multi-frontage lots, two (2) such signs, each one facing a different street, shall be permitted except in R-1 zoning
districts. No such sign shall be erected more than ten (10) days before the building permit is issued. Said signs shall be removed within one week after
completion of the construction. Construction signs may be permitted in addition to a tract development sign. (See subsection D of this section.)
G. Permitted Buntings, Banners, Pennants And Flags: Incidental and accessory to temporary business signs and quasi-public signs, buntings, banners,
pennants and flags may be erected and maintained pursuant to a permit issued by the city and subject to the following provisions:
1. Buntings, banners, pennants and flags accessory to temporary business signs shall be subject to the following provisions:
a. Shall be permitted in business districts only in accordance with the same provisions regulating the height and location of permitted business signs.
b. May be displayed for not more than sixty (60) days in any calendar year.
2. Buntings, banners, pennants and flags accessory to quasi-public signs shall be subject to the following provisions:
a. Shall not be erected or maintained within any public right of way except pursuant to a permit authorized by the city council.
b. May not be erected or maintained more than thirty (30) days prior to the date on which the event or activity advertised is to occur or be conducted
and shall be removed within ten (10) days after the termination thereof.
3. Buntings, banners, pennants and flags shall not be erected or maintained in such a location or manner as may endanger the public safety or
interfere with or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular travel or create a traffic safety problem. (Ord., 7-1989)
5-9-5: SPECIAL USES:
The following signs may be allowed by special use permit issued by the plan/zoning board of appeals in accordance with the provisions of section 5-10-9,
"Special Use Permits", of this title. (Ord., 7-1989; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
A. Electronic Message Centers:
1. The electronic message center shall serve the public convenience at that location and shall be located no closer than five hundred feet (500') to
another such sign directed to the same street.
2. The electronic message center shall be designed and located such that the entire sign message will be legible to the motorists viewing the sign.
3. The sign structure shall conform to all applicable regulations as specified in this chapter.
4. The sign message shall not consist of flashing, scintillating, chasing or animated lights, and shall not change more frequently than once every two (2)
seconds.
B. Off Premises Business Directory Sign:
1. Off premises signs shall only be permitted for purposes of identifying the location of businesses along a particular street or within a particular area
(i.e., industrial park directory). Such signs shall only be permitted in the business zoning districts.
2. Off premises signs may be erected on permanent ground. Signs should not exceed forty (40) square feet in area and ten feet (10') in height above
the established average grade.
3. Off premises signs may be double faced and each side shall be considered as facing traffic flowing in the opposite direction.
4. Off premises signs shall be located no closer than five hundred feet (500') to another such sign directed to the same street.
C. Menu Board:
1. One menu board for a drive-in or drive-through restaurant shall be permitted in addition to other signs permitted under these regulations, provided
such sign does not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area or six feet (6') in height from the established average grade.
D. Rotating Signs:
1. A rotating sign shall only be permitted in the business zoning districts and shall conform to all applicable regulations as specified in this chapter.
(Ord., 7-1989)
Chapter 10
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 266/470
5-10-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The administration of this title is hereby vested in the following officers of the city:
The office of the zoning administrator
The plan/zoning board of appeals
The office of the secretary of the plan/zoning board of appeals
The city council
(Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
5-10-2: OFFICE OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
A. Appointment: The zoning administrator shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council.
B. Duties Of The Zoning Administrator: The zoning administrator or his duly appointed and acting assistant shall administer and enforce this title. It shall be
the duty of the zoning administrator to:
1. Receive and process applications for zoning certificates for structures or additions thereto for which building permits are required.
2. Receive and process applications for zoning certificates not accompanied by an application for a building permit.
3. Receive and process applications for an occupancy certificate upon the completion of a structure or when there is a change of use as herein
provided.
4. Conduct inspections of structures or the use of land to determine whether there is compliance with this title; and, in the case of any violation, to notify
in writing the person or persons responsible, specifying the nature of the violation and order a corrective action.
5. Maintain in current status, the official zoning map.
6. Maintain permanent and current records required by this title, including, but not limited to, zoning certificates, occupancy certificates, inspections,
and all official action on appeals, variations, and amendments.
7. Prepare and submit an annual report to the corporate authorities on the administration of this title, setting forth such statistical data and information
as may be of interest or value in advancing and furthering the purpose of this title.
8. Prepare and have available in book, pamphlet, or map form, on or before March 31 of each year:
a. The compiled text of the zoning ordinance, including all amendments thereto through the preceding December 31.
b. A zoning map or maps, showing the zoning districts, divisions, and classifications in effect on the preceding December 31. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-
1977)
9. Maintain for a distribution to the public, a supply of copies of the zoning map or maps, the compiled text of the zoning ordinance, and the rules of the
plan/zoning board of appeals. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
5-10-3: ZONING AND OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATES:
A. Zoning Certificates: Unless a zoning certificate shall have been applied for and obtained from the office of the zoning administrator:
1. The construction, moving, remodeling, or reconstruction of any structure shall not be commenced.
2. The improvement of land preliminary to any use of such land shall not be commenced.
3. Permits pertaining to the use of land or structures shall not be issued by any official, officer, employee, department, board, or bureau of the city of
Prospect Heights.
Any application for a building permit that contains the information required by this title shall be deemed an application for a zoning certificate. Any
zoning certificate issued in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be null and void.
B. Application For Zoning Certificate: Every application for a zoning certificate shall be accompanied by the following:
1. The certificate of a registered architect or registered structural engineer licensed by the state of Illinois, or of an owner-designer, that the proposed
construction, remodeling, or reconstruction complies with all the provisions of this title.
2. A plat, in duplicate, of the piece or parcel of land, lot, lots, block or blocks, or parts or portions thereof, drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions
of the piece or parcel, lot, lots, block or blocks, or parts or portions thereof, according to the recorded plat of such land.
3. A plot plan, in duplicate, drawn to scale, and in such form as may, from time to time, be prescribed by the zoning administrator, showing the location,
ground area, height, and bulk of all present and proposed structures, drives and off street parking and loading spaces, the building lines in relation to
lot lines, waste disposal areas, the use to be made of such present and proposed structures on the land, and such other information as may be
required by the zoning administrator for the proper enforcement of this title. Applications for zoning certificates for industrial uses shall also be
subject to subsection C of this section and on such applications the plot plan shall also show all structures, streets, streams, and any other significant
physical features within two hundred feet (200') of the boundary of the site shown on the plot plan. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
4. Any application for a variance, amendment or special use must be accompanied by all documentation, if any, which evidences the existence of any
easements, covenants or any other private agreement applicable to the property for which such application is filed. (Ord. 0-88-58, 11-7-1988)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 267/470
One copy of both the plat and the plot plan shall be retained by the zoning administrator as a public record.
C. Application For Zoning Certificate For Industrial Uses: All applications for a zoning certificate for the construction, moving, remodeling, or reconstruction
of any structure to contain an industrial use shall be accompanied by sufficient information to enable the zoning administrator to determine that there
will be compliance with all of the applicable performance standards of chapter 7 of this title at all times. At the request of the zoning administrator, the
applicant shall provide, in addition to the information required under subsection B of this section, the following:
1. A description of the activity to be conducted in sufficient detail to indicate the extent to which the proposed operation will produce waste products,
conditions, or external effects which are regulated or otherwise limited by chapter 7 of this title.
2. A description of the type and location of any abatement devices or recording instruments used to control or measure conformity with any of the
standards set forth in chapter 7 of this title.
3. Such other data and certification as may reasonably be required by the zoning administrator to reach a determination with respect to whether the
proposed use or structure will comply with the requirements of chapter 7 of this title.
All information and evidence submitted in an application for a zoning certificate to indicate conformity with the performance standards set forth in
chapter 7 of this title shall constitute a certification and an agreement on the part of the applicant that the proposed structure or use can and will
conform to such standards at all times.
D. Issuance Of Zoning Certificate: A zoning certificate shall be either issued or refused by the zoning administrator within fourteen (14) days after the
receipt of an application therefor, or within such further period as may be agreed to by the applicant; provided, however, that the zoning administrator
shall have a period of twenty one (21) days within which to issue or refuse a zoning certificate on all applications which are required to comply with the
provisions of chapter 7 of this title. When the zoning administrator refuses to issue a zoning certificate, he shall advise the applicant in writing of the
reasons for the refusal.
E. Period Of Validity: A zoning certificate shall become null and void six (6) months after the date on which it is issued unless, within such six (6) month
period, construction, moving, remodeling, or reconstruction of a structure is commenced or a use is commenced.
F. Occupancy Certificates: No structure or addition thereto constructed, moved, remodeled, or reconstructed after the effective date hereof shall be
occupied or used for any purpose and no land vacant on the effective date hereof shall be used for any other use, unless an occupancy certificate shall
first have been obtained from the zoning administrator certifying that the proposed use or occupancy complies with the provisions of this title.
G. Application For Occupancy Certificate: Every application for a zoning certificate or building permit shall be deemed to be an application for an
occupancy certificate. Every application for an occupancy certificate for a new or changed use of land or structure, where no zoning certificate is
required, shall be filed with the zoning administrator and be in such form and contain such information as the zoning administrator shall provide by
general rule.
H. Application For Occupancy Certificate For Industrial Uses: All applications for an occupancy certificate for any industrial use where no zoning certificate
is required, shall be accompanied by sufficient information to enable the zoning administrator to determine that all the applicable performance
standards of chapter 7 of this title can and will be complied with at all times. At the request of the zoning administrator, the applicant shall provide such
information as is specified in subsection C of this section.
I. Issuance Of Occupancy Certificate: No occupancy certificate for a structure or addition thereto constructed, moved, remodeled, or reconstructed after
the effective date hereof shall be issued until such work has been completed including off street parking and loading spaces, and the premises have
been inspected by the zoning administrator and determined to be in full and complete compliance with the plans and specifications upon which the
issuance of the zoning certificate was based. No occupancy certificate for a new use of any structure or land shall be issued until the premises have
been inspected by the zoning administrator and determined to be in full and complete compliance with all the applicable regulations for the zoning
district in which it is located.
Pending the issuance of a permanent occupancy certificate, a temporary occupancy certificate may be issued to be valid for a period not to exceed six
(6) months from its date, pending the completion of any addition or during partial occupancy of the premises. An occupancy certificate shall be issued,
or written notice shall be given to the applicant stating the reasons why a certificate cannot be issued, within fourteen (14) days after the receipt of an
application therefor, or after the zoning administrator is notified in writing that the structures or premises are ready for occupancy; provided, however,
that the zoning administrator shall have a period of twenty one (21) days within which to issue or refuse an occupancy certificate on all applications
which are required to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
J. Escrow Deposits: Whenever an application for a zoning or occupancy certificate for a new or altered industrial structure or use indicates, in the opinion
of the zoning administrator, that the operations or activities to be conducted may violate the restrictions of chapter 7 of this title, the zoning
administrator shall, as a condition precedent to issuing a zoning or occupancy certificate, require the deposit in escrow of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00), to be held by the zoning administrator for a period of one year after the date that such new or altered use is commenced.
If during such one year period the zoning administrator believes there is a reasonable probability that the regulations of chapter 7 of this title are being
violated, he may employ a qualified technician or technicians to perform investigations, measurements, and analyses to determine whether or not the
regulations of chapter 7 of this title are, in fact, being violated and may pay his or their reasonable fees out of the aforementioned escrow deposit,
regardless of the outcome of the investigation.
If the reasonable fees of such technician or technicians exceed the amount of any available escrow deposit, and if a violation of chapter 7 of this title is
discovered, the fees may be recovered as a penalty in the same manner as, and in addition to, the penalties specified in chapter 12 of this title. Escrow
deposits or remainders of escrow deposits shall be returned to the depositors at the expiration of the escrow period. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-10-4: PLAN/ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 268/470
A. Creation And Membership: A plan/zoning board of appeals is hereby authorized to be established. The board shall consist of a chairman and six (6)
members and shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. The board shall elect from its members an acting chairman to act
whenever the chairman is absent.
When first appointed, the members of the board shall serve respectively for the following terms: one for one year, one for two (2) years, one for three
(3) years, one for four (4) years, one for five (5) years, one for six (6) years, and one for seven (7) years, or until their respective successors have been
duly appointed and qualified. The successor to each member so appointed shall serve for a term of five (5) years, or until his successor has been duly
appointed and qualified. Vacancies on the board shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant, in the manner
herein provided for the appointment of such members. The city council may provide by resolution for the compensation of the members of the
plan/zoning board of appeals.
B. Jurisdiction: The plan/zoning board of appeals (hereinafter referred to as "board") is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction: (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-
1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
1. To hear and decide appeals in which it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, interpretation, or determination (hereinafter
referred to collectively as "decision") made by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
2. To hear and review or, in the circumstances described herein, decide, all applications for variations under the terms of this title, in the manner
prescribed by and subject to the standards established herein and, where applicable, report findings of fact and recommendations to the city council.
(Ord. 0-96-91)
3. To hear and review all applications for special uses and for text and map amendments to this title, and report findings of fact and recommendations
to the city council.
4. To hear and report to the city council on such other matters as may be referred to the board by the city council, subject to the provisions of this title.
5. To hear and review or decide all other matters upon which it is authorized or required to pass under this title or the applicable Illinois statutes. (Ord.
0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
C. Meetings And Rules: All meetings of the board shall be held on regular meeting nights as published by the board in its rules of procedure and/or at the
call of the chairman. The city administrator shall designate a staff secretary who shall attend all of its proceedings. All meetings involving applications
for variations, special uses, and amendments, shall be held within sixty (60) days after receipt of application by the secretary of the board. All hearings
required by this title to be conducted by the board shall be open to the public. At meetings and hearings of the board, any interested person may
appear in person or by dually authorized agents or attorneys. All testimony before the board shall be given under oath. The chairman, or in the
chairman's absence the acting chairman, shall administer or authorize the administration of oaths and may compel the attendance of witnesses. (Ord.
0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that
fact. The board shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions. Each member is entitled to vote on each question, unless said member
is absent or has disqualified himself.
Every rule, regulation, every amendment or appeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the board, shall immediately be
filed with the secretary of the board and shall be a public record.
The board shall adopt and publish its own rules of procedure not in conflict with this title or with the Illinois statutes. The board may select or appoint
such officers or committees as it deems necessary. A copy of the rules of procedure shall at all times be on file in the office of the city clerk. The
minutes of the board shall be available for public examination in the office of the city clerk.
D. Quorum: Four (4) members of the board shall constitute a quorum. No meeting or hearing shall be conducted by the board without a quorum being
present.
E. Decisions: The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify or amend any order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from,
to the extent and in the manner the board may decide to be fitting and proper in the premises subject to the provisions contained in this title or in the
applicable Illinois statutes. Any absent member of the board, who certified that he/she has read the transcript of the proceedings before the board, may
vote upon any question before the board.
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning
administrator, to recommend a variation from the terms of this title, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which the board is required
to pass, under this title or any other ordinance. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
F. Site Plan Review: The board, when evaluating any application for relief brought under section 5-10-8, 5-10-9, or 5-10-10 of this chapter, as amended,
shall review the site plan, if applicable, to determine whether the site plan is compatible with the spirit and intent of the zoning ordinance and as part of
its determination as to whether the applicable standards for relief are met. The board shall consider the following criteria, as applicable, in its review of
any site plan:
1. Location Of Structures: The location of principal structures, accessory structures and freestanding signs shall be reviewed so that the location of all
structures has a minimally achievable impact on surrounding properties, facilitates an aesthetically pleasing development, and will not impede safe
and efficient traffic flow.
2. Traffic And Parking: Traffic and parking shall be reviewed so as to:
a. Minimize dangerous traffic movements.
b. Achieve efficient traffic flow in accordance with standards in the "Institute Of Traffic Engineers' Transportation And Engineering Handbook".
c. Provide for the optimum number of parking spaces, while maintaining city design standards.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 269/470
3. Landscaping: Landscaping shall be reviewed so as to:
a. Maintain existing mature trees and shrubs to the maximum extent practicable.
b. Buffer adjacent incompatible uses.
c. Screen unsightly activities from public view.
d. Break up large expanses of asphalt with plant material.
e. Provide an aesthetically pleasing landscaping design.
f. Provide plant materials and landscaping designs that can withstand Prospect Heights' climate. (Ord. 0-06-49, 12-18-2006)
5-10-5: OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF THE PLAN/ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
A. Appointment: The secretary of the plan/zoning board of appeals shall be appointed by the board to serve until a successor is appointed. (Ord. 0-77-27,
7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
B. Duties: The secretary shall:
1. Record the minutes of the board's proceedings and actions, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact.
2. Act as custodian of the records of the board.
3. Furnish members of the public with such blank forms for appeals and applications for variations, special uses, and amendments, as are approved by
the board.
4. Receive on behalf of the board all such forms, when completed and executed by the appellant or applicant, or his agent or attorney.
5. Perform such other duties as may be assigned from time to time by the board. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-10-6: APPEALS:
A. Scope And Commencement Of Appeals: An appeal from a decision of the zoning administrator made in interpreting this title may be taken to the
plan/zoning board of appeals by a person, firm, or corporation aggrieved by said decision or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city.
Such appeals shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the board by general rule, by filing with the zoning administrator a notice of
appeal, specifying the grounds thereof, and by filing said appeal and copy of said notice of appeal with the secretary of the board. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-
1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the secretary of the board all of the papers constituting the records upon which he/she made the
decision from which appeal was taken. The notice of appeal and the appeal itself shall be filed in such number of copies, be in such form, and contain
such information as the board may provide from time to time by general rule. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
B. Action On Appeal: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the decision appealed from unless the zoning administrator certifies to the
plan/zoning board of appeals after the notice of appeal has been filed with him that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be
granted by the board or by a court of record upon application following notice to the zoning administrator, and upon due cause shown. The board shall
select a reasonable time and place for the public hearing on the appeal, shall give due notice thereof to the parties having a known interest therein, and
shall render a written decision without unreasonable delay. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
Upon the concurring vote of four (4) members, the board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the decision from which the appeal
was taken, and to that end the board shall have all the powers of the zoning administrator with respect to such decision. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-10-7: APPLICATIONS FOR VARIATIONS, SPECIAL USES, AND AMENDMENTS:
A. Preapplication Conference: Prior to filing an application for relief under section 5-10-8, 5-10-9, or 5-10-10 of this chapter, the applicant shall first meet
with the zoning administrator and any other city staff the zoning administrator deems advisable. The purpose of this preapplication conference shall be
to ensure that the application is in proper form for action by the board. For routine or simple matters, the zoning administrator may waive this
requirement in his or her discretion.
B. Application: All applications for variations, special uses, and amendments, shall be filed with the zoning administrator. Such applications shall be filed in
such numbers of copies, be in such form, and contain such information as the board may prescribe from time to time.
C. Transmission To Board: Upon his or her determination that an application is complete and is in proper form, the zoning administrator shall transmit the
application to the secretary of the board and the city clerk for action. The zoning administrator may refuse to transmit any application which is not
complete and does not contain documents required by this zoning ordinance or reasonably required by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 0-06-49, 12-18-
2006)
5-10-8: VARIATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 270/470
A. Authorization: The board may recommend or, where applicable pursuant to the provisions of subsection K of this section, grant such variations from the
terms of this title, in harmony with their purpose and intent as will not be contrary to the public interest. Variations may be recommended or, where
applicable, granted only when the board has made findings of fact, based upon the standards set out in this chapter, that owing to special conditions
literal enforcement of the provisions of this title will, in an individual case, result in practical difficulties or particular hardship for the owner, lessee or
occupant of land or structure. (Ord. 0-96-91)
B. Application For Variation: The application shall contain the following information as well as such additional information as may be prescribed by rule of
the board:
1. The particular requirements of this title which prevent the proposed use or construction;
2. The characteristics of the subject property which prevent compliance with said requirements of this title;
3. The reduction of the minimum requirements of this title which would be necessary to permit the proposed use or construction; and
4. The practical difficulty or particular hardship which would result if said particular requirements of this title were applied to the subject property.
C. Initiation Of Variations: Variations may be proposed in writing by the owner of the subject property or his agent.
D. Notice Of Hearing: Public notice of such hearing shall be published at least once, not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days before
such hearing, in a newspaper published or circulated within the city of Prospect Heights. Such notice shall contain the date, time and place of the
hearing, the street address or common description of the property involved, the legal description of the property involved, and a brief description of the
relief sought. The board may give such additional notice as it may, from time to time, by rule provide. Any part in interest may appear and be heard at
the hearing in person, by agent, or by attorney. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
E. Notice To Property Owners: The petitioner for a variation shall notify all property owners within three hundred fifty feet (350'), excluding public land and
rights of way, but in no event more than four hundred fifty feet (450'), in each direction of the petitioner's property lines, by certified mail or hand delivery
to said property owners, of the date, hour and location of the public hearing and the variation requested. For notice to the owners of condominiums,
cooperatives, or other types of common interest communities (except common interest communities made up exclusively of detached single-family
homes) service upon the president or registered agent of the condominium association, cooperative, or common interest community as reflected in the
records of the Illinois secretary of state, with delivery via first class U.S. mail to individual unit owners, shall be sufficient notice under this paragraph.
Such notice shall be in the same form as the published public notice and shall be mailed or delivered not less than fifteen (15) and not more than thirty
(30) days prior to the date of the public hearing. The owners to be notified are such persons or entities which appear in the authentic tax records of
Cook County. Proof of notification shall be submitted by the petitioner to the plan/zoning board of appeals no later than the day of the public hearing.
(Ord. 0-16-12, 4-11-2016)
F. Standards For Variations: The plan/zoning board of appeals shall not recommend variation of the regulations of this title unless it shall make findings of
fact based upon the evidence as presented that: (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
1. Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands,
structures, or buildings in the same district.
2. Literal interpretation of the provisions of this title would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district
under the terms of this title.
3. The alleged hardship has not been directly created by any person presently, or a predecessor in interest, having a proprietary interest in the
premises.
4. The proposed variation will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood.
5. The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, substantially increase congestion in the public streets,
increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public safety.
6. The proposed variation will not alter the essential character of the locality.
7. The proposed variation is in harmony with the spirit and intent of this title.
8. Granting the variation requested will not confer the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this title to owners of other lands, structures, or
buildings in the same district.
9. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted use of lands, structures, or buildings in
other districts shall be considered grounds for issuance of a variation. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
10. The plan/zoning board of appeals shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variation, and
that the variation is the minimum variation that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977;
amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
The board may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the location, construction, design and use of property benefited by a variation as may
be necessary or appropriate to comply with the foregoing standards and to protect adjacent property and property values.
Violation of such conditions and restrictions, when made part of the terms under which a variation is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this title
and punishable under chapter 12, "Violations; Penalties", of this title. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
G. Report Of Hearing: The plan/zoning board of appeals shall report on all requests for variations within fifteen (15) days of the last public hearing thereon.
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to recommend a variation. A variation shall be recommended or denied by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 271/470
means of a conclusion or statement of relief recommended, supported by findings of fact, which statement and findings shall be transmitted to the city
council within fifteen (15) days from the date of the last public hearing thereon. (Ord. 0-89-05, 2-21-1989; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
1. The findings of fact shall specify the reason or reasons for recommending or denying the variation, and shall refer to any exhibits containing plans
and specifications for the proposed variation which have been made part of the application or which were introduced at the public hearing as
evidence.
2. The terms of relief recommended shall be specifically set forth in conclusion or statement separate from the findings of fact. (Ord. 8-89-05, 2-21-
1989)
H. Action By The City Council: After receiving the recommendations and report of the plan/zoning board of appeals, the city council shall within sixty (60)
days, review the recommendations and report, and may pass the proposed variation in a residentially zoned district and within one hundred eighty
(180) days in all other zoning districts with or without change, may reject it, or may recommit it to the plan/zoning board of appeals for further
consideration. A variation shall not be passed contrary to the recommendation of the plan/zoning board of appeals except upon a favorable vote of twothirds
(2/3) of the aldermen. (Ord. 0-04-27, 6-7-2004, eff. 6-17-2004)
I. Period Of Validity: No decision granting a variation shall be valid for a period longer than twelve (12) months from the date of such decision unless:
1. An application for a zoning certificate is obtained within such period and construction, moving, remodeling, or reconstruction is started;
2. An occupancy certificate is obtained and a use is commenced.
The board may recommend additional extensions of time not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days each, upon written application made within
the initial twelve (12) month period, without further notice or hearing; but said right to so extend said time shall not include the right to grant additional
relief by expanding the scope of the variation.
J. General Intent With Respect To All Uses: With respect to uses of land, buildings, and other structures, this title is declared to be a definition of the public
interest by city council, and the spirit of this title will not be observed by a variation which permits a use not generally or by special exception permitted
in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited, by the terms of this title in said district. This same restriction applies equally to
the mayor and city council. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
K. Action Of The Plan/Zoning Board Of Appeals In Certain Cases: The plan/zoning board of appeals may hear and decide petitions requesting variations
from the front yard, side yard, or rear yard setback requirements contained in this title; provided, however, that the board's authority to decide such
cases shall be limited to those applications requesting a variation of three feet (3') or less. The board may also hear and decide on petitions requesting
the expansion of a legal nonconforming use. (Ord. 0-96-91; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to effect any variation in the zoning ordinance. A variation shall be granted or
denied by means of a written decision, supported by findings of fact, which decision and findings shall conform to the requirements of subsection G of
this section. All of the requirements of this section pertaining to the granting of variations by the city council shall also be applicable to variations
granted by the board, including, without limitation, the provisions pertaining to the authorization of variations; the application for variations; the initiation
of variations; the notice of hearing to be published in the newspaper; the notice of hearing to be sent to property owners; the standards for variations;
the period of validity of variations; and the general intent with respect to all uses. (Ord. 0-96-91)
5-10-9: SPECIAL USES:
A. Authorization: The locations, construction, extension, or structural alteration of any use for which a special use permit is required pursuant to the
provisions of this title may be authorized by a permit issued by the corporate authorities, subject to the standards set forth herein, and such conditions
as may be imposed pursuant to this chapter. Prior to such authorization, a public hearing shall be held and a published notice shall be given, in the
manner prescribed for amendments by this title.
An enclosed arena, sports facility and entertainment complex may be authorized by a special permit issued by the corporate authorities, subject to the
standards set forth herein, and such conditions as may be imposed by the city council. Such permit may include the authorization of more than one
building on a zoning lot. Prior to such authorization, a public hearing shall be held and a published notice shall be given, in the manner prescribed for
amendments to this title.
1. Planned Unit Developments: Planned unit developments, as provided for in chapter 11 of this title, shall be a special use in every zoning district of
the city. (Ord. 0-05-01, 1-18-2005, eff. 1-28-2005)
B. Application For Special Use: Any person owning or having interest in the subject property may file an application to use such land for one or more of the
special uses provided for in this title in the zoning district in which the land is situated.
C. Notice Of Hearing: The same procedure for notice of hearing as required for variations (subsection 5-10-8D of this chapter) shall be followed for special
use. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
D. Notice To Property Owners: The petitioner for a special use permit shall notify all property owners within three hundred fifty feet (350'), excluding public
land and rights of way, but in no event more than four hundred fifty feet (450'), in each direction of the petitioner's property lines, by certified mail or
hand delivery to said property owners, of the date, hour and location of the public hearing and the special use requested. For notice to the owners of
condominiums, cooperatives, or other types of common interest communities (except common interest communities made up exclusively of detached
single-family homes) service upon the president or registered agent of the condominium association, cooperative, or common interest community as
reflected in the records of the Illinois secretary of state, with delivery via first class U.S. mail to individual unit owners, shall be sufficient notice under
this paragraph.
Such notice shall be in the same form as the published public notice and shall be mailed or delivered not less than fifteen (15) and not more than thirty
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 272/470
(30) days prior to the date of the public hearing. The owners to be notified are such persons or entities which appear in the authentic tax records of
Cook County. Proof of notification shall be submitted by the petitioner to the plan/zoning board of appeals no later than the day of the public hearing.
(Ord. 0-16-12, 4-11-2016)
E. Standards: No special use shall be recommended by the plan/zoning board of appeals unless said board shall find: (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd.
Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
1. That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use will not be unreasonably detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
morals, comfort or general welfare.
2. That the special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the community for the purposes already permitted, nor
diminish and impair property values within the community.
3. That the establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district.
4. That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or other necessary facilities have been or are being provided.
5. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress or egress so designed to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
(Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
6. That the special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such regulations
may in each instance be modified by the city council pursuant to the recommendations of the plan/zoning board of appeals. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-
1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
7. That the area described in the petition does not lie wholly or partly in floodplain, as defined by the flood control ordinances of the city; or, if it does lie
wholly or partly within the floodplain, that adequate provisions for storage, runoff control and floodwater retention, as appropriate, have been made.
F. Conditions And Standards: Prior to granting any special use, the board may recommend, and the city council shall stipulate, such conditions and
restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the special use as deemed necessary for the protection of the
public interest and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified herein, or as may be from time to time required. (Ord. 0-77-27,
7-18-1977)
G. Report Of Hearing: Following a public hearing held before the plan/zoning board of appeals, the board shall transmit to the city council a report thereon
containing its findings of fact and recommendations for action to be taken by the city council in the same manner as prescribed for a request for
variation (subsection 5-10-8H of this chapter). (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
For each application for a special use, the board shall report to the city council its findings and recommendations, including the stipulations of additional
conditions and guarantees that such conditions will be complied with when they are deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest. (Ord. 0-
77-27, 7-18-1977)
H. Action By The City Council: The city council may grant or deny any application for a special use. A special use shall not be granted contrary to the
recommendation of the plan/zoning board of appeals except by the favorable vote of three-fifths (3/5) of the aldermen. (Ord. 0-03-40, 11-3-2003, eff. 11-
13-2003)
I. Effect Of Denial Of A Special Use: After a public hearing, no application for a special use which has been denied wholly or in part by the city council shall
be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of said order of denial, except on the grounds of substantial new evidence of proof of changed
conditions found to be valid by the plan/zoning board of appeals. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
J. Period Of Validity: No decision granting a special use shall be valid for a period longer than twelve (12) months from the date of such decision unless:
1. An application for a zoning certificate is obtained within such period and construction, reconstruction or remodeling is started.
2. Upon written application, filed prior to the twelve (12) month period, the city council authorizes an extension for six (6) months; or
3. An occupancy certificate is obtained and a use is commenced. Any lawfully established special use of a building or land shall be allowed to continue
until such time as:
a. The authorized special use is changed, or
b. The authorized special use is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5-10-10: AMENDMENTS:
A. Authorization: The regulations imposed and districts created by this title may be amended by ordinance from time to time in the manner provided by this
title and the applicable Illinois statutes. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
B. Initiation Of Map And Text Amendments: Text amendments may be proposed in writing by the city council, the plan/zoning board of appeals, by any
person having proprietary interest in the property in the city, or by any interested citizen of the city.
Map amendments may be proposed by the owner of the property involved, by the city council, by the plan/zoning board of appeals, or by other city
officials.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 273/470
C. Standards For Map And Text Amendments: No map or text amendments shall be recommended by the plan/zoning board of appeals unless said board
shall find: (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
1. That the net impact of the proposed amendment, if granted, will be beneficial to the entire community and will not be harmful to the local area in
particular.
2. That a need exists for the general type of use proposed and that the specific proposal will indeed satisfy it more closely than the other possible uses.
3. That the use proposed is compatible with the current comprehensive land use plan of the city of Prospect Heights, in effect on the date of the
application.
4. That the proposed use is compatible and harmonious with uses in the surrounding general area. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
5. That the area described in the petition does not lie wholly or partly in the floodplain as defined by the Illinois department of transportation, division of
water resources, or, if it does lie wholly or partly within the floodplain, that adequate provisions for storage, runoff control and floodwater retention, as
appropriate, have been made or can be made. (Ord. 0-89-25, 6-5-1989)
D. Notice Of Hearing: Public notice of such hearing shall be published at least once, not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days before
such hearing, in a newspaper published within the city of Prospect Heights. Such notice shall contain the date, time and place of the hearing, the street
address or common description of the property involved, legal description of the property involved, and a brief description of the proposed amendment.
The board may give such additional notice as it may, from time to time, by rule provide. Any party in interest may appear and be heard at the hearing in
person, by agent, or by attorney. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
E. Notice To Property Owners: The petitioner for a map amendment shall notify all property owners within three hundred fifty feet (350'), excluding public
land and rights of way, but in no event more than four hundred fifty feet (450'), in each direction of the petitioner's property lines, by certified mail or
hand delivery to said property owners, of the date, hour and location of the public hearing and the map amendment requested. For notice to the owners
of condominiums, cooperatives, or other types of common interest communities (except common interest communities made up exclusively of
detached single-family homes) service upon the president or registered agent of the condominium association, cooperative, or common interest
community as reflected in the records of the Illinois secretary of state, with delivery via first class U.S. mail to individual unit owners, shall be sufficient
notice under this paragraph.
Such notice shall be in the same form as the published public notice and shall be mailed or delivered not less than fifteen (15) and not more than thirty
(30) days prior to the date of the public hearing. The owners to be notified are such persons or entities which appear in the authentic tax records of
Cook County. Proof of notification shall be submitted by the petitioner to the plan/zoning board of appeals no later than the day of the public hearing.
(Ord. 0-16-12, 4-11-2016)
F. Report Of Hearing: The plan/zoning board of appeals shall report on all requests for amendments within fifteen (15) days of the last public hearing
thereon. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to recommend an amendment. An amendment shall be
recommended or denied by means of a conclusion or statement of relief recommended, supported by findings of fact, which statement and findings
shall be transmitted to the city council within fifteen (15) days from the date of the last public hearing thereon. (Ord. 0-89-05, 2-21-1989; amd. Ord. 0-
03-35, 9-15-2003)
1. The findings of fact shall specify the reason or reasons for recommending or denying the amendment, and shall refer to any exhibits containing plans
and specifications for the proposed amendment which have been made part of the application or which were introduced at the public hearing as
evidence.
2. The terms of relief recommended shall be specifically set forth in conclusion or statement separate from the findings of fact. (Ord. 0-89-05, 2-21-
1989)
G. Action By The City Council: After receiving the recommendations and report of the plan/zoning board of appeals, the city council shall within sixty (60)
days, review the recommendations and report, and may pass the proposed amendment in a residentially zoned district, and within one hundred eighty
(180) days in all other zoning districts with or without change, may reject it, or may recommit it to the plan/zoning board of appeals for further
consideration. An amendment shall not be passed contrary to the recommendation of the plan/zoning board of appeals except upon a favorable vote of
two-thirds (2/3) of the aldermen. (Ord. 0-04-27, 6-7-2004, eff. 6-17-2004)
5-10-11: WHERE TO FILE ZONING APPLICATIONS:
All applications for zoning certificates and occupancy certificates shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall transmit all such applications with pertinent
documents to the zoning administrator. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
All applications for variations, amendments, and special uses shall be filed with the zoning administrator who shall forward a copy of same to the secretary
of the plan/zoning board of appeals and the city clerk without delay. The applications shall be filed in such number of copies, to be in such form and
contain such information as the board may prescribe from time to time. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
5-10-12: CONDUCT OF HEARINGS BEFORE PLAN/ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
All hearings before the plan/zoning board of appeals shall be conducted as set forth in this title and in the rules of practice and procedure of the board.
Such rules and procedures are attached to ordinance 0-77-27 as an appendix. In addition, all parties who desire to oppose in whole or in part the
proposed action(s) may do so in person or through an attorney at the public hearing, and in addition may file written objections based upon testimony
adduced at such hearings no later than seven (7) days following the final hearing on the requested action(s).
The plan/zoning board of appeals shall consider such written objections, provided that they are competent and relevant, submitted prior to the seventh day
following the final hearing on the action(s) requested, and are filed with the secretary of the plan/zoning board of appeals in the proper number and form as
the board may specify. The board shall provide copies of such objections to the applicant(s)/requestor(s). (Ord. 0-96-64; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 274/470
5-10-13: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-08-01, 1-22-2008)
5-10-14: FEES:
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent, who shall file an application for amendment or application for an appeal, variation, or special use, or for any other
certificate, or license or permit required under the terms of this title, shall be charged a fee in accordance with the schedule below: (Ord. 0-03-18, 6-2-
2003, eff. 6-12-2003)
SCHEDULE OF FEES
Petitions And Appeals
Petition for text amendment(s) $ 300.00
Petition for map amendment(s):
Less than 1 acre 300.00
1 to 5 acres 500.00
5 to 10 acres 1,400.00
10 to 20 acres 2,000.00
Over 20 acres 2,700.00
Petitions for planned unit development(s):
Less than 1 acre 350.00
1 to 5 acres 650.00
5 to 10 acres 1,700.00
10 to 20 acres 2,200.00
Over 20 acres 2,800.00
Subdivisions:
Less than 1 acre 150.00
1 to 5 acres 300.00
5 to 10 acres 700.00
10 to 20 acres 1,700.00
Over 20 acres 2,800.00
Petitions for special use(s) 400.00
Petitions for a variation(s) 150.00
Appeals from decisions of zoning administrator:
For property located in the R-1 residential district and used for single-family residential purposes 150.00
For all other property 250.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 275/470
Plan Examination
Single-family residential district (R-1):
Plan examination fee for principal uses 35.00
Plan examination fee for accessory uses 25.00
General residential district (R-2):
Plan examination fee for principal uses for a 6 dwelling unit structure or less ($5.00 per each additional dwelling unit) 40.00
Plan examination fee for accessory uses for a single accessory use of a 6 dwelling unit structure or less ($5.00 per each
additional accessory use)
30.00
Business districts (B-1 through B-4):
Plan examination fee for principal uses 50.00
Plan examination fee for accessory uses 40.00
Office/research park district (O-1):
Plan examination fee for principal uses 50.00
Plan examination fee for accessory uses 40.00
Special uses:
Plan examination fees for special uses 50.00
Miscellaneous uses:
Plan examination fee for uses not involving buildings and/or new construction 40.00
(Ord. 0-03-08, 3-17-2003, eff. 3-27-2003; amd. Ord. 0-03-18, 6-2-2003, eff. 6-12-2003)
Chapter 11
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
5-11-1: PURPOSE:
In an effort to promote ingenuity, imagination, and design efforts on the part of owners, builders, architects, and developers and to produce developments
which are in keeping with overall land use intensity and open space objectives of the comprehensive plan, this chapter makes available a special use
procedure departing from the strict application of the specific zoning requirements of the district where the development is located. The intent of this
chapter is to permit such flexibility and provide performance criteria for planned unit development permits which fosters creative design, efficient use of
land, enhances appearance; encourages creation/preservation of open space and natural features; and provides compatibility with surrounding areas.
(Ord. 0-05-01, 1-18-2005, eff. 1-28-2005)
5-11-2: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
A. An application for a planned unit development shall be processed in the same manner as an application for a special use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 276/470
B. An application for a planned unit development shall be accompanied by a tentative plat of subdivision which meets the requirements of the subdivision
regulations of the city.
C. The application shall also be accompanied by preliminary architectural drawings as well as by a preliminary development plan which shall contain the
following:
1. Statement Of Objectives: A statement of the planning objectives to be achieved by the particular design approach proposed by the applicant is
required. This statement should include a description of the character of the proposed development and the rationale behind the assumptions and
choices made by the applicant. This statement should also describe the public benefits that will be achieved through the proposed planned unit
development that would otherwise not result from a conventional type of development or subdivision of the site.
2. Statement Of Ownership And Proposed Use: A statement of the applicant's intentions with regard to the future selling or leasing of all or portions of
the land areas or structures and the proposed use thereof is required. A statement and documentation verifying that the applicant has, or will have,
ownership and control over all land included in the proposed planned unit development is also required.
3. Quantitative Summary: A quantitative summary including, but not limited to, the following is required. If the development is to be phased, the
quantitative summary must also be broken down into the phase components.
a. Area of the subject parcel in acres and square feet;
b. Density of the development;
c. Total area and footprint area of principal buildings in square feet;
d. Total area and footprint area of accessory buildings in square feet;
e. Area of roads in square feet;
f. Area of exterior parking facilities in square feet;
g. Number of parking spaces;
h. Percentage of ground cover for principal buildings, accessory buildings, parking areas, roads, and recreational facilities, individually and
collectively, versus area of entire parcel;
i. Proposed floor area ratio ("FAR"), if applicable;
j. Area of uncovered ground (open space) on site in square feet;
k. Area of commonly owned and maintained open space in square feet;
l. Maximum density that would be achievable through a conventional subdivision of the site.
4. Open Space Statement: A statement is required describing why the area for usable common open space was chosen, the unique advantages it
offers, and how it is envisioned that residents will utilize the space either actively or passively.
5. Traffic Study: A recent traffic survey prepared by a qualified expert setting forth and analyzing the effect upon traffic in and outside the city may be
required by the city. Such survey shall not be limited to the effect on adjacent streets but shall extend to all of the surrounding areas affected and
shall indicate the anticipated points of origin and the direction, amount and density of traffic flow to and from the proposed planned unit development.
6. Covenants: The developer shall establish an owners' association through a declaration of covenants and easements which will be recorded and run
with the land and be binding upon any purchaser of any lot or dwelling unit in the planned unit development. Such declaration shall be submitted to
the plan/zoning board of appeals for review subject to review and final approval by the city attorney. Such declaration shall include, but not be limited
to, provisions requiring:
a. The developer to convey the private streets or roads, detention or retention facilities and common areas to the owners' association;
b. The owners' association to maintain and repair any and all private streets or roads, detention or retention ponds and common areas and any and
all appurtenances thereto; and
c. That, if the owners' association fails to maintain and repair any and all private streets or roads, detention or retention ponds and common areas,
the city may, but is not required to, enter upon the property to maintain and repair such items and that the owners' association will pay the cost
thereof.
7. Maps And Graphics:
a. Existing Site Conditions: A map is required that illustrates existing site conditions including topography, water related features, vegetation,
wetlands, ravines, floodplains, unique soil condition, and other environmental data which may include a tree survey.
b. Surrounding Conditions: A map is required that illustrates the land use and environmental conditions of the surrounding neighborhood within five
hundred feet (500') of the perimeter of the subject site, particularly illustrating the adjacent lots showing their lot lines, structures, setbacks, and
driveways, as well as nearby streets.
c. Cross Sections: A minimum of two (2) cross sections are required through the entire site illustrating the bulk and heights of proposed structures in
relation to the topography, vegetation, and surrounding structures.
d. Utility And Drainage Plan: A plan is required that illustrates existing and proposed utilities and drainage facilities. Storm water detention and
floodplain compensatory storage facilities must be included if required by city ordinances.
e. Traffic Plan: A plan is required that illustrates the circulation of all vehicles, including emergency vehicles, internal to the site, consistent with
approved engineering and design standards, that illustrates the relationship of the development's internal private streets to the street plan in the
comprehensive plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 277/470
f. Landscape, Tree Preservation And Grading Plan: The applicant shall submit a landscaping plan, a tree preservation plan and/or a grading plan that
illustrates landscaping for the entire project, tree preservation and enhancement of the vegetation on the site, and/or the earth moving, if any, to be
done on the site.
8. Other Information: Depending on the scale and unique characteristics of a particular site, the plan/zoning board of appeals may require other
materials to be included in a preliminary development plan. These may include market studies, traffic studies, soil borings, approvals from other
agencies, and all other items that may be reasonably required. (Ord. 0-05-01, 1-18-2005, eff. 1-28-2005)
5-11-3: STANDARDS:
In addition to the standards generally applicable to special uses, as provided in section 5-10-9 of this title, no planned unit development shall be approved
unless the plan/zoning board of appeals shall also find:
A. Conformance: That said planned unit development conforms with the purpose of this chapter.
B. Size Of Development: That any residential development is located on a tract of land of three (3) or more contiguous acres and any commercial
development is located on a tract of land of one or more contiguous acres.
C. Common Ownership: That the planned unit development will be on a tract of land under common ownership or control.
1. Such common ownership or control shall extend to all common open space, landscaping, exterior maintenance and all other exterior common area
aspects of the development for a period of not less than twenty (20) years.
2. Said common ownership or control shall extend to all portions of the planned unit development for a period of not less than twenty four (24) months
following the completion of all public improvements, common area improvements, and the developer's relinquishing its control of any and all owners'
associations.
3. Common ownership or control as required herein shall mean unity of ownership or legal authority to act on behalf of all owners which shall be
evidenced by deed, contract, management agreement or other written guarantee.
D. Compatible Uses: That the uses permitted in the planned unit development shall be compatible to each other and with existing land use in the
surrounding area. Uses shall be deemed compatible if they comply with the underlying zoning district and they are so designed, located, and proposed
to be operated so that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected and such uses will not cause appreciable injury or damage to other
property in the area in which it is located.
E. Necessity: That the planned unit development will be responsive to a demonstrated need within the community.
F. Height Provisions: That the maximum height permitted in the planned unit development, exclusive of steeples, belfries, spires, chimneys, smoke stacks,
cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, parapet walls, and building equipment penthouses shall not exceed the maximum height permitted for the zoning
district in which the development is located.
1. Provided such buildings do not exceed thirty feet (30') in height the minimum horizontal distance between buildings (including their appurtenances)
of one story, two (2) stories, three (3) stories, or combinations thereof, shall not be less than thirty feet (30').
2. In the case of buildings exceeding thirty feet (30') in height, the space between buildings shall be equal to the height of the tallest building from which
the measurement is taken.
G. Yards: That the required yards along the periphery of the planned unit development shall be at least equal in width or depth to the greater of the
required yard for real property adjacent to the planned unit development or a distance not less than the height of the closest building to such yard,
unless such planned unit development is located adjacent to real estate owned by the Illinois toll highway authority, in which event the yard adjacent to
such real estate shall be fifty feet (50').
H. Density: That residential density of the planned unit development shall not exceed in number of dwelling units the maximum number of lots that could
be achieved through a conventional subdivision of the site as demonstrated by the subdivision sketch plan. It is understood that whenever the
development is located in more than one zoning district, the number of allowable dwelling units must be separately calculated for each portion of the
development that is in a separate zoning district. Thereafter the combined total of all dwelling units so calculated as allowable may be constructed and
distributed within the entire planned unit development without concern for the respective zoning districts within which the planned unit development is
located, provided there is compliance with building locations shown upon the site plan approved for such planned unit development.
I. Traffic Circulation: That the planned unit development shall include a traffic plan which will provide ingress and egress which is designed to minimize
traffic congestion in the public streets outside the planned unit development and facilitate the free flow of traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian, within
the planned unit development. The streets and other traffic thoroughfares, public or private, provided in such planned unit development shall conform
with at least the minimum requirements for streets and public ways of the ordinances of the city of Prospect Heights.
J. Preservation Of Landscape: The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal, and any
grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring developed areas.
K. Relationship Of Proposed Structures: Proposed structures shall be related harmoniously to the terrain and to existing structures in the vicinity and have
a visual relationship to the existing nearby structures. The achievement of such relationship may include the creative enclosure of space in conjunction
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 278/470
with other existing buildings or other proposed buildings and the creation of focal points with respect to avenues of approach, terrain features or other
buildings.
L. Functional And Mechanical Features: Exposed storage areas, trash, and garbage retainers, exposed machinery installations, service areas, truck
loading areas, utility buildings and structures, and similar accessory areas and structures shall be accounted for in the design of the project and made
as unobtrusive as possible. They shall be subject to such setbacks, special planting or other screening methods as shall reasonably be required to
prevent their being incongruous with the existing or contemplated environment and the surrounding properties.
M. Visual And Acoustical Privacy: The development shall provide reasonable visual and acoustical privacy for each building and dwelling unit. Fences,
insulation, walks, barriers and landscaping shall be used as appropriate, for the protection and aesthetic enhancement of property and the privacy of its
occupants, screening of objectionable views or uses, and reduction of noise.
N. Common Open Space: Each residential planned unit development permit shall have a site plan which contains at least twenty percent (20%) usable
common open space, except as it may be modified by the plan/zoning board of appeals in accord with this chapter.
1. Ineligible Area: Such usable common open space shall not include:
a. Areas reserved for the exclusive use or benefit of an individual occupant;
b. Dedicated streets and other public rights of way;
c. Vehicular drives, private streets, and parking, loading and storage areas; nor
d. Strips of land less than ten feet (10') wide.
2. Access: Primary (abutting) access from such common open space to each building site need not be provided; however, convenient access through
permanent easement must be provided and perpetually guaranteed to all residents not granted primary access.
3. Recreational Facilities: The only recreational facilities permitted within any common open space tract are those which are graphically shown on the
face of the development plan at the time of approval by the mayor and city council; provided however, that any development plan may be amended
through the procedures specified in this chapter.
4. Character And Quality: No proposed area on a site plan may be accepted as usable common open space unless its character and quality have been
reviewed by the plan/zoning board of appeals and approved by the mayor and city council. When making its determination, the plan/zoning board of
appeals and mayor and city council shall give consideration to the following variables:
a. The size and character of the structures to be constructed within the planned unit development;
b. The character of surrounding development;
c. The topography and existing amenities of the proposed area, including trees, ground cover and other natural features;
d. The manner in which the proposed area is to be improved and maintained for recreational or amenity purposes; and
e. The existence of public parks or other public recreational facilities in the vicinity and the relationship thereto.
5. Ownership And Maintenance: All land shown on the final development plan as common open space must be conveyed and maintained under one of
the following options:
a. Public Agency: It may be conveyed to a public agency acceptable to the mayor and city council, which agency will agree to maintain the common
open space and any authorized improvements placed upon it according to enumerated criteria.
b. Private Association: It may be conveyed to a private association or similar organization formed by a condominium agreement, townhouse
declaration, indenture, restrictive covenant or other binding agreement acceptable to the mayor and city council. The legal instrument(s) creating
such association or organization must specify that the common open space and related authorized improvements will be maintained according to
the enumerated criteria, and shall include a provision granting the city a right to enforce the same.
O. Surface Water Drainage: In conformance with the applicable storm water management regulations contained in this code, special attention shall be
given to proper site surface drainage so that removal of surface waters will not adversely affect neighboring properties or the public storm drainage
system. (Ord. 0-05-01, 1-18-2005, eff. 1-28-2005)
5-11-4: PERMITTED MODIFICATIONS TO ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
A. The off street parking, yard, setback (including scenic easements), lot size, lot width, FAR, open space, height restrictions and maximum lot coverage
regulations of the zoning district governing the site may be modified in conjunction with a planned unit development permit, provided the city council
determines that the development plan complies with the spirit and intent of this chapter. Any such modifications must be explicitly indicated in the
development plan or the underlying zoning district regulations shall control.
B. The plan/zoning board of appeals may recommend and the mayor and city council may impose such additional restrictions, conditions, or development
schedules which are particularly applicable to such planned unit development. (Ord. 0-05-01, 1-18-2005, eff. 1-28-2005)
5-11-5: SUBDIVISION REVIEW:
It is the intent of this chapter that applicable subdivision review under the Prospect Heights subdivision regulations be carried out as an integral part of the
review of a planned unit development permit under this chapter. The plans required must be submitted in a form which substantially satisfies the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 279/470
requirements of the subdivision regulations for preliminary and final plat approvals. It is the intent of this section to permit the submission of subdivision
applications for the whole, a part, or parts of the overall planned unit development permit as indicated by phases in the development plan.
A. If any provisions of this chapter and the subdivision regulations are in conflict, the more restrictive or detailed requirements shall be met, unless
specifically waived or altered by the mayor and city council upon recommendation of the plan/zoning board of appeals.
B. If a subdivision is created as a part of the processing of a planned unit development permit, the normal subdivision processing fee required by the
Prospect Heights subdivision ordinance must be submitted to the city, as well as the fee for a special use permit required by this chapter.
C. The on site internal street system, together with the provision and construction of public improvements, shall be in compliance with the requirements
and standards set forth in the Prospect Heights subdivision ordinance. The mayor and city council for good cause shown, upon recommendation of the
plan/zoning board of appeals, may permit such changes or alterations of such standards as are consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter.
(Ord. 0-05-01, 1-18-2005, eff. 1-28-2005)
5-11-6: BOARD RECOMMENDATION; PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
Following the public hearing, the plan/zoning board of appeals shall make its findings and recommendations concerning the preliminary development plan
to the mayor and city council within time limits set forth in section 5-11-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 0-05-01, 1-18-2005, eff. 1-28-2005)
5-11-7: CITY COUNCIL CONSIDERATION; PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
The mayor and city council shall indicate its approval or disapproval of the preliminary development plan by resolution. Approval of the preliminary
development plan shall vest no rights to the applicants other than the right to submit a final development plan. (Ord. 0-05-01, 1-18-2005, eff. 1-28-2005)
5-11-8: FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
Within six (6) months following the approval of the preliminary development plan, the applicant shall initiate the second stage of their application process
by filing with the plan/zoning board of appeals a final development plan and final subdivision plat, unless a final development plan has been presented at
the public hearing and thereafter considered and a recommendation concerning same has been made to the mayor and city council. In any event, the final
development plan shall contain in final form all of the information required in the preliminary development plan, along with such other documents as may
be necessary to implement the plan or to comply with all applicable requirements of the zoning code.
A. Contents Of The Final Development Plan: The final development plan shall contain all of the materials included in the preliminary development plan
together with revisions, if any, which may be recommended by the plan/zoning board of appeals without an additional public hearing. In addition, if
approved by the mayor and city council, the final development plan shall include the following:
1. Phasing Program: A document describing any proposed phasing program of the development for all structures, recreational and other common
facilities, and open space improvements, including time schedule for commencement and completion dates of construction of each phase.
Intermediate phases shall not exceed overall project density and a pro rata allocation of common open space shall be made as each phase is
developed.
2. Common Open Space Agreement: A copy of the formal agreement with a public agency or private association for the ownership and maintenance of
the common open space is required.
3. Plats For Recording: A copy of the subdivision plat, plat of dedication, or plat of vacation that is a necessary part of the planned unit development
permit is required.
4. Covenant: Restrictive covenants in a form acceptable to the city attorney limiting development of and construction upon the tract as a whole to such
development and construction as shall comply with the final development plan and the special use permit granted by the mayor and city council,
which document shall include, but not be limited to, provisions granting the city a right to enforce same as well as its storm water management
regulations.
B. Time Extension: Upon written request by the applicant, the plan/zoning board of appeals, for good cause, may extend the period for filing the final
development plan for a period not to exceed an additional twelve (12) months.
C. Permitted Minor Changes From A Preliminary Development Plan: Minor changes in the location, siting, and height of structures, streets, driveways, and
open spaces may be recommended by the plan/zoning board of appeals and approved by the mayor and city council to be included in the final
development plan in accord with the following procedure without additional public hearings, if such changes are required by engineering or other
circumstances not foreseen at the time the preliminary development plan was approved. No change authorized by this subsection may cause any of
the following:
1. A change in the use or character of the development;
2. An increase by more than one percent (1%) in the overall land coverage of structures;
3. An increase in floor area or, in the case of residential areas, an increase in density;
4. An increase in the problems of traffic circulation and public utilities;
5. A reduction of more than one percent (1%) in approved common open space;
6. A reduction in off street parking and loading spaces; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 280/470
7. A reduction in required pavement widths.
D. Board Recommendation Of Final Development Plan: Within sixty (60) days after the proposed final development plan is filed, with all necessary
documents, subdivision plats, and exhibits, the plan/zoning board of appeals must recommend approval, approval with modification, or disapproval,
and transmit its findings of fact and recommendation to the mayor and city council. If the proposed final development plan does not include any
changes from the approved preliminary development which exceed the criteria listed above, the plan/zoning board of appeals may review the proposed
final development plan without conducting a public hearing. If the proposed final development plan includes changes from the approved preliminary
development plan which exceed the criteria listed above, the plan/zoning board of appeals shall conduct a new public hearing in order to review the
proposed final development plan. (Ord. 0-05-01, 1-18-2005, eff. 1-28-2005)
5-11-9: CONSIDERATION OF FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN BY MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL:
A. In accord with the time limits set forth in section 5-11-11 of this chapter, upon receipt of the recommendation of the plan/zoning board of appeals
following the public hearing on the application for a planned unit development, the mayor and city council may by ordinance approve such planned unit
development granting the applicant a special use permit to proceed in accordance with the final development plan attached thereto and all documents
in support thereof, subject to such additional conditions and upon such terms as the mayor and city council deem necessary or appropriate to protect
and promote the public health, safety, and welfare.
1. Said ordinance shall include all standards, conditions, or restrictions which the mayor and city council shall deem necessary to effectuate the
proposed planned unit development and protect the public interest.
2. In addition to the restrictions and conditions imposed in the ordinance approving the planned unit development, the mayor and city council shall
require the execution of such agreements as shall be necessary to guarantee the maintenance of public and private open space.
a. Such agreements may include the conveyance of such open space to the city or other municipal corporation, a not for profit corporation or other
legal entity which shall hold the open space for the benefit of the public.
b. In the event a private not for profit corporation or similar entity shall be established for the purpose of maintaining common open space, the city
may require that said corporation shall provide maintenance and improvements of such common open space and have the right to exact from the
property owners the cost of such maintenance or improvement in a legally enforceable manner.
B. All public improvements and facilities to be provided under the provisions of the planned unit development shall be located underground and completed
for each phase prior to the issuance of occupancy permits within any such phase and in accordance with the phase plan submitted as part of the
application.
1. The installation and completion of such improvements shall be guaranteed by the deposit in escrow of the amount equal to one hundred ten percent
(110%) of the city engineer's estimate of the cost of improvements or subdivision bonds or letter of credit in the form and as approved by the city
attorney of the city.
2. In addition to said guarantees for the installation of public facilities, the city shall require a deposit in cash or other suitable security of an amount
equal to one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the estimated cost of such improvements.
a. This security shall be held for the purpose of guaranteeing the satisfactory operation of the public facilities constructed within the planned unit
development for a period of eighteen (18) months following completion of construction of the entire planned unit development by the developer and
acceptance by the city of said public facilities.
b. The security deposit herein required shall be refunded at the expiration of said eighteen (18) month period if no defects shall have developed in
the public improvements; provided, however, that the city may utilize such deposit for the purpose of correcting defects during said period, in which
case the city shall be required to return only that portion of the guarantee remaining on deposit. (Ord. 0-05-01, 1-18-2005, eff. 1-28-2005)
5-11-10: RECORDATION OF DOCUMENTS:
A. The specific ordinance granting a special use in the nature of a planned unit development as provided within this enabling legislation shall contain a
legal description of the property subject to such planned unit development.
B. Said ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County, Illinois, together with all such restrictive covenants as may be
required by the mayor and city council at the expense of the applicant.
1. Said restrictive covenants shall be in a form which will effectuate the development of the subject property in accordance with the planned unit
development and provide for the maintenance and continued protection of all public open space and common open space and all privately owned
common open space.
2. In addition to all other interested parties, the city may require that said covenants shall run to and be for the benefit of the city and shall extend to the
city the right to enforce said covenants by any appropriate action in law or in equity. (Ord. 0-05-01, 1-18-2005, eff. 1-28-2005)
5-11-11: CONSTRUCTION TIMING:
Construction of a development under a planned unit development permit shall commence within twelve (12) months from the date of the passage of the
authorizing special use permit ordinance by the mayor and city council and shall proceed to completion in accordance with the phasing program, if any,
contained therein.
A. Revocation Of Permits: The mayor and city council may at any time request written reports on the progress and development of the proposed planned
unit development project. If the city council is satisfied that the permittee has abandoned the development of the proposed planned unit development
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 281/470
project, or failed to follow the final development plan, it shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of considering the revocation of all permits issued
and action taken. Written notice of said hearing shall be sent by certified mail (return receipt) to the permittee at the business address stated in the
application for the planned unit development permit. Publication of said hearing shall also be given in accordance with the provisions of this section. If
the board finds that the permittee has abandoned the development of the proposed planned unit development project or failed to follow the final
development plan, it may then revoke the planned unit development special use permit without public hearing but following notice that such revocation
will be considered by the mayor and city council at a meeting thereof not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days after the date of such
notice. The notice specified herein shall be deemed given when sent certified mail to the applicant at the address given in the application for such
planned unit development special use permit.
B. Time Extensions: Upon application by a permittee of a planned unit development, the mayor and city council may extend the time for the
commencement of construction as follows:
1. If a delay, or anticipated delay, is caused by governmental action without fault on the part of the developer, an extension may be granted for a period
not longer than the period of the governmental delay;
2. For good cause shown, an extension may be granted for such periods of time as the board deems appropriate but not exceeding twelve (12)
months, exclusive of extensions authorized under subsection B1 of this section.
C. Establishment Of Common Open Spaces And Facilities: The establishment of common open spaces and construction of public or common recreational
facilities shown on the final development plan together with the construction of other nonresidential structures shall proceed substantially in accordance
with the phasing program previously approved as part of the final development plan.
1. Occupancy Permits: No occupancy permit for any structure in the development shall be issued until a pro rata share of the common open spaces
and facilities required in compliance with the phasing plan have also been placed in a condition suitable for use or occupancy.
2. Developer Responsibility: The developer shall maintain control of all common open spaces and facilities, and be responsible for required
maintenance, until the same are formally turned over to a public agency or private association. The mayor and city council may determine when the
common open spaces and facilities must be formally turned over, based upon the status of the development, when this item is not adequately
addressed in the phasing program. (Ord. 0-05-01, 1-18-2005, eff. 1-28-2005)
5-11-12: AMENDMENT OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
A. Any substantial change in character of any existing planned unit development shall require the adoption of an ordinance which shall make such
changes and modifications in said planned unit development as may be approved by the mayor and city council.
1. Said amendatory ordinance may be adopted only after a public hearing by and recommendation of the plan/zoning board of appeals in like manner
as is required herein for the adoption of an original planned unit development ordinance.
2. An amendatory ordinance shall be required in the event of any change in the established density, location of buildings, height, street pattern, or
installation of public utilities.
B. However, the mayor may approve such changes to the final development plan in the construction of the planned unit development as in his judgment
shall not constitute a substantial deviation from the specific planned unit development ordinance. Before any such changes approved by the mayor
may become effective however, the mayor shall within seven (7) days notify in writing the city council of such changes and the city council shall, at its
next regular meeting, ratify the action of the mayor or deny such changes until an amendatory ordinance has been adopted in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to indicate that the mayor and city council must pass an amendatory ordinance to grant any changes
requested. (Ord. 0-05-01, 1-18-2005, eff. 1-28-2005)
5-11-13: COMPLETION OF THE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
For the purpose of this chapter, the planned unit development shall be completed when the last occupancy permit for the structures in the development
has been issued by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 0-05-01, 1-18-2005, eff. 1-28-2005)
Chapter 12
VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES
5-12-1: FINE:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this title shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 0-77-27, 7-18-1977)
Title 6
SUBDIVISIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 282/470
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
6-1-1: TITLE:
This Title shall be known, cited and referred to as the SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS OF THE CITY OF PROSPECT HEIGHTS, ILLINOIS. (Ord. 0-77-02,
2-7-1977)
6-1-2: PURPOSES:
These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
A. To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the City.
B. To guide the future growth, and development of the City.
C. To provide for adequate light, air and privacy, to secure safety from fire, flood and other danger and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue
congestion of population.
D. To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the Municipality and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of
all parts of the City.
E. To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts
among the uses of land and buildings.
F. To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds,
recreation and other public requirements and facilities.
G. To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the City, having particular
regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways, and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and
buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and building lines.
H. To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions, in order to further the orderly layout and use of land;
and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land.
I. To ensure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision.
J. To prevent the pollution of air, streams and ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the wise
use and management of natural resources throughout the City in order to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the community and the value of
the land.
K. To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the City and to ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural features.
L. To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-1-3: APPLICATION OF ORDINANCE:
These regulations shall be applicable to all subdivisions and resubdivisions of land within the corporate limits of the City and contiguous unincorporated
territory within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-1-4: INTERPRETATION:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety and general welfare. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-1-5: CONFLICT WITH PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROVISIONS:
A. Public Provisions: These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other
provisions of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed from any other provision of these
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 283/470
regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, of any kind, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher
standards shall control.
B. Private Provisions: These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that
where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other private
agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern. Where the provisions of the easement, covenant or private agreement or
restriction impose duties and obligations more restrictive, or higher standards than the requirements of these regulations, or the determinations of the
Plan Commission or the City in approving a subdivision or in enforcing these regulations, and such private provisions are not inconsistent with these
regulations or determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative and supplemental to these regulations and determinations
made thereunder. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-1-6: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or part of these subdivision regulations shall for any reason be held invalid, such decision or holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining provisions of these regulations; and the application of these provisions to any person or circumstance shall not be
affected thereby. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
Chapter 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
6-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural number and the plural the
singular.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
C. The word "may" is permissive.
D. The word "lot" shall include the words "plot", "piece" and "parcel".
E. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for". (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-
1977)
6-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
ACCEPTED PUBLIC STREET: Any street duly accepted by the City Council for maintenance by said City.
ALLEY: A minor public right of way used primarily for vehicular service access along the side of or in the rear of properties.
APPROVED STREET: Any street, whether public or private, meeting standards and specifications of the City.
BUFFER PLANTING STRIP: A strip of land planted with trees and shrubs for screening purposes.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: The line indicating the minimum horizontal distance between the property line and buildings, either at the front or side of the
lot.
CITY: The City of Prospect Heights.
CITY ENGINEER: The person or firm charged with the responsibility of Municipal engineering matters.
COLLECTOR STREET: Those existing streets and streets proposed as collector streets in new subdivisions for access of traffic from several minor streets
to a major street.
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street having one open end and being permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround.
CURRENT SURVEY: A survey which accurately reflects the topography of a tract of land and the location of all improvements located thereon at the time
of the filing of the survey.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the general public, a corporation, or a certain person or persons for a specific
purpose or purposes.
FINAL PLAT: The drawings and documents described in Section 6-3-4 of this Title.
FRONTAGE: All the property on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street, or
if the street is dead-ended, then, all the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
IMPROVEMENT (SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT): Any facility for which the City or other Municipal body may ultimately assume the responsibility for
maintenance and operation or which is constructed for general public use or benefit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 284/470
INTERSECTION, STREET: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of
the roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty feet (30') or more apart, then every crossing of
each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting highway
also includes two (2) roadways thirty feet (30') or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate
intersection.
LOT: A parcel of land in a subdivision separated from other parcels or portions by virtue of a plat of subdivision recorded with the appropriate county office
and identifiable by reference to said plat of subdivision and not dependent for such identification by metes and bounds.
MAJOR STREET: A street of considerable continuity which serves or is intended to serve as a major traffic artery between the various sections of Prospect
Heights.
MINOR STREET: A street intended primarily as access to abutting properties.
OWNER: The individuals, firms, associations, syndicates, copartnerships, corporations, trusts or any other legal entities having sufficient proprietary
interest of record in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under the statutes of the State of
Illinois or under the ordinances of the City.
PARKWAY: That portion of the street right of way not occupied by roadway pavement and sidewalk.
PLAN COMMISSION: The Plan Commission of the City of Prospect Heights.
PLAT: A map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plans of the subdivision are presented and which he submits for approval and intends to record in
final form.
PONDING: The creation of pockets or depressions which have no surface drainage provided and which, in the event of a failure on the part of inlets or
storm sewers, will contain standing water. That portion of surface waters which are flowing will not be considered as ponding.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: The drawings and documents described in Section 6-3-2 of this Title.
PUBLIC AGENCY: Any public body created by authority of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
PUBLIC STREET: All major, collector and minor streets which are or are to be dedicated for public use.
RATIONAL METHOD: A basis of calculation for storm water runoff in the form of the equation Q = CIA, where Q is the peak discharge in cubic feet per
second; C is the runoff coefficient; I is the uniform rate of rainfall intensity in inches per hour for a duration equal to the time of concentration; and A is the
drainage area in acres.
REAR YARD: A yard extending along the rear lot line which is bounded by the side lot lines, rear lot line and the rear line of a building on the same lot.
ROADWAY OR ROAD: Wherever the words "road" or "roadway" is used in this Title, it shall be deemed the paved area existing on the street right of way
and not the street right-of-way width.
SIDE YARD: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building and located between said building and the side line of the lot and extending from
the street line to the rear yard.
SIDEWALK: The portion of a street or pedestrian crosswalk, paved and intended for pedestrian use.
STREET: Wherever the word "street" is used in this Title, it shall refer to the width of the street right of way or easement, whether public or private, and
shall not be considered as the width of paving or other improvement on the street right-of-way width.
SUBDIVIDER: Any individuals, firms, associations, syndicates, corporations, copartnerships, trusts, or other legal entities commencing proceedings under
this Title to effect a subdivision of land.
SUBDIVISION: A subdivision is:
A. The division of land into two (2) or more parts, any of which is less than five (5) acres, whether immediate or future, for the purpose of transfer of
ownership or building development, including all public streets, alleys, ways for public service facilities, parks, playgrounds, school grounds or other
public grounds, and all the tracts, parcels, lots or blocks and numbering all such lots' blocks or parcels by progressive numbers, giving their precise
dimensions. However, the following shall not be considered a subdivision and shall be exempt from the requirements of this Title:
1. The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five (5) acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access;
2. The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining and contiguous land;
3. The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as right of way for railroads or other public utility facilities which does not involve any
new streets or easements of access;
4. The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
5. The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 285/470
6. Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances.
B. Any multiple-family, business, commercial or industrial district established by a zoning district amendment of the Zoning Ordinance of the City, after
the effective date of this Title, shall be deemed a subdivision for the purpose of these regulations regardless of whether the land is divided into
parcels for separate sale or is developed on a lease basis and said subdivision shall be subject to the improvement and design requirements of this
Title and other requirements specified by the Plan Commission. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
Chapter 3
PLAT APPROVAL PROCEDURES
6-3-1: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
A. Procedure: Any owner or representative of the owner of land located within the corporate limits of the city or within one and one-half (11/2) miles of such
corporate limits shall first submit to the plan/zoning board of appeals of the city, or its representative, such information as may be required by the
plan/zoning board of appeals to describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development thereof, the applicant shall be
supplied with pertinent information on plan commission requirements not contained herein. Applicant shall contact the city clerk to be put on the plan
commission agenda. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
B. Data: The following information shall be provided at the time of the preliminary consultation:
1. Information including data on existing covenants, existing land use, land characteristics and available community facilities and utilities, and
information describing the subdivision proposal, such as number of residential lots, typical lot widths and depth, price ranges, business areas,
playgrounds, park area and other public areas, tree planting, proposed protective covenants and proposed utilities and street improvements.
2. A location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing community facilities which serve or influence it. Include development
name and location; main traffic arteries; public transportation lines; principal places of employment; other community features such as railroad
stations, airports, hospitals and churches; title; scale; north arrow and date.
3. A sketch plan showing in simple sketch form the proposed layout of the streets, lots and other features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch
plan may be a free hand pencil sketch made directly on a print of the topographic survey. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-3-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A. Procedure For Approval: The subdivider shall submit twelve (12) copies of the preliminary plat and written application for approval to the city clerk.
Accompanying the plats shall be the preliminary plat filing fees referred to in subsection 6-7-4B of this title. The preliminary plat shall be referred by the
city council to the plan/zoning board and appropriate city staff officers for review. The plan/zoning board, after its review and report from appropriate
city staff officials, shall negotiate with the subdivider on changes deemed necessary, shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or rejection
of the plat to the city council. The council shall refer the preliminary plat to the appropriate committees, and after committee review and
recommendation, approve, approve with conditions or reject the preliminary plat. The city clerk shall then notify the subdivider in writing. Such tentative
approval by the city council shall not constitute acceptance of the subdivision. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-03-35, 9-15-2003)
B. Requirements:
1. Identification And Description:
a. Proposed name of subdivision not duplicating the name of any plat heretofore recorded in Cook County, Illinois.
b. Location by section, township and range, and by other legal description necessary to clearly locate and describe the subdivision area.
c. A current survey prepared and certified by an Illinois registered land surveyor showing the topography, the boundary lines and the area being
subdivided and all improvements drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100').
d. Names and addresses of the owner having control of the tract and the surveyor who prepared the plat. (The names and addresses of the
beneficiaries of any trust owner shall be supplied to the Plan Commission on a separate document.) Proof of ownership and/or beneficial interest
shall be submitted to the Plan Commission in the form of a title policy or commitment and/or necessary trust documentation or such other evidence
as the Plan Commission deems necessary.
e. North point (true north).
f. Date of survey and preparation.
2. Existing Conditions:
a. Boundary lines of proposed subdivision in accordance with subsection B1c of this Section.
b. Total acreage of subdivision.
c. Existing zoning districts in proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts.
d. Location, widths and names of all existing or previously platted streets or other rights of way, showing type of improvement (if any), railroad and
utility rights of way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, easements and section and corporate lines within the
tract and to a distance of at least two hundred feet (200') beyond the tract.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 286/470
e. Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract and to a distance of at least two hundred
feet (200') beyond the tract, also indicating such data as grades, invert elevations, and locations of catch basins, manholes and hydrants.
f. Location map, at a scale of not less than one inch equals one thousand feet (1" = 1,000') showing boundary lines of adjoining, unsubdivided or
subdivided land within an area bounded by nearest arterial streets or other natural boundaries, but not less than one-half (1/2) mile beyond the
subdivision boundaries in subdivisions located beyond the City limits, identifying type of use and ownership of surrounding land and showing
alignments of existing streets.
g. Topographic data including the location of watercourses, high, low and normal water level elevations, marshes, and other significant features and
existing contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet (2'), except in unusual topographical conditions; such vertical intervals may be
required to be altered as determined by the City Engineer. Topographic data shall refer to the United States Geological Survey Datum. Soil boring
data and seepage tests may be required at locations and depths as determined by the City Engineer.
h. Locations of or reference to locations of existing monuments or survey markers used in preparation of survey and grade elevation of each
monument and marker.
i. Reports from the following agencies (where applicable):
North Cook County Soil and Water Conservation District, including statement that all lots will support septic systems
Cook County Health Officer
Applicable sewerage districts
Cook County Highway Department
Illinois Department of Transportation
Applicable water districts
Certificate of professional engineer that individual lots will support septic systems
Applicable school district
Applicable park district
Applicable fire protection district
Applicable library district
3. Proposed Subdivision Design Features:
a. The proposed subdivision layout shall be in substantial accord with any official plan as amended from time to time in effect at the time of
application.
b. Layout of streets showing right-of-way widths and street names (not duplicating the name of any street heretofore used in the City or its environs
unless the street is an extension of or in line with an already named street and provided it can be connected with such street, in which event that
name shall be used) and showing proposed through streets extended to boundaries of subdivision.
c. Location and width of alleys, pedestrianways and easements.
d. Layout, numbers and dimensions of blocks and lots to the nearest foot.
e. Building lines and all dimensions from lot lines.
f. The proposed City zoning districts for subdivisions to be annexed.
g. A table of the following information:
(1) Total acreage of subdivision.
(2) Acreage of streets to be dedicated.
(3) Acreage of public lands to be dedicated other than streets.
(4) Acreage of lots (subsection B3g(1), less numbers B3g(2) and B3g(3) of this Section).
(5) Total number of lots.
(6) Minimum area of individual lots in square feet.
h. Proposed location of sanitary sewers, storm sewers, drainage courses and channels, methods of handling storm water, surface water disposal,
sewage disposal and waste disposal plans.
i. No land will be approved in a subdivision which is subject to periodic flooding, which lies in flood plain areas as designated on the most recent
applicable flood maps as designated by the City Engineer, or which contains inadequate drainage facilities, unless the owner agrees to make all
necessary improvements and agrees to all required covenants which will, in the opinion of the City Engineer, City Attorney and Plan Commission,
be binding, make such land safe for occupancy and provide necessary safeguards for adjacent property which will be affected by the grading,
drainage or other changes being permitted or required for this subdivision1. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-3-3: CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT PLANS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 287/470
A. Procedure For Approval:
1. Preliminary Plans: Simultaneous with filing the preliminary plat or as soon thereafter as practicable, the subdivider shall submit to the City Clerk three
(3) copies of the preliminary subdivision improvement plans covering the area of the preliminary plat. Two (2) copies of the preliminary plans shall be
forwarded to the City Engineer for review. The City Engineer shall review the plans and submit a report on these plans to the Plan Commission as a
part of the preliminary plat review report. Upon approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall be notified in writing to proceed with the
preparation of final construction plans.
2. Final Construction Plans And Specifications: After approval of the preliminary plats and plans, the subdivider shall prepare final construction plans,
specifications and cost estimates, and submit four (4) copies to the City Clerk. Accompanying the submittal shall be subdivision improvement filing
fees referred to in Section 6-7-4C of this Title. Three (3) copies of the submittal shall be transmitted to the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall
review the final construction plans for conformance with the preliminary plans and transmit a written report and one copy of the submittal to the City
Council with his recommendations. If a final plat is being prepared covering only a portion of the approved preliminary plat, the final construction
plans need be prepared for only that portion being platted. However, the entire area must be taken into account in designing the system.
The City Council, after review, shall approve, approve with conditions or reject the final construction plans. The subdivider shall be notified in writing
by the City Clerk of the Council's action.
B. Requirements: Both preliminary and final improvement plans shall be prepared on twenty two inch by thirty six inch (22" x 36") reproducible material by
a professional engineer licensed in the State and at least contain the following information in order:
Sheet 1 - Title page
Sheet 2.0 - 2.XX - Plat of subdivision
Sheet 3.0 - 3.XX - General layout drawings
a. Streets, sidewalks, lighting
b. Sanitary sewer
c. Water system
d. Storm drainage
e. Landscaping
Sheet 4.0 - 4.XX - Plan and profile of streets and sewers on a
scale of not less than 1" = 50' horizontal and 1" = 5' vertical
Sheet 5.0 - 5.XX - Details
Sheet 6.0 - 6.XX - Grading plans scale not less than 1" = 50'
The plans shall be prepared in accordance with the design standards listed in Chapters 4 and 5 of this Title. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-3-4: FINAL PLAT:
A. Procedure For Approval: Within one year of approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall prepare a final plat and submit to the City Clerk,
together with a written application for approval. Accompanying the submittal shall be the final plat filing fees referred to in subsection 6-7-4B of this
Title.
In case application for approval of a final plat is made for a part or parts of an approved preliminary plat, the City Council may extend the time for
application of approval of final plats for other parts of the approved preliminary plat until later date or dates beyond the foregoing one year period.
The City Council shall refer the plats to the Plan Commission and the City Engineer for review. The City Engineer shall review the plats for technical
details, conformance with existing City ordinances and conformance with the approved preliminary plat and submit a written report to the Plan
Commission. The Plan Commission shall, after its review, submit its recommendation to the City Council. The City Council shall, by resolution, approve
or disapprove such plat. Upon adoption of the resolution approving a final plat, the City Clerk shall certify such approval and affix the corporate seal of
the City on the final plat.
Upon approval of the City Council, the City Clerk shall record the final plat, providing the cost of recording has been paid by the subdivider.
After recording, the original and one copy of the recorded plat and one copy of all supporting data shall be retained in the City Clerk's files, two (2) sets
of such materials shall be retained by the City Engineer and one set shall be retained by the Building Official.
B. Requirements:
1. General: All information required on the preliminary plat, except that required in subsections 6-3-2B1b, B3d, B3e, B3f and B3h of this Chapter, shall
be shown accurately and drawn with black waterproof drawing ink on linen, vellum, or plastic film in a manner so that clear and legible
transparencies or contact prints or photostatic copies can be made.
2. Identification And Description: The following shall be shown on the plats:
a. Proposed name of subdivision.
b. A full and detailed legal description of the land embraced in the plat, showing the township and range in which such land is situated, and the
sections and parts of sections platted.
c. The name of the owner.
d. The surveyor making the plat.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 288/470
e. Scale of plat: one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') minimum. Scale to be shown numerically and graphically.
f. North point (indicating true north).
g. Date of preparation.
3. Delineation Of Final Plat: The following shall be shown on final plats:
a. Boundary of plat based on an accurate traverse with all bearings and linear dimensions. Error of closure of such boundary survey shall not exceed
one in ten thousand (10,000), one foot (1') for each ten thousand feet (10,000') of perimeter survey.
b. All blocks, lots, streets, alleys, excepted parcels, pedestrianways, easements and building lines within or adjacent to the plat shall be shown. All of
the above shall have all bearings and linear dimensions given and all radii, internal angles, bearings, points of curvature, tangents, and lengths of
all curves. All dimensions shall be given to the nearest hundredth of a foot.
c. True bearings and distances to the nearest established official monuments.
d. The lines of the subdivision shall be accurately tied by distances and bearings to City, township and section lines.
e. Consecutive numbering of all blocks and lots. Names of all existing adjoining streets and all streets in the subdivision.
f. Bearings and linear dimensions of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use or for the exclusive use of property owners within the
subdivision.
g. Location of all iron stakes and all permanent monuments required by this Title.
h. Any protective covenants.
i. Statements covering easement provisions.
j. All other information required by State statutes.
4. Certificates: The following certificates shall be on the final plat when submitted:
Owner's certificate
Notary's certificate of owners
Surveyor's certificate
County clerk's certificate on unpaid taxes
Sanitary District's certificate on unpaid assessments
(when applicable)
City Engineer's certificate of improvements
City Treasurer's certificate on unpaid assessments
Plan Commission certificate
City Council certificate of approval
The application for approval of the final plat shall not be deemed completed until all certificates, other than the City certificates, have been duly
executed.
5. Supporting Documents: The final plat shall be accompanied by the following supporting documents, prepared by a registered professional engineer
and based upon the conditions of approval of the preliminary plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer and other public officials having
jurisdiction, such approval to be certified on the final plat when submitted:
Complete plans,
Specifications, and
Cost estimates of the improvements to be installed.
(Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-3-5: DEDICATION OF PARK AND RECREATION LANDS:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision or of a final plat of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer is hereby required to
dedicate land for park and recreation purposes, to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the development, or cash contribution in lieu of
actual land dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of the City in accordance with the following criteria and formula. (Ord. 0-78-11, 4-3-1978)
6-3-5-1: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING PARK AND RECREATIONAL LAND DEDICATION:
A. Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a proposed development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for dedication.
The total requirement shall be five and one-half (5.5) acres of land per one thousand (1,000) of ultimate population in accordance with the following
classifications:
Types Of
Recreation Area
Minimum
Size, Range
Minimum Acres
Per 1,000 People
1. Play lot 8,000 square feet Not applicable
2. School - park (Neighborhood
playground)
Minimum park of 5 acres 1.25
3. Neighborhood park 5 acres 1.0
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 289/470
4. District-wide park or play field 10 acres 1.25
5. Community-wide recreation park 15 acres 2.0
Total 5.5 acres of land per 1,000 people
The amount of land required to be dedicated shall be determined by dividing the estimated population of the proposed development by one thousand
(1,000) and multiplying the quotient times five and one-half (5.5) acres of park land required for each one thousand (1,000) people.
B. Location: The City plans in conjunction with the local park district plans shall be used as guidelines in locating sites. A central location which will serve
equally the entire development is most desirable. In large developments, these sites can be located throughout the development according to
established standards for park area distances.
C. Credit For Private Open Spaces, Recreation Areas And Tax Assessments: When subdividers or developers provide their own open space for recreation
areas and facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand for local public recreational services. Depending on the size of the development, a portion
of the park and recreation area in subdivisions or planned unit developments may at the option of the City Council be provided in the form of "private"
open space in lieu of dedicated "public" open space. The extent of same shall be determined by the City Council based upon the needs of the
projected residents and in conformance to the total park and recreation land for the general area.
In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated parks will imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and the installation of
recreational facilities, including equipment by the developer as part of his obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including specifications of facilities to
be installed, must be approved by the City and before any credit is given for private recreation areas, the subdivider or developer must guarantee that
these private recreation areas will be permanently maintained for such use by the execution of the appropriate legal documents. Private "swimming
clubs" are included in this provision. When an adjustment for private recreation areas is warranted, it will be necessary to compute the total park land
dedication that would have been required from the subdivision or planned unit development and then subtract the credit to be given.
D. Buildable Area: Each park site shall include a two hundred foot by two hundred fifty foot (200' x 250') site for a park building and a one hundred fifty foot
by one hundred fifty foot (150' x 150') site for tennis courts with uniform soil bearing capacity of at least three thousand (3,000) psi based on soil boring
data to be furnished by the developer.
E. Improvements: Each park site shall be located on a fully improved street, with sewer, electricity and gas available at the property lines. (Enclosed
drainage, curb and gutter and streetlights shall be included if otherwise required for the subdivision or development.) The sidewalk and trees normally
included within the definition of "improved" sites may be deleted due to the delay between dedication of any park site and construction of park facilities
thereon. At least twenty percent (20%) of the perimeter of the site shall have direct access to a fully improved street, and at least two (2) access routes
or easements shall be provided. Any pedestrian access route or easement shall be at least thirty feet (30') wide and any vehicle access route or
easement shall be at least sixty feet (60') wide.
F. Topography: Each park site shall have sufficient level areas, uninterrupted by streams and drainage ditches, to permit its development for football and
baseball fields without additional expense for rough grading, and without the infields of baseball fields overlapping the football fields. The entire site
shall be rough-graded to provide adequate storm water runoff so that there will be no storm water standing within any required buildable area, or on
any playfield area, and the overland flow rate shall be determined in accordance with rational method based on a 100-year frequency rainfall as defined
by: 1) Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago, or 2) U.S. Department of Agriculture. Adequate clay seals with overlapping top soil shall be
placed upon exposed peat areas within any required play field areas. Where low, swampy land is to be considered for dedication by the developer, he
shall provide an adequate outlet complying with all codes and regulations, or if not drainable, the areas shall be deepened to a depth suitable for the
proposed use (to be negotiated for each condition). The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be
suitable for its intended purposes. Grading on sites dedicated for park and recreation uses shall not differ greatly from surrounding land.
G. Special Requirements For Park Sites Which Include Storm Water Detention Or Retention Areas: (These requirements are in addition to any
requirements set forth in other ordinances of the City.) Where water impounding areas are built into the site to satisfy requirements of the various
sanitary and drainage agencies, the edges of the ponds shall be sloped for ease of maintenance.
1. Adequate overflow channels or structures shall be provided meeting all the requirements of the various agencies having jurisdiction over these water
improvements.
2. At least sixty feet (60') of space shall be provided between static water lines of ponds and the back or side lots of the adjacent subdivision.
3. There shall be at least a twenty foot (20') suitable roadway access around the impoundment at high-water level, wide enough for maintenance and
emergency equipment.
4. On all park sites which include storm water detention areas, the following regulations shall apply:
a. Minimum size of such park site shall be five (5) acres.
b. No more than fifty percent (50%) of such park site shall hold water during a 100-year rainfall.
c. At least thirty percent (30%) of the available high ground within such park site shall be of sufficient size and quality to provide adequate
recreational facilities, playgrounds, picnic areas, etc.
5. On all park sites which include water retention, the following regulations shall apply:
a. Minimum size of such park shall be five (5) acres.
b. No more than one-third (1/3) of such park site shall hold water during a 100-year rainfall.
c. At least fifty percent (50%) of the site must be good high ground of sufficient size and quality to provide adequate recreational facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 290/470
d. The lake contours must be approved by both the applicable park district for aesthetic quality and recreational functionability (i.e., ice skating,
fishing, etc.) and the City Engineer for hydraulic quality.
e. Riprap shall be provided above and below the static water level to protect the banks, and sodded above that point to the high-water level.
f. Each lake shall be tapered and terraced for safety. A central trench of a ten foot (10') depth shall be provided covering an area of twenty five
percent (25%) of the lake in order to sustain adequate fish life. (Ord. 0-78-11, 4-3-1978)
6-3-5-2: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF PARK SITES:
Where the development is small and the resulting site is too small to be practical or when the available land is inappropriate for park and recreational
purposes, the City shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication required. The cash contributions in lieu
of park and recreational land dedication shall be held in trust by the City or other public body designated by the City solely for the acquisition of park and
recreation land as hereinbefore classified, which will be available to serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or
development or for the improvement of other existing local park and recreation land which already serves such needs. If any portion of a cash contribution
in lieu of park and recreation land dedication is not expended for the purposes set forth herein within seven (7) years from the date of receipt, it shall be
refunded to the developer who made such contribution.
A. Fair Market Value: The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on the "fair market value" of the acres of land in the area improved as specified
herein that otherwise would have been dedicated as park and recreation sites. The developer shall submit an appraisal showing the "fair market value"
of such improved land in the area of his development or other evidence thereof and final determination of said "fair market value" per acre of such
improved land shall be made by the City Council based upon such information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other sources which
may be submitted to the City Council by the applicable park district or others.
B. Criteria For Requiring Dedication And Fee: There will be situations in subdivisions or planned unit developments when a combination of land dedication
and a contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These occasions will arise when:
1. Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the location for a park site. That portion of the land within the subdivision falling within the
park location shall be dedicated as a site as aforesaid, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional land that would
have to be dedicated;
2. A major part of the local park or recreation site has already been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from the development to
complete the site. The remaining portions shall be required by dedication, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required.
C. Time For Payment Of Contribution In Lieu Of Land: Any cash contribution required hereunder shall be paid at or before the time of approval of the final
plat of subdivision. (Ord. 0-78-11, 4-3-1978)
6-3-5-3: DENSITY FORMULA:
The following table of population density is generally indicative of current and short-range projected trends in family size for new construction and shall be
used in calculating the amount of required dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu thereof unless a written objection is filed thereto by
the subdivider or developer.
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
Children Per Unit
Type Of Unit
Pre-School
0-4
Elementary
Grades K-5
5-10 Years
Junior High
Grades 6-8
11-13 Years
Total
Grades K-8
5-13 Years
High School
Grades 9-12
14-17 Years
Adults
18-up
Total Per
Unit
Detached Single Family:
3 Bedroom 0.306 0.58 0.26 0.84 0.30 2.00 3.446
4 Bedroom 0.332 0.64 0.38 1.02 0.42 2.26 4.032
5 Bedroom 0.355 0.86 0.68 1.54 0.57 2.37 4.835
Attached Single Family (Townhouse, Row House, Quadriplex, etc.):
1 Bedroom -- -- -- -- -- 1.52 1.520
2 Bedroom 0.477 0.15 0.02 0.17 0.04 1.96 2.647
3 Bedroom 0.503 0.47 0.13 0.60 0.16 2.00 3.263
4 Bedroom 0.702 0.93 0.34 1.27 0.41 2.20 4.582
Low Density Apartment (to 15/acre):
Efficiency -- -- -- -- -- 1.00 1.000
1 Bedroom 0.070 0.052 0.017 0.069 -- 1.42 1.559
2 Bedroom 0.357 0.225 0.064 0.289 0.063 1.85 2.559
3 Bedroom 0.475 0.384 0.184 0.568 0.240 2.00 3.283
4 Bedroom 0.500 0.670 0.250 0.920 0.330 2.10 3.850
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 291/470
High Density Apartments (16+ acre):
Efficiency -- -- -- -- -- 1.00 1.000
1 Bedroom 0.05 0.026 0.014 0.040 0.007 1.26 1.357
2 Bedroom 0.21 0.065 0.035 0.100 0.029 1.43 1.760
3 Bedroom 0.43 0.150 0.080 0.230 0.092 2.00 2.752
In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the "Table of Estimated Population Per Dwelling Unit" listed herein, he shall submit his
own demographic study showing the estimated additional population to be generated from the subdivision or planned unit development, and in that event
final determination of the density formula to be used in such calculations shall be made by the City Council based upon such demographic information
submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other sources which may be submitted to the City Council by the applicable park district or others. It is
recognized that population density, age distribution and local conditions change over the years, and the specific formula for the dedication of land or the
payment of fees in lieu thereof, as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and amendment if necessary. (Ord. 0-78-11, 4-3-1978)
6-3-5-4: RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND:
Where a duly enacted Comprehensive Plan of the City calls for a larger amount of park and recreation land in a particular proposed subdivision or planned
unit development than the developer is required to dedicate, the land needed beyond the developer's contribution shall, if so determined by the City
Council, be reserved for subsequent purchase by the City or other public body designated by the City; provided, that such acquisition is made within one
year from the date of approval of the final plat. (Ord. 0-78-11, 4-3-1978)
6-3-5-5: COMBINING WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENTS:
Where the subdivision or planned unit development is less than forty (40) acres, public open space which is to be dedicated should, where possible, be
combined with dedications from adjoining developments in order to produce usable recreation areas without hardship on a particular developer. (Ord. 0-
78-11, 4-3-1978)
6-3-5-6: TITLE TO SITES:
All sites shall be conveyed to the City either by warrant or trustee's deed. The subdivider or developer shall be responsible for conveying good,
merchantable title to such sites, and shall be responsible for payment of all real estate taxes to the date of conveyance for any tax years or periods prior to
the time of conveyance. Each deed or other instrument conveying land to the City or to a park district shall be accompanied by: a) a written commitment
issued by a title insurer licensed to do business in the State to insure the grantee's right to such real estate in an amount equal to its value computed
pursuant to this Section subject only to the then current general real estate taxes, covenants, conditions and restrictions which do not prohibit the use of
the subject real estate for park use, utility easements located within twenty feet (20') of the boundary lines of the subject real estate, and drainage ditches,
feeders, laterals and underground pipe or other conduit, and acts done or suffered by or judgments against the grantee; b) a current boundary line survey,
certified to the grantee by a licensed Illinois land surveyor to be in compliance with the Illinois land surveyor standards; and c) except in instances where
the real estate is to be conveyed as a lot in a recorded subdivision, an assessment plat and tax division petition in form acceptable to the appropriate
County authorities so that the land to be conveyed can be assigned its own permanent real estate index number for exemption purposes. (Ord. 0-78-11, 4-
3-1978)
6-3-6: AGREEMENTS AND PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE:
6-3-6-1: SWORN STATEMENT:
Before a final plat may be approved, the owner or subdivider shall submit a properly executed sworn statement and agreement listing the public
improvements he proposes to make at his expense in the subdivision, the time of completion of said improvements and the method of payment for the
improvements. This agreement shall include provisions:
A. Requiring and providing for approval by the City Engineer of the agreement;
B. That the improvements have been or will be installed in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer;
C. Showing the method of selection of the contractors engaged to construct the improvements;
D. That in respect to subdivisions wholly or partly within the City limits, the bonds, guarantees or deposits provided for by this Chapter have been furnished
to the City;
E. Requiring evidence of insurance covering their employees with companies and in amounts satisfactory to the City Attorney;
F. Requiring the owner or subdivider to be responsible for paying all costs including, but not limited to, attorney fees and engineers' fees incurred by
reason of the City having to enforce the provisions of this Title. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
G. Requiring the owner or subdivider to execute a bill of sale in a form acceptable to the City conveying to the City title to all nonexempt water, sewer and
drainage lines consistent with the provisions of subsection 6-5-2E of this Title after approved installation thereof. (Ord. 0-78-19, 6-2-1978)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 292/470
6-3-6-2: GUARANTEE OF COMPLETION:
Prior to the approval of the final plat, the owner or subdivider shall guarantee the completion of all required improvements by one or more of the following
methods:
A. Performance Bond: The owner or subdivider may post a completion bond (performance bond) in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney with the City
Clerk. Such completion bond shall be in an amount sufficient to cover one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the cost of the land improvements
required by the provisions of this Title, including, but not limited to, soil preservation, final grading, lot drainage, lawn-grass, seeding, removal of debris
and waste, fencing and all other lot improvements required by the Plan Commission. Said bond shall have a good and sufficient surety thereon,
approved as to form by the City Attorney and conditioned upon the installation of and payment for said improvements and payment of the fees provided
in Section 6-7-4 of this Title within three (3) years following the approval of the final plat. The completion bond shall also be conditioned upon the
faithful performance of all provisions of this Title and the agreements executed pursuant to this Title.
B. Cash Escrow: The owner or subdivider may deposit a cash bond with the City in accordance with a specific escrow agreement approved by the City
Attorney and City Engineer in an amount equal to one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the cost of the land improvements required by the provisions
of this Title, including, but not limited to, soil preservation, final grading, lot drainage, lawn-grass, seeding, removal of debris and waste, fencing and all
other lot improvements required by the Plan Commission. The deposit shall be held in a special account by the City and the agreement may provide for
partial payouts as work progresses in amounts approved by the City Engineer as corresponding to the original estimate of costs. Provision shall be
made in the escrow agreement that funds therein may be used to pay the fees provided in Section 6-7-4 of this Title if such fees have not previously
been paid in accordance with the provisions of this Title and that use of said funds shall also be conditioned upon the faithful performance of all
provisions of this Title and the agreements executed pursuant to this Title.
C. Exception To Bond: Upon specific permission by the City Council, as recommended by the Plan Commission, after approval of the final construction
plans and specifications for the land improvements required by the provisions of this Title, including, but not limited to, soil preservation, final grading,
lot drainage, lawn-grass, seeding, removal of debris and waste, fencing and all other lot improvements required by the Plan Commission, the owner or
subdivider may elect to complete one or more improvements prior to approval of the final plat. Where the subdivider elects to guarantee completion of
an improvement by this method, approval of the final plat shall be contingent upon certification by the City Engineer that the improvement has been
completed in accordance with plans and specifications and that the inspection reports are favorable. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
D. Irrevocable Letter Of Credit: In lieu of any bond or cash escrow, the owner or subdivider may furnish to the City an irrevocable letter of credit in a form
approved by the City Attorney certifying that adequate funds are and will remain available at a sound and reputable, federally insured, banking
institution authorized to do business in the State in an amount equal to one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the land improvements required by the
provisions of these subdivision regulations, including, but not limited to, soil preservation, final grading, lot drainage, lawn-grass, seeding, removal of
debris and waste, fencing and all other lot improvements required by the Plan Commission. Provisions shall be made in such irrevocable letter of credit
that funds are available to pay the fees provided in Section 6-7-4 of this Title, if such fees have not previously been paid. Such irrevocable letter of
credit shall be in effect for the length of time required to complete the public improvements, and in a form to allow the City to procure the funds
irrevocably committed to complete the required land improvements if construction of said improvements shall be in default.
E. Refund Of Surety: There shall be no reduction of that portion of the completion bond, escrow deposit or letter of credit applying to a particular
improvement, unless and until that improvement is complete and accepted or approved by the City Council, except that upon the completion of the
subgrade, base course and binder course of a street, alley or parking area, the City Council, as recommended by the Plan Commission, may reduce
the amount of that portion of the bond, deposit or letter of credit covering such land improvements. In no event, after a reduction, shall the remaining
portion of the completion bond, cash escrow deposit or letter of credit be less than one hundred twenty percent (120%) of an updated estimate of cost
of completion of the required land improvements. (Ord. 0-79-19, 4-16-1979)
6-3-7: CONTRIBUTION FOR LIBRARY PURPOSES:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision or of a final plat of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer is hereby required to
make a cash contribution for library purposes, to be available for the immediate and short term future library needs of the residents of the development in
accordance with the following criteria and formula:
A. Requirement And Density Formula: The ultimate density of a proposed development shall bear directly upon the amount of required contribution. The
table (shown in section 6-3-5-3 of this chapter) of population density is generally indicative of current and short range projected trends in family size for
new construction and shall be used in calculating the amount of cash contributions unless a written objection is filed by the subdivider or developer:
In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the "table of estimated population per dwelling unit" listed in section 6-3-5-3 of this
chapter, he shall submit his own demographic study showing the estimated additional population to be generated from the subdivision or planned unit
development, and in that event final determination of the density formula to be used in such calculations shall be made by the city council based upon
such demographic information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other sources which may be submitted to the city council by the
applicable library district or others. It is recognized that due to changes in local conditions, changes in population density attributable to developments
and changes in costs of improving and expanding library services, the formula herein is subject to periodic review and amendment, if necessary.
B. Amount Of Cash Contribution Required; Formula: The amount of cash contribution required of a proposed development shall be calculated by
multiplying the estimated population thereof by twelve dollars ($12.00), such amount having been found and determined to be the per capita impact of
the new development upon library services, facilities and collection.
C. Time For Payment Of Contribution: Any cash contribution required hereunder shall be paid as follows:
1. Ten percent (10%) shall be paid as a condition of approval of the final plot of subdivision or development plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 293/470
2. The remaining ninety percent (90%) shall be paid at the time of or prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. In the event an occupancy permit is
requested for less than the whole of a subdivision or development, the portion of the amount of contribution remaining due represented by the
number of persons expected to occupy the partial development of such subdivision or development shall be paid.
D. Use Of Funds: The contributions provided for herein shall be held by the city or other public body designated by the city solely for the acquisition of
library land which will be available to serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or development, or for the improvement or
expansion of existing library facilities, or for the expansion or enhancement of the library collection. If any portion of a cash contribution is not expended
for the purposes set forth herein within seven (7) years from the date of receipt, it shall be refunded to the developer who made such contribution. (Ord.
0-81-31, 11-2-1981)
6-3-8: CONTRIBUTION FOR FIRE DISTRICT PURPOSES:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision or of a final plat of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer is hereby required to
make a cash contribution for fire district purposes, to be available for the public convenience, health, welfare and services required by the residents of the
development in accordance with the following criteria and formula:
A. Disposition Of Contributed Funds: The cash contribution in lieu of land, including interest earned thereon, shall be held in trust by the mayor and city
council, for use in acquisition of land for fire and emergency services and other public purposes which will be available to serve the immediate or future
needs of the residents of that subdivision or development or for the improvement of other existing fire and emergency services. Monies deposited with
the city for the use and benefit of the fire district within the provisions of this section shall be paid to that governmental body upon request, at the time a
designation for the use of the funds is approved by the city council. If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of land is not expended for the purpose
set forth herein within ten (10) years from the date of receipt, the mayor and city council shall determine if the original needs still exist. If the needs are
determined not to exist, the cash contribution shall be refunded to the current titleholders of the land originally owned by the developer who made such
contribution. The city of Prospect Heights finance department, in May and November of each year, shall inform the fire district, by mail, what amount is
due to it. Upon receiving verification from the district, the city shall proceed with payment of the funds upon approval by the city council as soon as
practicable.
B. Fire And Emergency Services Contribution Fee: As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, each subdivider or developer will be required to
pay a cash contribution in accordance with the following formula:
1. Amount Of Fire And Emergency Services Contribution Fee: The amount of the fire and emergency services contribution fee is an amount equal to
one and one-half (11/2) years of the projected equalized assessed valuation for the subject property as improved, multiplied by the prior year's tax
rate for the fire district. In the event the subject property is included or contemplated to be included within the boundaries of a tax increment financing
district, the amount of the fire and emergency services contribution fee is an amount equal to the projected equalized assessed valuation for the
subject property as improved, multiplied by the prior year's tax rate for the district, multiplied by the number of years remaining for the existence of
the TIF district reduced to the present cash value of the aggregate amount.
2. Held In Trust: The district's cash contribution shall be held in trust by the city for the Prospect Heights fire protection district and disposed of in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this section. (Ord. 0-01-13, 6-4-2001, eff. 6-14-2001)
Chapter 4
DESIGN STANDARDS
6-4-1: GENERAL:
The subdivision of land, including the arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all highways, streets, alleys, crosswalks, easements,
sites for parks, playgrounds and schools, or other land to be dedicated for public use, shall be approved by the Plan Commission and adopted by the City
Council and other responsible governmental bodies of the City. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-4-2: STREETS:
A. All streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety and in their
relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
B. The arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either:
1. Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding area; or
2. Conform to a plan for the area or neighborhood approved or adopted by the Plan Commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or
other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable.
C. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
D. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed highway or major thoroughfare, the Plan Commission may require double frontage with
screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation at least ten feet (10') wide, along the rear property line; deep lots with rear service alleys, or such
other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 294/470
E. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad or highway, the Plan Commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side
of such railroad or highway, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for
commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach
grades and future grade separations.
F. Reserve strips controlling access to public utilities, streets or alleys shall be prohibited.
G. All street intersections and confluences should encourage safe traffic flow.
H. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall be avoided.
I. Tangents shall be introduced between reverse curves on all major and collector streets (see Table of Minimum Standards).
J. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any point by more than ten degrees (10), they shall be connected by a curve with a radius
adequate to ensure clear sight distances (see Table of Minimum Standards).
K. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at less than sixty degrees
(60).
L. Street right-of-way widths shall be as specified in the Table of Minimum Standards.
M. Half-streets shall be prohibited with the following exception. Wherever an existing half-street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the
street shall be platted within such tract.
N. Dead-end streets (cul-de-sac), designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than five hundred feet (500') from the intersection of the origin
through the center of the circle to the end of the right of way, and shall be provided at the closed end with a paved turnaround having an outside
pavement diameter of at least eighty eight feet (88') and a street property line diameter of at least one hundred twenty feet (120').
O. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with names of existing streets. Existing street names shall be projected wherever
possible. Street names must be submitted to applicable police and fire officials and postmaster.
P. Street gradients and vertical curves shall be as specified in the Table of Minimum Standards.
Q. Street grades shall provide proper relation between the street and the first floor elevation of the houses or buildings and permit convenient and
economical access to and drainage of the lots. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-4-3: ALLEYS:
A. In commercial, business and industrial districts, definite and assured provisions shall be made for service access such as off-street loading, unloading
and parking consistent and adequate for the uses proposed. If, in the opinion of the Plan Commission, such facilities are not adequate, the Plan
Commission may permit or require the dedication and improvement of a public alley.
B. Alleys in residential areas shall not be permitted, except where deemed necessary and on the recommendation of the Plan Commission.
C. The width of an alley where permitted or required, shall be twenty four feet (24') of which only twenty feet (20') need be paved.
D. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alley alignment shall be avoided.
E. Dead-end alleys shall be prohibited. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-4-4: EASEMENTS:
A. Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least ten feet (10') wide.
B. Easements shall be designed to provide continuity from block to block.
C. Where subdivisions and/or parcels abut a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, storm water easements or drainage rights of way conforming
substantially with the line of such watercourse shall be provided. The easement width shall be determined by the Plan Commission. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-
1977)
6-4-5: BLOCKS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 295/470
A. Blocks shall not be less than four hundred feet (400') nor more than twelve hundred feet (1,200') in length, except as the Plan Commission considers
necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of the street pattern.
B. In blocks one thousand feet (1,000') or more in length, the Plan Commission may require a public pedestrian crosswalk of not less than ten feet (10') in
width to extend entirely across the block at the location deemed necessary. Alignment of such crosswalks shall be continuous throughout the
subdivision to provide for pedestrian circulation.
C. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots, except where fronting on major streets or prevented by topographical conditions or size of the
property, in which case the Plan Commission may approve a single tier of lots. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-4-6: LOTS:
A. The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated.
B. Lot dimensions and areas shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance applicable to the City.
C. Lots abutting a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream shall have a minimum width or depth as required to provide an adequate building site and
to afford the minimum usable area required in this Title or the applicable Zoning Ordinance for front, side and rear yards.
D. All corner lots shall have a minimum building setback line on both streets.
E. All lots shall abut on a publicly dedicated street.
F. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from highways or
primary thoroughfares or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten feet (10')
across which there shall be no right of vehicular access shall be provided along the rear lot lines of lots abutting such highways and major
thoroughfares.
G. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-4-7: BUILDING SETBACK LINES:
Building setback lines in residential areas of new subdivisions shall conform to the front yard provisions of the applicable Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 0-77-02,
2-7-1977)
6-4-8: PARKS, SCHOOLS AND PUBLIC AREAS1:
Whenever the reasonable requirement of a Comprehensive Plan, duly adopted by the City, indicates the necessity for providing for a school site, park site
or other public lands within any proposed subdivision for which approval has been requested, and no such provision has been made therefor, the City
authorities may require that land be designated or uses provided for such public purposes before approval of such plat. Whenever a final plat of
subdivision, or part thereof has been approved by the City as complying with such Comprehensive Plan and there is designated therein a school site, park
site or other public land, the governing authorities having jurisdiction of such use, be it a school board, park board or other authority, shall acquire the land
so designated by purchase or commence proceedings to acquire such land by condemnation within one year from the date of approval of such plat; and if
it does not do so within such period of one year, the land so designated may then be used by the owners thereof in any other manner consistent with this
Title, including an official map and applicable Zoning Ordinance of the City.
In subdividing any land within the City or within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits, due regard shall be shown for all natural features such
as tree growth, watercourses, historic sites, or similar conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the proposed development. (Ord.
0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
Chapter 5
REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
6-5-1: GENERAL:
No subdivision of land shall be approved by the Plan Commission without the subdivider submitting a statement signed by the City Engineer certifying that
the improvements described in the subdivider's plans and specifications, together with agreements, meet the minimum requirements of all ordinances of
the City and that they comply with the Addendum which by reference is made a part of this Title. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-5-2: UTILITIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 296/470
A. Sanitary Sewer System:
1. Sanitary Sewers Adjacent: A complete system of sanitary sewers shall be constructed throughout the subdivision in such a manner to serve every
lot. Sanitary sewers shall be designed and constructed to meet the standards of the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago or the
appropriate sanitary district, whichever is more restrictive. See Addendum for additional specifications.
2. Sanitary Sewers Unavailable: Where no sanitary sewer outlet is available to the proposed subdivision, an application for private sewer systems shall
be made to the City Council. If approved, a private sewer system employing septic tanks and tile seepage fields may be used, provided the following
conditions are met:
a. Minimum lot area for septic systems shall be forty thousand (40,000) square feet. Not more than one dwelling shall be connected to a septic
system.
b. A seepage test shall be performed for each lot and shall show the area to be suitable for septic tanks and seepage fields. The tests shall be done
in accordance with the Cook County Department of Health standards.
A written report, prepared by a registered professional engineer shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.
c. All septic tanks shall be constructed and operated in accordance with the above-referenced standards.
d. All dwelling units shall be provided with a service line for future connection to sanitary sewers when available.
e. When sanitary sewers become available, all private disposal systems shall be abandoned in accordance with the above referenced standards and
connection made to the sanitary sewer system.
B. Storm Drainage:
1. A comprehensive drainage plan shall be submitted to the City Engineer. Storm sewer systems shall be designed in accordance with the "Rational
Method" and a copy of the design computations shall be furnished with the preliminary improvement plans.
Retention facilities shall be designed in accordance with the regulations of the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-
1977)
However, the release rate will be dependent on the safe carrying capacity of any limiting downstream restriction, will not cause the elevation of any
receiving surface water to be increased by more than one-tenth foot (0.1') during the 100-year flood and will not exceed the lesser of:
a. The runoff rate of the site or the property prior to improvement, construction or development, determined by a 3-year storm; or
b. Fifteen one-hundredths cubic foot per second (0.15 cfs) per acre.
Storm frequency design storage will be one hundred (100) years. Flood plain high water elevation and limits will be determined from flood plain
maps and profiles listed in Section 7-1-4 of this Code. (Ord. 86-02, 1-6-1986)
2. See Addendum for specifications.
C. Water Supply Systems:
1. Central Water Systems:
a. Where public water systems or community water systems are available, the subdivision shall be adequately served by the water supply and
distribution system. The design of the system shall be in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois, current edition.
b. See Addendum for specifications.
2. Private Water Systems: Individual private water systems (wells) may be used to serve the water needs. Where a private water system is used, it
shall be for a single user only. No party wells shall be allowed.
D. Conditions Relating To Installation Of Utilities: In all cases where private central sanitary sewer systems and private central water systems are to be
used, the subdivider shall secure the necessary permits for installation and operation of the systems. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
E. Conveyance Of Water, Sewer And Drainage Lines: The owner or subdivider of a subdivision or planned unit development will execute a bill of sale in a
form acceptable to the City conveying to the City title to all water, sewer and drainage lines in said subdivision or planned unit development, except for
those water, sewer and drainage lines owned, operated or to become owned or operated by another unit of local government. (Ord. 0-78-19, 6-2-1978)
6-5-3: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Street Design: Street design shall be in accordance with the Table of Minimum Standards. Also, see Addendum1 for specifications.
B. Curb Return: All curb returns at street intersections shall have a radius of not less than twenty five feet (25'). In industrial and commercial areas, the
radius of curb returns shall be not less than thirty feet (30').
C. Sign Conformance: Street signs shall be erected so as to identify every street within the subdivision and shall be so designed and constructed as to
conform with existing street sign standards. They shall be installed at a height not less than seven feet (7') and shall be placed not less than two feet
(2') nor more than ten feet (10') from the edge of the pavement. When a curved street blends into another street, street signs shall be erected to identify
each street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 297/470
D. Road Regulatory Signs: The applicant shall deposit with the City at the time of final subdivision approval, the sum of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for
each road sign required by the City Engineer at all road intersections. The City shall install all road signs before issuance of certificates of occupancy
for any residence on all streets approved.
Street name signs are to be placed at all intersections within or abutting the subdivision, the type and location of which to be approved by the City
Engineer. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-5-4: MONUMENTS AND MARKERS:
Monuments shall be placed at all corners and angle points of the outside boundary but no further than one-quarter (1/4) mile apart. The monuments shall
be of concrete, not less than six inches (6") in diameter and thirty six inches (36") deep, with a center copper dowel three inches (3") long cast in place.
Iron pipe or steel bars not less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter and twenty four inches (24") long shall be set at the intersection of street center lines
and at all corners of lots not marked by monuments. The monuments and markers shall be set level with the finished grade. The subdivider shall replace
all or verify the existence of the iron pipes at all lot corners and all bends in property lines after the completion of all construction and before final
acceptance of the subdivision by the City Council. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-5-5: PUBLIC UTILITIES SYSTEM:
A. Utilities Underground: Whenever possible, all utility distribution lines for telephone, electric and gas service in the subdivision shall be placed
underground. Any aboveground facilities shall require prior approval of the Plan Commission. Installation of such facilities shall be made in compliance
with the applicable orders, rules and regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission now or hereafter effective and the owner shall be responsible for
compliance with rules and regulations, now or hereafter effective and filed with said Plan Commission pursuant to the Illinois Public Utilities Act2, of any
public utility whose services shall be required for the subdivision with respect to the provision of such underground facilities.
B. Underground Utilities In Easements: Underground telephone, electric and gas service shall be placed within easements or dedicated public ways in a
manner which shall not conflict with other underground services. Further, all transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous
to the public.
C. Permits: Permits shall be obtained from the City and other governing bodies having jurisdiction for the installation of communication, electric power, gas
and other utility services in public or private rights of way or easements, as shown on the final plat. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-5-6: SIDEWALKS:
Concrete sidewalks shall be provided throughout the subdivision to serve the anticipated needs of its residents. Such walks shall be located in accordance
with proper land planning procedures and with due regard for public safety and anticipated concentration of pedestrian traffic.
Sidewalks serving single-family residential lots and located along minor streets and cul-de-sac streets, shall not be less than four feet (4') wide.
Sidewalks located along major or collector streets shall not be less than five feet (5') wide. See Addendum3 for specifications. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-5-7: LANDSCAPING:
A. Unimproved Areas: All unpaved or otherwise unimproved areas within the public right of way or public use areas shall be graded and seeded in an
approved manner.
B. Street Trees Required: Street trees shall be provided along all streets where trees do not exist. Trees shall be of a species suitable for local soil and
climate conditions and adapted to street use at least two inch (2") caliper. At street comers, the trees shall be located a minimum of twenty five feet
(25') from the intersection of the street right-of-way lines. They shall be located so as not to interfere with utilities, street lights or sidewalks and placed
fifty feet (50') apart. Trees shall be placed in the parkway at locations approved by the City Engineer. If by virtue of interference with sewers, water
lines, underground utilities or sidewalks, trees cannot be placed in the parkway, the trees shall be planted on the lots.
C. Approval Of Informal Plans: In informal type street patterns, informal planting of street trees in accordance with approved landscape development plans
may be permitted.
D. Requirement For Residential Lots: All residential lots shall have an appropriate cover of undisturbed existing vegetation, seeding, fresh cut sod, plugs or
spot sod.
E. Median Strips: Median strips may be planted with trees and shrubs in accordance with a landscaping plan approved by the Plan Commission.
F. Barriers Between Uses: Protective screen planting may be required to secure a reasonably effective physical barrier between residential properties and
adjoining uses to minimize adverse conditions of sight and sound. The screen planting shall be prepared by a landscape architect and shall meet the
approval of the City Council based upon the recommendation of the Plan Commission.
G. Topsoil: No land shall be approved for subdivision which has had the topsoil stripped or covered with fill unless such topsoil is adequately replaced to a
minimum depth of eight inches (8") in areas not proposed for construction of buildings or pavement, and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 298/470
approved by the City Engineer.
H. Soil Erosion Control: The subdivider shall provide positive erosion control in accordance with the recommendations of the North Cook County Soil and
Water Conservation District. A copy of this report shall be furnished to the City Engineer along with the preliminary improvement plans.
I. Prohibited Trees: See Addendum for specifications4. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-5-8: SOIL INVESTIGATION:
A. If the subdivision contains questionable soil and, in the opinion of the City Engineer, soil investigations, borings and other soil tests are necessary to
determine the nature and extent of such questionable material, the owner or developer shall retain or cause to be retained the services of a competent
testing laboratory to perform the needed investigations.
B. Copies of the completed reports prepared by the testing laboratory shall be filed with the City Engineer.
C. The City Engineer shall have no liability for costs connected with the tests, borings or interpretations of results of such work. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-5-9: STREET LIGHTING:
See Addendum for specifications5. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-5-10: EXCEPTIONS TO REQUIREMENTS:
Notwithstanding the foregoing, for subdivisions consisting of single-family residential lots containing at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, curb
and gutter, sidewalks, storm sewers (except where required due to topography) and the paving of pedestrian crosswalks shall not be required. (Ord. 0-86-
26, 9-2-1986)
Chapter 6
CONSTRUCTION, INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE
6-6-1: CONSTRUCTION:
A. After approval of the final construction plans, as defined in subsection 6-3-3A of this Title, and prior to initiating any construction, the subdivider shall
furnish the City Engineer with a list of construction improvement contractors and an estimated time schedule for construction. Accompanying this
information shall be the name and phone number of the authorized representative of the subdivider, responsible for improvement construction.
B. The construction of improvements shall be installed in the following sequence:
1. Underground utilities work;
2. Roadway construction excluding final surface course;
3. Sidewalks, streetlights, signs;
4. Final grading, topsoil and landscaping;
5. Final roadway surface course.
C. The subdivision improvements shall be completed within three (3) years of final plat approval by the City Council. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-6-2: CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION:
During the course of construction and at such times as the City Engineer deems necessary, inspection of the work shall be performed to ensure
compliance with the approved plans and specifications. The subdivider shall pay all actual costs for this inspection. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-6-3: CITY ACCEPTANCE:
After completion of all improvements, the subdivider shall furnish the City Engineer with one reproduction set of the improvement drawings corrected to
show all actual "record" improvements. Final inspection of the improvements shall be made and a written list of items requiring correction shall be
furnished to the owner. Those items requiring correction that are weather dependent, such as, but not limited to, grading, topsoil, landscaping and
bituminous concrete will not be accepted during the period November 15 through April 13, unless waived by the City Council.
After these items are corrected, the City Engineer shall submit his written approval of the improvements to the City Council. The improvements shall then
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 299/470
be accepted by resolution of the City Council. Such acceptance shall include release of the performance bond held, provided the subdivider furnishes
waivers of lien in the amount of the improvements. (Ord. 0-90-04, 2-20-1990)
6-6-4: GUARANTEE BOND:
As a condition of acceptance of all improvements, the subdivider shall furnish the City a guarantee bond in the amount of twenty percent (20%) of the cost
of the improvements to guarantee the continued acceptability of the improvements. The bond shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney and shall
remain in effect for a minimum of two (2) years duration or one year following completion of eighty percent (80%) of the foundation work for lot
improvements, whichever period is longer. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-6-5: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
The Plan Commission may recommend variations from these requirements in specific cases which, in its opinion, are in harmony with the intent and
purpose of a Comprehensive Plan and Official Map if any are applicable to the City and in harmony with the intent of these subdivision regulations. Such
recommendations shall be communicated to the corporate authorities and, where the land affected lies outside the corporate limits, to the proper officials
of Cook County. The City Council may approve variations from these requirements for subdivisions within the City limits or for those where the land
affected lies within the area of planning jurisdiction as established by State statutes, when, in its opinion, such variations will not be contrary to the purpose
or intent of a Comprehensive Plan and Official Map, if applicable, or the spirit of these subdivision regulations. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
6-7-1: ENFORCEMENT:
No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the Recorder's Office of Cook County or have any validity until it shall have been approved in
the manner prescribed in these subdivision regulations. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-7-2: BUILDING PERMITS:
No building permit shall be issued by any governing official for the construction of any building, structure or improvement to land or any lot within a
subdivision, as defined herein, which has been approved for platting until all requirements of these subdivision regulations have been fully complied with.
(Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-7-3: OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
No occupancy permit shall be granted by any governing official for the use of any structure within a subdivision approved for platting or replatting until
required utility facilities have been installed and made ready to service the property and until the roadway access to the subject lot or lots has had at least
the binder course installed and is suitable for vehicular traffic. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-7-4: FEES:
There is hereby established a fee for the approval of preliminary and final plats and subdivision improvements as follows:
A. Plan Review; Engineering Department: The plan review by the Engineering Department shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per acre with a five
hundred dollar ($500.00) minimum fee.
B. Preliminary And Final Plat: The review and filing fees for a preliminary or final plat shall be: 1) reimbursement of all costs as set by the Cook County
Recorder; and 2) an administration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per filing.
C. Subdivision Improvements: The review fees for subdivision improvements shall be according to the following schedule:
Estimated Cost
Of Construction
City Engineer
Review Fees
City
Review Fees
$0.00 to $ 25,000.00 2.5 percent 1.0 percent
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00 2.25 percent 1.0 percent
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 2.0 percent 1.0 percent
$100,001.00 to $250,000.00 1.75 percent 1.0 percent
$250,001.00 to $500,000.00 1.50 percent 1.0 percent
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 300/470
$500,001.00 and over 1.25 percent 1.0 percent
In addition to the foregoing engineering review fees, each subdivider shall reimburse the City for all fees incurred by the City for the City Planner,
consultant services, and City Attorney relating to the review, approval, and recording of each subdivision.
D. Plan Commission Fees: Each petitioning entity before the Plan Commission must pay a one hundred dollar ($100.00) charge for the first appearance.
Such payment must occur prior to a petitioner's inclusion on a Plan Commission agenda.
E. Subdivision Fees:
Less than 1 acre $ 100.00
1 to 5 acres 25.00
5 to 10 acres 500.00
10 to 20 acres 1,500.00
Over 20 acres 2,500.00
(Ord. 0-96-53, 7-15-1996, eff. 7-25-1996)
6-7-5: BLASTING:
No blasting shall take place in connection with any work in a subdivision until appropriate City authorities have been notified and the applicable City
ordinances are complied with. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-7-6: RECORD OF PLATS:
Copies of all plats of subdivisions, after the same have been submitted, approved and recorded as provided by statute and in these subdivision
regulations, shall be filed and kept by the City Clerk among the records of the City. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-7-7: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Anyone violating any of the provisions of these subdivision regulations shall forfeit, upon conviction, to the City not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation, plus the costs of the action, and each day that such violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
Chapter 8
OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
6-8-1: OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED:
The mayor and city council of the city of Prospect Heights, county of Cook, Illinois, hereby adopt the comprehensive plan, dated April 15, 1996, as the
comprehensive plan for the city attached to ordinance 0-96-09 on file in the clerk's office. (Ord. 0-96-09, 4-15-1996)
Chapter 9
ADDENDUM; ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS
6-9-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
The owner or subdivider shall install storm and sanitary sewers, water supply system, street grading and pavement, alleys, crosswalks, public utilities,
street lighting in accordance with applicable ordinances and standards of construction of the City.
No subdivision of land shall be approved without receiving a statement signed by the City Engineer, certifying that the improvements described in the
subdivider's plans and specifications together with agreements, meet the minimum requirements of all ordinances of the City and that they comply with the
following provisions. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-9-2: SEWERS:
A. Sanitary Sewers: Sanitary sewers and sanitary sewer services shall be installed to serve all properties in the subdivision. Public sanitary sewers shall
have a minimum internal diameter of eight inches (8"). Sanitary sewer services shall have a minimum internal diameter of four inches (4"). Sanitary
sewers with internal diameter between eight inches (8") and twenty one inches (21"), and sanitary sewer services, shall be constructed of extra
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 301/470
strength vitrified clay pipe in conformance with the specifications of the American Society for Testing Materials, Designation C-200. Sanitary sewers
with internal diameter twenty four inches (24") and over shall be constructed of either reinforced concrete pipe conforming to the American Society for
Testing Materials, Designation C-76, wall thickness B, or asbestos cement pipe conforming to the American Society for Testing Materials, Designation
C-296. Joints for vitrified clay pipe sanitary sewers and sanitary sewer services shall be the compression type in conformance with the specifications of
the American Society for Testing Materials, Designation C-425-60T. Joints for reinforced concrete sewers shall be rubber gaskets conforming to
American Society for Testing Materials, Designation C-443. Joints for asbestos cement pipe shall consist of an asbestos cement sleeve, made from
material similar to the pipe, and two (2) rubber ring gaskets, all designed and suitable for connecting the lengths of pipe together. Rubber gaskets shall
be of uniform thickness throughout, smooth, free from pitting, blisters, air checks and other imperfections.
B. Storm Sewers: Storm sewers shall be constructed throughout the entire subdivision to carry off water from all inlets and catch basins and shall be
connected to an adequate outfall. Intercepting storm water structures shall be provided at intervals not in excess of four hundred feet (400') as
measured along the gutter line. The storm water drainage system shall be separate and independent of the sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers shall
be constructed of nonreinforced or reinforced concrete pipe conforming to the American Society for Testing Materials, Designations C-14 and C-76,
respectively, wall thickness B. Other materials of storm sewer construction may be used in special cases upon the approval of the City Council. Existing
drain tiles shall be connected to storm sewers or shall be restored to operating condition. Joints for concrete storm sewer shall be designated above for
concrete sanitary sewers, or they shall be cement mortar and jute.
Storm sewer capacities shall be determined with the use of the rational formula. The intensity (I factor) used shall be a return frequency of not less than
five (5) years for lateral mains, and ten (10) years for trunk mains The runoff coefficient (C factor) shall be determined by the character of the land to be
drained and shall conform to accepted standard engineering practices. Street grades and lot and block drainage shall be established so as to permit
positive drainage. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-9-3: MANHOLES AND DRAINAGE APPURTENANCES:
A. Manholes: Manholes for sewers thirty six inches (36") and smaller shall have an inside diameter of forty eight inches (48"), and a six inch (6") thick
precast concrete base, in one piece, bedded in at least two inches (2") of gravel or crushed stone. The sidewalls shall be of precast concrete ring
construction which shall have a five inch (5") minimum thickness. Manhole bases for sewers with an internal diameter forty two inches (42") and larger
shall have an inside diameter of sixty inches (60") and be constructed of reinforced concrete.
B. Catch Basins And Inlets: Catch basin sidewall and base construction shall conform to manhole requirements for sewers thirty six inches (36") and
smaller, except that a sump two feet six inches (2'6") in depth shall be provided below the discharge pipe. Inlets shall have an internal diameter of two
feet (2') and a minimum depth of two feet (2'). Sidewalls shall be precast concrete having a thickness of four inches (4"), bedded in a minimum two
inches (2") of gravel or crushed stone.
C. Frames And Grates: Frames and grates for manholes, catch basins, inlets and valve vaults shall be similar to Neenah manufacture no. R-1015, with a
combined weight of five hundred forty (540) pounds for type B closed lid, and a combined weight of five hundred twenty five (525) pounds for type D
open lid. Open curb casting may be used based on approval of the city council. The frames shall be set in a full mortar joint on each structure. (Ord. 0-
77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-9-4: WATER SUPPLY:
Water distribution facilities, including piping, fittings, hydrants, valves, valve basins, water services and all other needful appurtenances adequate for fire
and domestic needs, shall be installed to serve all properties within the subdivision.
A. Water Mains: Water mains shall be of a minimum eight inches (8") internal diameter. The material of the pipe shall be approved by the city engineer and
shall conform to all applicable ANSI, ASTM, ISPE, and AWWA standards. The minimum depth of water main from the top of pipe to finished grade shall
be five and one-half feet (51/2').
B. Valves And Vaults: Valves shall be nonrising stem gate valves with operating nut, designed to take full pressure on either face, furnished in full
compliance with AWWA C509 or AWWA C515. All valves shall open by turning counterclockwise. Valves shall operate at a working pressure of one
hundred fifty (150) pounds per square inch and a test pressure of three hundred (300) pounds per square inch. Valves eight inches (8") and smaller
shall be housed in valve vaults with an internal diameter of forty eight inches (48"); valves over eight inches (8") shall be housed in vaults with an
internal diameter of sixty inches (60"). Valve vault, sidewall and base construction shall conform to ASTM C478 with gasketed joints. All buried valves
must be mechanical joint ends and ANSI class 125 flange ends or mechanical joint ends for valves installed in vaults. Restrained type joints must be
provided for all mechanical joint end valves. Valve boxes must be provided on all buried valves with valve box stabilizers. Valves shall be American flow
control (waterous) series 2500 resilient wedge or other comparable valve as approved by the city engineer.
C. Hydrants:
1. Hydrants shall be of the compression or gate type conforming to AWWA C502 and shall be waterous pacer model WB67-250 unless otherwise
approved by the city engineer. Hydrants shall be designed for a three hundred (300) pound test pressure and a one hundred fifty (150) pound
working pressure.
2. Hydrants shall be furnished with a five and one-fourth inch (51/4") main valve assembly, with two and one-half inch (21/2") hose nozzles and one
41/2-inch pumper nozzle. Threads on nozzles and caps, and operating nuts, shall be national standard. Hydrants shall open by turning to the left and
shall be so marked.
3. Hydrants shall have a six inch (6") pipe connection and shall be equipped with six inch (6") auxiliary resilient seat type gate valves with restrained
type joints. Valves shall be in valve boxes with stabilizers on all auxiliary valves with cover marked "water". Auxiliary valve shall be attached to
hydrant with one hundred twenty five (125) pound standard flanges.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 302/470
D. Water Services: All water services shall be constructed of type K copper pipe, having a minimum internal diameter of one inch (1"). Such services shall
be equipped with corporation cock, curb stops and other necessary fittings in accordance with current city standards. (Ord. 0-07-36, 12-3-2007, eff. 12-
14-2007)
6-9-5: TRENCH BACKFILL:
All trenches caused by the construction of sewers, water mains, water service pipes, and in excavation around catch basins, manholes, inlets and other
appurtenances which occur within the limits of existing or proposed pavements, sidewalks and curb and gutters shall be backfilled with trench backfill.
Trenches and excavations near or adjacent to proposed or existing pavements, sidewalks and curb and gutters shall be backfilled with trench backfill to an
elevation equal to the intersection of a one to one slope line from the top of the pavement, sidewalks or curb edge, with a vertical line through the nearest
edge of the trench or excavation.
Trench backfill shall consist of sand, pit run gravel or crushed stone and shall be compacted in place to ninety five percent (95%) of maximum density at
optimum moisture as determined by the Standard Proctor Test. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-9-6: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
A. The full width of the right of way shall be graded to the required section.
B. All unsuitable subbase material shall be removed and shall be replaced with stable, compacted material in conformance with generally accepted
engineering practices.
C. The center line grade shall be not less than five-tenths percent (0.5%), and shall not exceed six percent (6%) on major and collector streets and eight
percent (8%) on minor streets and cul-de-sac streets.
D. Vertical curves shall be used whenever a change in center line gradient occurs, except where the algebraic difference in gradients is one percent (1%)
or less. The length of vertical curve on minor streets shall be forty feet (40') for each one percent (1%) of algebraic difference of grade, but in no case
shall such length be less than forty feet (40'). The length of vertical curve on collector streets shall be fifty feet (50') for each one percent (1%) of
algebraic difference of grade, but in no case shall such length be less than fifty feet (50').
E. All pavement thicknesses, including surface, base courses and subbase courses, shall be designed in accordance with either the "Manual of
Instructions for the Structural Design of Bituminous Pavements" or the "Manual for the Structural Design of Portland Cement Concrete Pavements", as
applicable, and all subsequent revisions thereto, as published by the State of Illinois Department of Transportation. The minimum thickness for
residential streets shall be as specified therein. Design data shall be submitted to the City Engineer together with copies of soils test reports, at the time
of plan submittal.
F. Minimum pavement cross section for major streets shall be:
1. A three inch (3") Class I Bituminous Concrete Surface on an eight inch (8") Bituminous Aggregate Mixture (BAM) base; or
2. An eight inch (8") standard reinforced concrete pavement.
G. Minimum pavement cross section for collector streets shall be:
1. A three inch (3") Class I Bituminous Concrete Surface on a six inch (6") BAM; or
2. An eight inch (8") standard reinforced concrete pavement; or
3. A seven inch (7") standard reinforced concrete pavement on a four inch (4") crushed stone or gravel base.
H. Minimum pavement cross section for minor streets, including cul-de-sac streets, shall be:
1. A two and one-half inch (21/2") Class I Bituminous Concrete Surface on a ten inch (10") crushed stone or gravel base; or
2. A two and one-half inch (21/2") Class I Bituminous Concrete Surface on a five inch (5") BAM base; or
3. A seven inch (7") nonreinforced concrete pavement; or
4. A six inch (6") standard reinforced concrete pavement.
I. Pavements in or bordering commercial or industrial areas shall meet the minimum requirements of a collector street.
J. Alleys in or bordering commercial or industrial areas shall meet the requirements of a collector street. Alleys in residential areas shall meet the
requirements of a minor street.
K. Curbs and gutters shall be constructed on all streets and shall be combination (integral) concrete of barrier type for major and collector mountable for
residential not less than eighteen inches (18") in overall width. Curbs may be constructed integrally with the Portland cement concrete pavement.
Concrete for curb and gutter shall conform to that hereinafter required for concrete sidewalk. Half streets of a permanent nature shall be constructed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 303/470
with a concrete retainer curb at the center line, except for concrete base construction. Three (3) five-eighths inch (5/8") reinforcing bars ten feet (10')
long shall be installed in all curb and gutter, centered over each sewer and water trench crossed by the curb and gutter. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-9-7: SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete to a thickness of five inches (5"). Concrete for such sidewalks shall have a minimum twenty
eight (28) day compressive strength of four thousand (4,000) pounds, and shall contain not less than three percent (3%) nor more than six percent (6%)
entrained air. Slump shall be not less than two inches (2") nor more than four inches (4"). (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-9-8: PEDESTRIAN CROSSWALKS:
Pedestrian crosswalks shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete conforming to the requirements set forth under Section 6-9-7 of this Chapter.
(Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-9-9: STREET LIGHTING IMPROVEMENTS:
Street lighting improvements may be installed to serve all properties within the City in accordance with the regulations of this Section. The City Council
shall review all requests for streetlights within the City and approve or reject said request. In the course of its review the City Council shall take into
consideration: safety factors, maintenance cost, electricity cost, liability, and general benefit to the City. Upon the advice and recommendation of the City
Engineer that exceptions to these regulations are in the best interest of the City, the City Council may approve said exceptions. Such improvements shall
be of the individual service or of the multiple circuit type and shall consist of standards, luminaires, cable conduit under driveways and/or streets,
controllers, handholes, and all other miscellaneous work and equipment necessary for an integrated system of streetlights. (Ord. 0-86-26, 9-2-1986)
A. Location: There shall be at least one standard luminaire at each intersection and interior of each cul-de-sac, and spacing of standards shall not exceed
three hundred feet (300') in residential areas. In commercial and/or manufacturing areas, spacing and location of standards shall be as approved by
the City Council.
B. Specifications: Lighting standards shall be either steel or spun aluminum, complete with concrete base, complete with bracket and handhole. Heights of
standard and length of bracket shall be as follows:
1. Residential areas - standard twenty three feet (23'); bracket arm - eight feet (8').
2. Commercial, industrial and manufacturing areas - standard thirty feet (30') with the length of the bracket arm as approved by the City Council.
C. Luminaires shall be of the mercury vapor type with constant wattage type ballasts. Size and life shall be as follows:
1. Residential area - 175-watt with average life of three thousand (3,000) hours.
2. Commercial, industrial and manufacturing areas - 250-watt or 400-watt with average life of three thousand (3,000) hours as approved by the City
Council. (Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-9-10: PROHIBITED TREES:
The following is a list of trees prohibited under subsection 6-5-7I of this Title.
Common Name Scientific Name Prohibited
Soft Maple Acer dasycarpum In variety
Poplar Populus All varieties
Willow Salix All varieties
Box Elder Acer negundo All varieties
Catalpa Catalpa All varieties
Tree of Heaven Ailantbus All varieties
Mountain Ash Sorbus All varieties
Mulberry Morus alba In variety
(Ord. 0-77-02, 2-7-1977)
6-9-11: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN:
That certain document a copy of which is on file in the office of the City Engineer, being marked and designated as the Administrative Policies, Illinois
Department of Transportation, Bureau of Local Roads and Streets, chapter 6, "Project Development" be and the same is hereby adopted as the minimum
design standards of the City for the construction of streets and roads within the City. (Ord. 0-90-18, 5-21-1990)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 304/470
Title 7
FLOOD CONTROL
Chapter 1
FLOOD CONTROL REGULATIONS
7-1-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this City by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12M, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2.
The purpose of this Chapter is to maintain this City's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program; to minimize potential losses due to periodic
flooding including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare; and
to preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise utilization of water and related land
resources. This Chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
A. To meet the requirements of 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18g, An Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams of the State of
Illinois approved June 10, 1911, as amended.
B. To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
C. To protect new buildings and major improvements to existing buildings from flood damage;
D. To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
E. To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief
operations; and
F. To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the City by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.
G. To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended.
H. To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and water resources;
I. To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of watercourses and flood plains and to protect water quality and aquatic habitats;
J. To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil
erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development. (Ord. 0-90-37, 8-20-1990)
7-1-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this Title shall be deemed as additional requirements to minimum standards required by other ordinances of the City. In case of
conflicting requirements, the most restrictive shall apply. (Ord. 0-90-37, 8-20-1990)
7-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
ACT: "An Act" in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the State, 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an application.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the regulatory floodway that are permissible and will be considered for permit issuance, The only uses that will be
allowed are as specified in Section 7-1-8-2 of this Chapter.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-
year frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location is as defined in Section 7-1-6 of this Chapter.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured
home, mobile home or a prefabricated building. The term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 305/470
hundred eighty (180) days.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine,
wash or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping or other armoring, widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody vegetation.
Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form of
channel modification typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g., straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural
flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the flood plain. The uncompensated loss of natural flood plain storage can increase
off-site floodwater elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A REGULATORY FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction approval by DWR and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency of a proposed change to the Floodway Map. This preconstruction approval, pursuant to this Chapter, gives assurances to the
property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to permitted plans, the Floodway Map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon
review and acceptance of as-built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that the Federal Emergency Management Agency will revise base flood
elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map,
once the as-built plans are submitted and approved.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream
water surface elevation.
DWR: Illinois department of natural resources, office of water resources.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing or
diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not included.
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, generally
depicted on the FEMA FIRM, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase
in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities.
A. The floodways are designated for on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008.
When two (2) floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more restrictive floodway limit shall prevail.
B. The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of Prospect Heights that may
be annexed into the city are designated for McDonald Creek and the Des Plaines River on the countywide flood insurance rate map prepared by
FEMA and dated August 19, 2008.
C. To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map and
located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the
designated floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
A. Construction, reconstruction, repair or placement of a building or any addition to a building.
B. Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days.
C. Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges or similar projects.
D. Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
E. Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
F. Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste.
G. Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal.
Development does not include maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads when there is no increase in
elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by the federal emergency management agency that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has
been elevated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 306/470
EROSION: The general process whereby the soils are moved by flowing water or wave action.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Organizations which are exempt from this chapter per the Illinois Compiled Statutes including state, federal or local units of
government.
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79 effective as of October 1, 1986. This incorporation does not include
any later editions or amendments.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or
exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM): A map prepared by the federal emergency management agency that depicts the special flood hazard area
(SFHA) within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood plus two and one-half feet (21/2') of freeboard at
any given location in the SFHA.
FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas, ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard
area (SFHA).
A. The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the city that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The
SFHAs of the city are generally identified as such on panel numbers 0201, 0202, 0206, 0207, 0208 of the countywide flood insurance rate map of the
city prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated August 19, 2008.
B. The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the
city are generally identified as such on panel numbers 0201, 0202, 0206, 0207, 0208 of the countywide flood insurance rate map prepared for Cook
County by the federal emergency management agency and dated August 19, 2008.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management agency that is used to certify that a building has been
designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown localized
conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analysis which determines expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land
characteristics and rainfall events.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a specific structure is not in a 100-year flood zone; amends the effective
flood hazard boundary map or FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): Letter that revises base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries
or floodways as shown on an effective FHBM or FIRM.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured homes also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which floodplain development activities might have on the public
health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
NGVD: National geodetic vertical datum of 1929. Reference surface set by the national geodetic survey deduced from a continental adjustment of all
existing adjustments in 1929.
NATURAL: When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by
man. A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed
or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross section of the stream
caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is
reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural conditions by man through regrading and revegetation.
OHWM (ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK): The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily
recognized characteristics.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to
existing buildings and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this
definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 307/470
public agencies.
PUBLICLY NAVIGABLE WATERS: All streams and lakes capable of being navigated by watercraft.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the state of Illinois, under the Illinois land surveyors act1.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the state of Illinois, under the Illinois professional engineering act2.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel, including on stream lakes and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated
by DWR, which is needed to store and convey the existing and anticipated future 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a one-tenth foot
(0.1') increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities.
The regulatory floodways are designated for the McDonald Creek and its tributaries on map number 17031C and panels 0201F, 0202F, 0206F, 0207F and
0208F dated November 6, 2000, of the countywide flood insurance rate map for Cook County prepared by FEMA and the regulatory floodplain map
prepared by DWR and dated October 1, 1978. The regulatory floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city that have been or may be annexed into the city are designated for the Des Plaines River and McDonald Creek and its tributaries on
map number 17031C and panels 0069F and 0226F, November 6, 2000, of the countywide flood insurance rate map for Cook County prepared by FEMA
and the regulatory floodplain map prepared by DWR and dated October 1, 1978. To locate the regulatory floodway boundary on any site, the regulatory
floodway boundary should be scaled off the regulatory floodway map and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where
interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the regulatory floodway boundary, the division should be contacted for the interpretation.
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities which do not result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any
changes to the dimensions of a structure.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A retention facility stores stormwater runoff without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of
stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm.
RIVERINE SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, on stream lake system or any other identified channel. This
term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank flooding.
RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
SFHA (SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA): Any base flood area subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, or any other identified
channel or ponding and shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map as zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V30, VE, V, M, or E.
SEDIMENTATION: The process that deposits soils, debris, and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
STRUCTURE: The results of a manmade change to the land constructed on or below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement
of a building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on
a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either: a) before the improvement or repair is started, or b) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
The term does not, however, include either: a) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or b) any alteration of a structure listed on the national register
of historic places or a state inventory of historic places.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow cross section to a wide cross section or vice versa. (Ord. 0-
90-37, 8-20-1990; amd. Ord. 0-00-27, 10-16-2000, eff. 10-26-2000; Ord. 0-08-27, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-19-2008)
7-1-4: HOW TO USE THIS CHAPTER:
The city engineer shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the duties listed in section 7-1-5 of this chapter. (A flow chart and forms are on file with the city
clerk and are available through the city staff.)
A. To fulfill those duties, the city engineer first should use the criteria listed in section 7-1-6 of this chapter to determine whether the development site is
located within a floodplain. Once it has been determined that a site is located within a floodplain, the city engineer must determine whether the
development site is within a flood fringe, a regulatory floodway, or within an SFHA or floodplain on which no floodway has been identified. If the site is
within a flood fringe, the city engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of section 7-1-7 of this chapter be met. If the site is within a
floodway, the city engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of section 7-1-8 of this chapter be met. If the site is located within an SFHA or
floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the city engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of section 7-1-
9 of this chapter be met.
In addition, the general requirements of section 7-1-10 of this chapter shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of section 7-1-7, 7-1-
8, or 7-1-9 of this chapter. The city engineer shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of section 7-1-11 of this chapter.
B. If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the city engineer shall review the requirements of section 7-1-12 of this chapter to make sure they are met.
In addition, the city engineer shall complete all notification requirements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 308/470
C. In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this chapter, the city engineer may take any and all actions as outlined in section 7-
1-15 of this chapter. (Ord. 0-90-37, 8-20-1990)
7-1-5: DUTIES OF THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
The city engineer shall be responsible for the general administration and enforcement of this chapter which shall include the following:
A. Determining The Floodplain Designation: Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a special flood hazard area (SFHA). If they
are in an SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted which drains
more than one square mile.
B. Professional Engineer Review: If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted which
drains more than one square mile then the permit shall be referred to a registered professional engineer (PE) under the employ or contract of the city
for review to ensure that the development meets the requirements of section 7-1-83 of this chapter. In the case of an appropriate use, the PE shall state
in writing that the development meets the requirements of section 7-1-8 of this chapter.
C. Dam Safety Requirements: Ensure that a DWR dam safety permit has been issued or a letter indicating no dam safety permit is required, if the
proposed development activity includes construction of a "dam" as defined in section 7-1-3 of this chapter. Regulated dams may include weirs,
restrictive culverts or impoundment structures.
D. Other Permit Requirements: Ensure that any and all required federal, state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit.
E. Plan Review And Permit Issuance: Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the city meet the requirements of this
chapter and issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this community when the
development meets the conditions of this chapter.
F. Inspection Review: Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure that
they comply with the provisions of this chapter.
G. Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates: Maintain in the permit files an elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) of a residential or nonresidential building or the elevation to which a nonresidential building has been floodproofed, using a floodproofing
certificate, for all buildings subject to section 7-1-10 of this chapter for public inspection and provide copies of same.
H. Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and regulatory floodway maps, copies of
federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, conditional letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map amendment and as
built elevation and floodproofing or elevation and floodproofing certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this chapter.
I. State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the Illinois division of water resources, for all development projects subject to
sections 7-1-8 and 7-1-9 of this chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the city. Upon acceptance of this chapter by DWR
and FEMA, responsibility is hereby delegated to the city as per 91 Illinois administrative code 708 for construction in the regulatory floodway and
floodplain when floodways have not been defined in sections 7-1-8 and 7-1-9 of this chapter. However, the following review approvals are not
delegated to the city and shall require review or permits from DWR:
1. Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
2. Department of transportation projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in section 7-1-3 of this chapter and all other state, federal or local
unit of government projects, including projects of the city and county, except for those projects meeting the requirements of section 7-1-8 of this
chapter.
3. An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood
profile, per subsection 7-1-8-2L1e of this chapter.
4. An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to subsection 7-1-8-2L1d of this chapter.
5. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in subsections 7-1-8-2L1a, L1b and L1h of this
chapter.
6. Permit issuance of structures within or over publicly navigable rivers, lakes and streams.
7. Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway locations; and
8. Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist.
J. Cooperation With Other Agencies: Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood
and floodway data and to improve the administration of this chapter. Submit data to DWR and the federal emergency management agency for
proposed revisions of a regulatory map. Submit reports as required for the national flood insurance program. Notify the federal emergency
management agency of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 309/470
K. Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject however to the
review and approval of DWR and FEMA for any chapter changes. (Ord. 0-90-37, 8-20-1990)
7-1-6: BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS:
This chapter's protection standard is based on the countywide flood insurance study for Cook County. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood
elevation is not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois state water
survey's floodplain information repository. When a party disagrees with the best available data, he/she may finance the detailed engineering study needed
to replace existing data with better data and submit it to DWR and FEMA. (Ord. 0-00-27, 10-16-2000, eff. 10-26-2000)
A. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of McDonald Creek and its tributaries and the Des Plaines River shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of Cook County prepared by FEMA dated August 19, 2008, and such
amendments to the study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
B. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the city shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of Cook
County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to
time. (Ord. 0-08-27, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-19-2008)
C. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an "AH zone" or "AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth)
delineated on the countywide flood insurance study for Cook County prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated November 6,
2000, and such amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
D. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an "A zone" on the countywide flood insurance
study for Cook County prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated November 6, 2000, shall be according to the best existing
data available in the Illinois state water survey flood plain information repository.
When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be
determined from a back water model, such as HEC-II, WSP-2, or a dynamic model such as HIP. The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be
obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-I, TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States
geological survey for estimating peak flood discharges. Flood flows should be based on anticipated future land use conditions in the watershed as
determined from adopted local and regional land use plans.
Along any watercourses draining more than one square mile, the above analysis shall be submitted to DWR for approval, once approved it must be
submitted to the Illinois state water survey flood plain information repository for filing. For a nonrivering SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be historic
flood of record plus three feet (3') unless calculated by a detailed engineering study and approved by the Illinois state water survey. (Ord. 0-00-27, 10-
16-2000, eff. 10-26-2000)
7-1-7: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by proper
elevation, and compensatory storage and other provisions of this chapter are met. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of
drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of
section 7-1-10 of this chapter.
A. Development Permit: No person not exempted by state law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a development permit
from the city engineer.
1. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the city. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site,
drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor;
existing grade elevations in MSL, 1929 adj. datum of NGVD and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and dimensions
of all buildings and additions to buildings. For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade
shall be shown on the submitted plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of section 7-1-10 of this chapter.
2. Upon receipt of a development permit application, the city engineer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation. Any development located on land within the flood plain that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the
site's first flood insurance rate map identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter. The city engineer
shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the
date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification.
3. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas shall be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post construction maintenance.
4. The city engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant, copies of all other local, state and federal permits, approvals or permit not
required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The city engineer shall not issue a permit unless all other local, state and federal permits
have been obtained.
B. Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public health and safety.
1. It fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient data and obtain
a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the flood plain.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 310/470
2. Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a flood plain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill
or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume
of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one and one-half (1.5) times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of
streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All flood plain storage lost below
the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All flood plain storage lost above the existing 10-
year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse. (Ord. 0-90-37, 8-20-1990)
7-1-8: OCCUPATION AND USE OF IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS:
This Section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a regulatory floodway. The regulatory
floodway for the Des Plaines River and McDonald Creek and its tributaries shall be as delineated on the regulatory floodway maps designated by DWR
according and referenced in Section 7-1-3 of this Chapter. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in this Section. All
floodway modifications shall be the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also meet the requirements of
Section 7-1-10 of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-90-37, 8-20-1990)
7-1-8-1: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person not exempted by State law shall commence any development in a floodway without first obtaining a development permit from the City Engineer.
A. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the City Engineer. The application shall include the following information:
1. Name and address of applicant;
2. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to be in
an incorporated or unincorporated area;
3. Name of stream or body of water affected;
4. Description of proposed activity;
5. Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
6. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
7. Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if different from the applicant;
8. Signature of applicant or the applicant's agent;
9. If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized officer shall sign the application form;
10. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the application form; and
11. If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the name of the trustee by him (her) as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall be filed with
the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective interests therein.
12. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum:
a. A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical
scale, and north arrow;
b. A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or
work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum of NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control
easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when
the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), regulatory floodway limit, flood plain limit, specifications and
dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale;
c. Cross section views of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
d. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the
temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post construction maintenance.
e. A copy of the regulatory floodway map, marked to reflect any proposed change in the regulatory floodway location.
13. Any and all other local, State and Federal permits or approval letters that may be required for this type of development.
14. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of subsection B of this
Section.
15. If the regulatory floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the application will
not be considered complete until DWR has indicated conditional approval of the regulatory floodway map change. No structures may be built until a
letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 311/470
16. The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing ground
elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or grade resulting from any proposed excavation or filling, and flood
plain and floodway limits; sealed by a registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land surveyor; the location and dimensions of
all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the
requirements of Section 7-1-10 of this Chapter.
17. If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the applicant shall submit the following information:
a. A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
b. A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;
c. An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts the project would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water
affected.
d. An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each feasible alternative identified in subsection 7-1-8-2L1a through L1b and L1h, would
have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected;
e. An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water
affected.
B. The City Engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, State, and Federal permits and approvals that may be
required for this type of activity. The City Engineer shall not issue the development permit unless all required Federal and State permits have been
obtained. A registered professional engineers under the employ or contract of the City shall review and approve applications reviewed under this
Section. (Ord. 0-90-37, 8-20-1990)
7-1-8-2: PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES AND A LIST OF APPROPRIATE USES:
The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and which will not
create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare or impair the natural
hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat.
Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this Chapter. Only those appropriate uses listed in 92 Illinois
Administrative Code 708 will be allowed. Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building additions,
buildings on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonappropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including
landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an appropriate use. The approved
appropriate uses are as follows:
A. Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or water
quality or habitat for fish and wildlife.
B. Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities, and facilities and
improvements related to recreational boating, commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses.
C. Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls.
D. Underground and overhead utilities.
E. Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any one
direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows and including open air pavilions.
F. Detached garages, storage sheds, or other nonhabitable accessory structures without toilet facilities to existing buildings that will not block flood flows,
nor reduce floodway storage.
G. Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and taxiways and any modification thereto.
H. Parking lots and any modifications thereto (where depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will not exceed 1 foot) and aircraft parking
aprons built at or below ground elevation.
I. Regulatory floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive nonerosive slope toward a watercourse.
J. Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating structures, or
construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be no more than
ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing structure, and which are not considered substantial improvements to the structure.
K. In the case of damaged or replacement buildings, reconstruction or repairs made to a building that are valued at less than fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the building before it was damaged or replaced, and which do not increase the outside dimensions of the building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 312/470
L. Additions to existing buildings above the BFE that do not increase the building's footprint and are valued at less than fifty percent (50%) of the market
value of the building.
1. Within the regulatory floodway as identified on the regulatory floodway maps designated by DWR, the construction of an appropriate use, will be
considered permissible, provided, that the proposed project meets the following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with
supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered professional engineer, and, provided, that any structure meets the protection requirements of
Section 7-1-10 of this Chapter.
a. Preservation Of Flood Conveyance, So As Not To Increase Flood Stages Upstream: For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings,
on-stream structures or dams, all effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and
including the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective regulatory floodway conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into
consideration:
(1) Regulatory floodway conveyance,
K - 1.486 AR 2/3
n
where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective area of the cross section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See Open
Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw Hill Book Company, New York.)
(2) The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a
Federal, State, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a
vegetative to a nonvegetative land cover.
(3) Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of effective regulatory floodway conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to DWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more
abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
(A) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot
(1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
(B) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
(1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length.
(C) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream
length shall be used.
(D) Transition sections shall be provided between cross sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the regulatory
floodway delineation on adjacent properties.
(E) All cross sections used in the calculations shall be located perpendicular to flood flows.
b. Preservation Of Floodway Storage So As Not To Increase Downstream Flooding: Compensatory storage shall be provided for any regulatory
floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least one and five-tenths (1.5) times the volume of flood plain storage lost.
Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced. The compensatory regulatory
floodway storage shall be placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation.
All regulatory floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
regulatory floodway storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the
location of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate to DWR through a determination of flood discharges and water
surface elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent.
Finally, there shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to reduce
flooding at existing structures.
c. Preservation Of Floodway Velocities So As Not To Increase Stream Erosion Or Flood Heights: For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts
or on stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or stage for all
flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. However, in the case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures built for the
purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and
sedimentation will be avoided by the use of riprap or other design measures.
d. Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And Roadway Approaches: The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream
flood stages greater than one-tenth foot (0.1') when compared to the existing conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year
frequency event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the
channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. It the proposed
construction will increase upstream flood stages greater than one-tenth foot (0.1'), the developer must contact DWR, Dam Safety Section for a
dam safety permit or waiver.
(1) The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in Section 7-1-6 of this Chapter. Culverts must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT, FHWA
Hydraulic Chart for the Selection of Highway Culverts. Bridges must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT/Federal Highway Administration
Hydraulics of Bridge Waterways calculation procedures.
(2) Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per subsection B1b of this Section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 313/470
(3) Velocity increases must be mitigated per this Section 7-1-8-2.
(4) If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for recreational or commercial navigation, a Department of Transportation permit
must be received.
(5) The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to DWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by subsection 7-1-8-1B of this Chapter.
(6) All excavations for the construction of the crossings shall be designed per subsection L1h of this Section.
e. Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges, Culverts, And Approach Roads:
(1) The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or modification shall be constructed with no more than one-tenth foot (0.1')
increase in back water over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is
not a source of flood damage.
(2) If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream flood plain, the
applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
(3) The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in
accordance with the Department of Transportation Rules 92, Illinois Administrative Code 708 (Floodway Construction in Northeastern Illinois)
and submitted to the Division for review and concurrence before a permit is issued.
f. On-Stream Structures Built For The Purpose Of Backing Up Water: Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than zero feet (0') when
compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the channel
banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or
within recorded flood easements. A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from DWR, Dam Safety Section for a dam
safety permit or waiver for any structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flow. All dams and
impoundment structures as defined in Section 7-1-3 of this Chapter shall meet the permitting requirements of 92 Illinois Administrative Code 702
(Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed activity involves a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an
impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:
(1) The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional storm water detention;
(2) The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle,
such as for spawning;
(3) The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual
bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures, and a presedimentation basin;
(4) A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimize
the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants. It there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the
municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed
control;
(5) The project otherwise complies with the requirements of Section 7-1-8.
g. Floodproofing Of Existing Habitable, Residential And Commercial Structures: If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the
existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction shall be placed no further than ten feet (10') from the outside of the
building. Compensation for lost storage and conveyance will not be required for floodproofing activities.
h. Excavation In The Floodway: When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and
replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance for other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be
provided for the excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to DWR
through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
(1) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
(2) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length; and
(3) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream length
shall be used.
(4) Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and downstream of the transition sections.
i. Channel Modification: If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
(1) There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the body of
water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from the flood
plain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment of a streamside buffer strip or green belt. Channel modification is acceptable
it the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish and wildlife habitat;
(2) Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may be
destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent degree of natural resource values;
(3) The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions
of the body of water affected, consistent with the following criteria:
(A) The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross section,
slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be
incorporated into channel modification design, where practical.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 314/470
(B) Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will
prevent erosion.
(C) One-sided construction of a channel shall be used when feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one side
of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization effects of the vegetation.
(D) Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that which is essential for construction of the channel.
(E) Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no steeper than three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. Natural
vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use
of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions, or
construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
(F) All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the
vegetative cover.
(G) If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such features shall be
provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established,
where appropriate.
(H) A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality.
(I) New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to diversion
of water into the new channel.
(J) There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless necessitated
by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
(K) Unless the modification is for a public flood control project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage outside the
floodway as a result of the modification; and
(4) The project otherwise complies with the requirements of Section 7-1-8 of this Chapter.
j. Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
k. Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in the floodway, including grading, filling and excavation, in which there is potential for
erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
(1) The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time
soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days
prior to the initiation of improvements.
(2) Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be
provided within fifteen (15) days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site, and within fifteen (15) days to denuded areas which may
not be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60) days.
(3) Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement of
eroded sediments off-site or into the channel. Potential sediment control devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion
ditches, and sediment basins.
(4) A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25') in width shall be preserved and/or reestablished, where possible, along existing
channels (see subsection L1p of this Section). Construction vehicle use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be
constructed, where necessary, to minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels shall be restabilized immediately.
(5) Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures and Standards for Urban
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" (1988) also known as the "Green Book" and "Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control" (IEPA, 1987).
l. Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects, the permitting requirements of this Section will be considered met it the applicant
can demonstrate to DWR through hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in
increased flood heights outside the project right of way or easements for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
m. General Criteria For Analysis Of Flood Elevations:
(1) The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the regulatory floodway study, referenced in Section 7-1-6 of this Chapter, must be used for
analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, DWR shall be contacted for approval and
concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.
(2) If the 100-year regulatory floodway elevation at the site of the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to meet the requirements of this Section for the 100-year
frequency flood elevations of the regulatory floodway conditions and conditions with the receiving stream at normal water elevations.
(3) If the applicant learns from DWR, local governments, or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to be
removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next
five (5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this Section for both the existing conditions
and the expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is built.
n. Conditional Letter Of Map Revision: If the appropriate use would result in a change in the regulatory floodway location or the 100-year frequency
flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to DWR and to FEMA all the information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a
conditional regulatory floodway map revision and receive from DWR a conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change before a permit is
issued. However, the final regulatory floodway map will not be changed by DWR until as-built plans or record drawings are submitted and accepted
by FEMA and DWR.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 315/470
In the case of nongovernment projects, the municipality in incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the
proposed conditional regulatory floodway map revision before DWR approval can be given. No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take
place until a conditional approval is issued. No further development activities shall take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is issued
by FEMA and DWR.
o. Professional Engineer's Supervision: All engineering analyses shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional
engineer.
p. For all activities in the floodway involving construction within twenty five feet (25') of the channel, the following criteria shall be met:
(1) A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at least twenty five feet (25') of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
(2) Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be established
upon completion of construction.
(3) The use of native riparian vegetation is preferred in the buffer strip. Access through this buffer strip shall be provided, when necessary, for
stream maintenance purposes.
After receipt of conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change and issuance of a permit and a conditional letter of map revision,
construction as necessary to change the regulatory floodway designation may proceed but no buildings or structures or other construction that is
not an appropriate use may be placed in that area until the regulatory floodway map is changed and a final letter of map revision is received.
The regulatory floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by DWR and FEMA of the as-built plans.
2. State Review: For those projects listed below located in a regulatory floodway, the following criteria shall be submitted to DWR for their review and
concurrence prior to the issuance of a permit:
a. DWR will review an engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge pursuant to subsection L1d of this Section.
b. DWR will review an engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating
the proposed flood profile, pursuant to subsection L1e of this Section.
c. The DWR will review alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to subsections L1a, L1b and L1h of this Section.
d. The DWR will review and approve prior to the start of construction any Department projects, dams (as defined in Section 7-1-3 of this Chapter)
and all other State, Federal or local units of government projects, including projects of the Municipality or County.
3. Other Permits: In addition to the other requirements of this Chapter development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless the
applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not required from DWR, issued pursuant to 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5
et seq. No permit from DWR shall be required if the Division has delegated this responsibility to the City.
4. Dam Safety Permits: Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a "dam" as defined in Section 7-1-3 of this Chapter per 92
Illinois Administrative Code 702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall obtain an Illinois Division of Water Resources dam safety permit prior to the
start of construction of a dam. If the City Engineer finds a dam that does not have a DWR permit, the City Engineer shall immediately notify the Dam
Safety Section of the Division of Water Resources. If the City Engineer finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the City Engineer
shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, DWR, Dam Safety Section in Springfield and the Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
(ESDA).
5. Activities That Do Not Require A Registered Professional Engineer's Review: The following activities may be permitted without a registered
professional engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this Chapter, including the mitigation requirements.
a. Underground and overhead utilities that:
(1) Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations, or
(2) Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the floodway, or
(3) In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet (3') below the existing stream
bed, and
(4) In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to catch debris.
b. Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
(1) Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope, and
(2) Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, and
(3) Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location.
c. Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences), properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade.
d. Construction of shoreline and streambank protection that:
(1) Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length.
(2) Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
(3) Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-sectional area of the stream channel or bank of the lake.
(4) Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel
velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap are preferred materials.
Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 316/470
e. Temporary stream crossings in which:
(1) The approach roads will be one-half foot (0.5') or less above natural grade.
(2) The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water more than, one-tenth foot (0.1') during the 100-year flood flow.
(3) The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be
nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
(4) All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction.
(5) The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization. (Ord. 0-90-37, 8-20-1990)
7-1-9: OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHA AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED:
In SFHA or flood plains, where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations have been established by
FEMA, and draining more than one square mile, no development shall be permitted, unless the cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly
increase the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
A. Development Permit: No person not exempted by State law, shall commence any development in a SFHA or flood plain without first obtaining a
development permit from the City Engineer. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the City. The application shall be
accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations and all changes in grade
resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevation at the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of Section 7-1-10 of this
Chapter.
The application for a development permit shall also include the following information:
1. A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose and intended use;
2. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed to be in
an incorporated or unincorporated area;
3. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
4. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum:
a. A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical
scale, and north arrow;
b. A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or
work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum of NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control
easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of
water), flood plain limit, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale;
c. Cross section views of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or
numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); and
d. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the
temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post construction maintenance.
5. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of subsection A4b of this
Section.
6. Any and all other local, State and Federal permits or approvals that may be required for this type of development.
B. Acceptable Elevation Data: Based on the best available existing data according to the Illinois State Water Survey's Flood Plain Information Repository,
the City Engineer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Should no elevation information exist
for the site, the developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to subsection 7-1-6D of this Chapter. Any development located on land that
can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification is not in the SFHA and,
therefore, not subject to the requirements of this Chapter. The Building Official shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the
development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification.
1. The City Engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, State, and Federal permits, approvals or permit not
required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The City Engineer shall not issue the development permit unless all required local, State
and Federal permits have been obtained.
2. Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the SFHA, where a floodway has not been determined shall create a damaging or potentially
damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
the floodway or channel, or impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation
methods as called for in this Chapter.
3. Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been determined, the following standards shall apply:
a. The developer shall have a registered professional engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans, calculations, and data that the
project meets the engineering requirements of subsections 7-1-8-2L1a through (1) of this Chapter for the entire flood plain as calculated under the
provisions of subsection 7-1-6D of this Chapter. As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study performed to determine a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 317/470
floodway and submit that engineering study to DWR for acceptance as a regulatory floodway.
Upon acceptance of their floodway by the Department, the developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of Section 7-
1-8 for the regulatory floodway. The floodway shall be defined according to the definition in Section 7-1-3 of this Chapter.
b. A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit from DWR or written documentation that a permit is not
required from DWR.
c. No permit from DWR shall be required if the Division has delegated permit responsibility to the City per 92 Illinois Administrative Code, part 708 for
regulatory floodways, per DWR's Statewide permit entitled "Construction in Flood Plains with No Designated Floodways in Northeastern Illinois".
d. Dam Safety Permits: Any work Involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam or an on-stream structure to impound water as defined
in Section 7-1-3 of this Chapter shall obtain an Illinois Division of Water Resources dam safety permit or letter indicating a permit is not required
prior to the start of construction of a dam.
If the City Engineer finds a dam that does not have a DWR permit, the City Engineer shall immediately notify the Dam Safety Section of the
Division of Water Resources. If the City Engineer finds a dam which is believed to be In unsafe condition, the City Engineer shall immediately
notify the owner of the dam and the Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Agency (ESDA), and the DWR, Dam Safety Section in Springfield.
e. The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional engineer's review or calculation of a base flood elevation and regulatory
floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this Chapter.
(1) Underground and overhead utilities that:
(A) Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations, or
(B) Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the floodway, or
(C) In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet (3') below the existing
streambed, and
(D) In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to catch
debris.
(2) Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
(A) Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope, and
(B) Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, and
(C) Are designed so as not to cause stream bank erosion at the outfall location.
(3) Construction of shoreline and streambed protection that:
(A) Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length or two (2) cubic yards per lineal foot of streambed.
(B) Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
(C) Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-sectional area of the stream channel by more than ten percent (10%).
(D) Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel
velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap are preferred materials.
Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
(4) Temporary stream crossings in which:
(A) The approach roads will be one-half foot (0.5') or less above natural grade.
(B) The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water more than one-tenth foot (0.1') during the 100-year flow, or above
the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or outfall invert, whichever is more restrictive.
(C) The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be
nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
(D) All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of
construction.
(E) The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization.
(5) The construction of light poles, sign posts and similar structures;
(6) The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields (excluding fences), patios and similar surfaces which are built at grade;
(7) The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports built at or below
existing grade that would not obstruct the flow of flood waters;
(8) The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten feet (10') in any one dimension (e.g.,
animal shelters and tool sheds);
(9) The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not increase the first floor area by more than twenty percent (20%) which are
located on the upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and which do not extend beyond the sides of the existing building that are
parallel to the flow of flood waters;
(10) Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 318/470
(A) The affected length of stream is less than one thousand feet (1,000').
(B) The work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural stream channels, or
(C) The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
(D) The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
4. Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a flood plain authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of
excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one and one-half (1.5) times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of
streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All flood plain storage lost below
the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All flood plain storage lost above the existing 10-
year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse. (Ord. 0-90-37, 8-20-1990)
7-1-10: PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOOD PLAIN AREAS:
In addition to the requirements found in Sections 7-1-7, 7-1-8, and 7-1-9 of this Chapter for development in flood fringes, regulatory floodways, and SFHA
or flood plains where no floodways have been identified (Zones A, AO, AH, AE, A1-A30, A99, VO, V-30, VE V, M, or E), the following requirements shall
be met:
A. Public Health Standards:
1. No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE.
2. New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines and on-site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all
manholes or other aboveground openings located below the FPE are watertight.
B. Carrying Capacity And Notification. For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying
capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. In addition, the City shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of
a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.
C. Protecting Buildings: All buildings located within a 100-year flood plain also known as a SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood
protection elevation. However, existing buildings located within a regulatory floodway shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards
included in Section 7-1-8. This building protection criteria applies to the following situations:
1. Construction or placement of a new building;
2. A structural alteration to an existing building that either increases the first floor area by more than twenty percent (20%) or the building's market
value by more than fifty percent (50%);
3. Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site. This building protection requirement does not apply
to returning a mobile home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and
4. Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
This building protection requirement may be met by one of the following methods.
a. A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
(1) The lowest floor, (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation.
(2) The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot (1') deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation. The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation.
However, the ten foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages
due to hydrostatic pressures. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour. The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.
b. A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
(1) The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space, stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood waters
and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The permanent openings shall be no more
than one foot (1') above grade, and consists of a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation.
(2) The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize
exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris.
(3) All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement)
and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection
elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located
below the flood protection elevation.
(4) No area below the flood protection elevation shall be used for storage of items or materials.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 319/470
(5) Manufactured homes and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days shall be elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the
rules and regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois Administrative Code 870.
c. Only a nonresidential building may be structurally floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that a registered professional engineer shall certify
that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are
watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The building design shall take into account flood
velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice. Floodproofing
measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berm, floodwalls and similar works are
not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection).
d. Nonconforming structures located in a regulatory floodway may remain in use, but may not be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered. A
nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural or manmade disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this Chapter. (Ord. 0-90-37, 8-20-1990)
7-1-11: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The City Council shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known in all official actions related to land management, use and
development.
A. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, and planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to
assure that the proposed developments are consistent with Sections 7-1-7, 7-1-8, 7-1-9, and 7-1-10 of this Chapter and the need to minimize flood
damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a
registered professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act4.
B. Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home
parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this
information is not available from an existing study filed with the Illinois State Water Survey, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per subsection 7-1-6D and the "floodway" delineation per the definition in Section 7-1-3 of this
Chapter and submitting it to the State Water Survey and DWR for review and approval as best available regulatory data.
C. Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the flood plains shall be included within parks or other public grounds.
D. The City Council shall not approve any planned unit development (PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such
agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-90-37, 8-20-1990)
7-1-12: VARIANCES:
No variances shall be granted to any development located in a "regulatory floodway" as defined in Section 7-1-3 of this Chapter. However, when a
development proposal is located outside of a regulatory floodway but within the flood fringe, and whenever the standards of this Chapter place undue
hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the site plan review, committee for a variance. The site plan review committee
shall review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the City Council.
A. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
1. The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
2. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted;
3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
4. There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation of a nuisance;
5. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations, policing, or
repairs to stream beds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public facilities;
6. The provisions of subsections 7-1-7B and 7-1-9B2b of this Chapter shall still be met;
7. The activity is not in a regulatory floodway;
8. The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a general problem; and
9. The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the area involved including existing stream uses.
B. The City Engineer shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of Section 7-1-10 that would lessen the degree of protection
to a building will:
1. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage;
2. Increase the risks to life and property; and
3. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and liability.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 320/470
C. Variances requested in connection with restoration of a site or building listed on the National Register of Historical Places or documented as worthy of
preservation by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of subsections A and B
of this Section. (Ord. 0-90-37, 8-20-1990)
7-1-13: FEES FOR FLOOD PLAIN DETERMINATION REPORTS:
The City Engineer shall prepare a flood plain determination report for any requested information, alteration, or improvement subject to the provisions of this
Title. The fees for such reports shall be paid by the applicant and shall be as follows:
Information request for existing structures or vacant property $ 35.00
Improvement to existing structures 70.00
New construction or development (building permit) 100.00
For detailed studies performed or received by an engineering consultant retained by the City. All costs incurred by the City will be reimbursed by the
applicant. (Ord. 0-90-37, 8-20-1990)
7-1-14: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived
from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This Chapter
does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage. This Chapter does not create liability on the
part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision made
lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 0-90-37, 8-20-1990)
7-1-15: PENALTY:
Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this Chapter. Upon due
investigation, the City Council may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this Chapter exist. The City Council shall notify the owner in
writing of such violation.
A. It such owner fails after ten (10) days notice to correct the violation:
1. The City may make application to the Circuit Court for an injunction requiring conformance with this Chapter or make such other order as the Court
deems necessary to secure compliance with the Chapter.
2. Any person who violates this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense.
3. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
4. The City may record a notice of violation on the title to the property.
B. The City Council shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause coverage
by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
C. Nothing herein shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue
to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 0-90-37, 8-20-1990)
7-1-16: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this Chapter and other
ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. This Chapter is
intended to repeal the original Chapter or resolution which was adopted to meet the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, but is not intended to
repeal the resolution which the City passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program. (Ord. 0-90-37, 8-20-1990)
7-1-17: SEPARABILITY:
The provisions and sections of this Chapter shall be deemed separable and the invalidity of any portion of this Chapter shall not affect the validity of the
remainder. (Ord. 0-90-37, 8-20-1990)
Title 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 321/470
Chapter 1
ROADWAY DITCHES AND SWALES; PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY AND DRIVEWAYS
8-1-1: FILLING, ALTERING AND SHAPING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Minimum depth of open drainage ditches or swales before installation of a storm culvert or conduit shall be eighteen inches (18") below the edge of the
roadway surface, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. Maximum allowable depth of open drainage ditches or swales along local streets
shall be two feet (2') below the edge of the roadway surface before enclosure with a conduit is required. (Ord. 0-82-02, 2-16-1982)
B. Minimum ditch gradient of open drainage ditches or swales shall be five-tenths of one percent (0.5%) with a positive direction of drainage to a proper or
approved outlet or point of discharge. For ditch gradients less than five-tenths of one percent (0.5%), the flow line of the ditch shall have a four inch (4")
thick by eighteen inch (18") wide granular (CA-6, grade 8) invert covered by four inches (4") of topsoil and grass or sod layer. If a ditch gradient of
three-tenths of one percent (0.3%) cannot be maintained, storm sewers shall be installed. (Ord. 0-79-16, 6-18-1979)
C. Side slopes for open drainage ditches shall be maximum four to one (4:1) (horizontal to vertical) from the roadway shoulder to a two foot (2') minimum
wide ditch flow line and a four to one (4:1) or less slope back to the right-of-way line. Changes to the minimum slopes may not be made unless
approved by the City Engineer; but in no case shall the slope from the shoulder be greater than three to one (3:1) nor the flow line less than two feet
(2') wide. The shoulder shall be four feet (4') in width with the two feet (2') adjacent to the pavement edge to be gravel over a stabilized base as
approved by the City Engineer.
This provision for four to one (4:1) side slopes shall be effective April 1, 1989, and shall apply to all new subdivisions, road reconstruction projects
where appropriate, and other drainage improvement projects unless otherwise authorized by the City Engineer. (Ord. 0-89-11, 4-3-1989)
D. No open roadway ditch or swale shall be filled or cross-sectional area reduced without first ensuring proper drainage over or across the property in
question. Roadway drainage ditches may be filled if a properly sized culvert pipe is installed at an approved gradient. In general, corrugated metal pipe
culverts may be used for lengths up to one hundred feet (100'). For culvert lengths in excess of one hundred feet (100'), a reinforced concrete pipe or
equivalent shall be used.
If an intermediate drainage opening is required in culvert length up to one hundred feet (100'), an inlet box with an open grate shall be provided at
minimum fifty foot (50') intervals.
E. All previous sections of drainage ditches or swales must have acceptable erosion protection or side slope stabilization. The "Standards and
Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control for Northeastern Illinois Planning Commission" and the "Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction", current editions, may be used as guidelines for implementation of acceptable measures for erosion protection of bank
stabilization.
F. Culvert sizing and specifications shall be as follows:
1. Proper size and type of culvert as determined or approved by the City Engineer, based upon the local watershed drainage area tributary to the
culvert in question.
2. Minimum culvert diameter of twelve inches (12") or multiple eight inch (8") diameter culverts, if approved. For culverts fifteen inches (15") in diameter
or larger and culverts crossing public streets, flared end sections of the appropriate size and material will be required.
3. Culvert materials of corrugated metal pipe (CMP), reinforced concrete pipe (RCP), or approved equal by the City.
4. Minimum four inch (4") thick granular (CA-6, grade 8) bedding, extending one foot (1') beyond the ends of the culvert pipe. (Ord. 0-79-16, 6-18-1979)
5. Minimum three foot (3') extension of culverts beyond a driveway or roadway edge, unless a headwall structure is installed.
6. Minimum eight inches (8") of cover from top of culvert pipe to finished driveway surface. Minimum of six inches (6") of cover from top of culvert pipe
to the finished edge of pavement surface on minor streets, unless otherwise approved by the City. (Ord. 0-82-02, 2-16-1982)
7. Proper grade or invert elevations as established, set or approved by the City.
G. New construction, reconstruction or roadway improvements shall not be initiated until a construction permit from the Building Official with the sanction
or recommendations from the City Engineer has been obtained.
H. All costs associated with the setting of culverts, establishing or checking ditch gradients, correcting deficiencies or bringing ordinance violations into
compliance, issuance of permits, or payment of penalties shall be the responsibility of the property owner(s) or developer(s) required to do the
necessary drainage work. (Ord. 0-79-16, 6-18-1979)
8-1-2: RIGHT OF CITY TO CORRECT IMPROPER DRAINAGE:
A. Corrective measures are necessary to ensure and protect the general public health, safety and welfare. The provisions herein mentioned are adopted to
prevent advanced deterioration of public streets within the City and to prolong the life expectancy of street pavements by ensuring proper roadway
drainage and reduced annual maintenance costs.
B. Corrective work shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 322/470
Grading and ditching;
Culvert removal and replacement;
Erosion protection;
Surface restoration;
Proper discharge of waters from sump pumps and roof downspouts.
C. The City shall assess all costs of correction or rehabilitation to property owner(s) or developer(s) required to do the necessary drainage work. (Ord. 0-
79-16, 6-18-1979)
8-1-3: STORM WATER RUNOFFS:
A. General: The handling of storm waters collected and discharged from impervious roof surfaces shall be as follows:
1. Single-family residential structures shall discharge onto pervious ground surfaces (front, rear or side yards) in close proximity to the residence.
2. Multi-family, commercial, business, institutional or industrial structures may discharge onto impervious surfaces, providing storm water detention is
accomplished. Storm waters shall be properly collected and discharged into a public storm sewer system which outlets to an acceptable watercourse
or drainage way.
Method of detention and release rate requirements shall be subject to the provisions of the City's flood control regulations1 and the recommendation
of the City Engineer. (Ord. 0-79-16, 6-18-1979)
B. Sump Pumps Handling Storm Waters:
1. Basement or foundation sump pumps shall discharge onto front, rear or side yards or into a roadway drainage ditch, underground storm sewer or
drain tile system; provided, that such discharge does not cause any ponding on the property served by any such sump pump or on any other
property. If discharge is to an open ditch, proper erosion control measures shall be used at the point of discharge.
2. Storm water sump pumps shall not discharge directly onto the street pavement or shoulder.
3. Stormwater sump pumps shall not discharge into the sanitary sewer system.
4. When violations are observed, the violation shall be duly recorded; the violator shall be given a citation and shall have thirty (30) days in which to
correct the deficiency and come into compliance with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 0-90-31, 11-19-1990)
C. Discharge Restrictions: Only stormwaters and associated runoff shall be discharged and transported in roadway ditches, swales or storm sewers. All
contaminated waters as a result of human usage shall discharge into a sanitary sewer or approved septic system and not into open ditches or storm
sewers discharging into public watercourses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge sanitary or industrial wastewater into the storm sewers constructed as part of the improvements to U.S.
Route 45 within the city limits.
No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall discharge any sanitary waste or industrial wastewater into any storm sewer or drainage facility
constructed as part of the Milwaukee Avenue improvement, said limits of improvement being between Palatine Road and Euclid Avenue, and a portion
of which passes through the city of Prospect Heights.
Any person violating this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and every day during which a violation continues or exists. (Ord. 0-08-31, 7-21-2008)
8-1-4: PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY PERMIT FEES:
The permit application fee for any work within any public right of way shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00). This fee shall include costs associated with
plan review and site inspection of the project area. (Ord. 0-07-07, 3-5-2007)
8-1-5: DRIVEWAY FEES:
The permit application fee for any work associated with the removal, resurfacing, or reconstruction of an existing or proposed private driveway shall be
seventy five dollars ($75.00). This fee shall include costs associated with plan review and site inspection of the project area. (Ord. 0-07-07, 3-5-2007)
8-1-6: PENALTY:
A party or parties found in violation with the provisions of this chapter will be subject to a penalty of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day for each day
beyond the grace period allowed for correction of the cited violation; or the violator will be subject to payment of all costs for the city to correct the cited
violation. (Ord. 0-96-54, 7-15-1996, eff. 7-25-1996)
Chapter 2
PARADES
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 323/470
PARADE: Any parade, march or procession of any kind, or any similar display in or upon any street or sidewalk in the City.
PERSON: Any person, firm partnership, association, corporation or organization of any kind. (Ord. 0-77-19, 6-7-1977)
8-2-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTION:
No person shall use the public streets and sidewalks of the City in conflict with any of the traffic ordinances, laws or regulations of the City, whereby normal
pedestrian or vehicular traffic may be impeded, hindered or obstructed or in conflict with noise ordinances, laws or regulations of the City except upon
receiving written permission from the Mayor of the City not less than forty eight (48) hours nor more than thirty (30) days before the parade.
It shall be unlawful to participate in any manner in a parade on the public streets or sidewalks as described herein prior to compliance with the provisions
of this Chapter.
This Chapter shall not apply to:
A. Funeral processions;
B. A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions;
C. Students participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities
and does not require stoppage of or interfere with traffic on a State highway. (Ord. 0-77-19, 6-7-1977)
8-2-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMITS:
Any person seeking written permission from the Mayor for a parade permit shall submit the following information in writing to the Mayor:
A. The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade and who will be responsible for its conduct.
B. The name, address and telephone number of the organization and the authorized and responsible heads of such organization the parade is being held
by, for or on behalf of.
C. The date and time period when the parade is to be conducted.
D. The starting point, route and termination point.
E. The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles expected to participate in such parade together with a description of the type of animals and
vehicles involved.
F. The location of any assembly areas and the time at which the units will begin to assemble for such parade.
G. Any additional information which the Mayor shall find reasonably necessary in a fair determination as to whether a parade should take place or not.
Upon receipt of such notification, the Mayor shall review the information. If review shows that the parade will unreasonably interfere with the rights of
others to use the streets and sidewalks with respect to time, route or composition, the Mayor shall direct that the plan for the parade shall be
appropriately adjusted. When the review is completed, the Mayor shall issue written permission for the parade to the person responsible for the parade.
In the event the Mayor receives notification of more than one parade to be held on the same date, the Mayor may route each parade so they will not
conflict with each other. The first notice shall have priority over later notices. (Ord. 0-77-19, 6-7-1977)
8-2-4: PERMIT FEES:
There shall be paid at the time of submitting parade information a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). The fee requirements shall not apply to religious, civic or
social groups of the City. (Ord. 0-77-19, 6-7-1977)
8-2-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly, or with any person, vehicle or animal
participating or used in a parade. (Ord. 0-77-19, 6-7-1977)
8-2-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 324/470
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 0-77-19, 6-7-1977)
Chapter 3
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
8-3-1: SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL:
8-3-1-1: UNLAWFUL TO PARK:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any motor vehicle or recreational vehicle on any "unplowed" public street (or lanes
thereof) within the corporate limits of the City at any time within a twenty four (24) hour period (or until snow and ice removal operations are complete) after
an accumulation of two inches (2") or more of snow as provided for below.
Notice of both normal and emergency snow routes and scheduled timing for plowing or removal operations in certain areas of the City shall be displayed
annually (during the snow season) to familiarize and inform the public as to approximately when streets should be cleared of parked motor or recreational
vehicles. Such information shall be displayed at public places including the City Hall, Prospect Heights Library and Prospect Heights Post Office.
The "Snow Commander" designated by the City Administrator and working in cooperation with the Police Department, shall make the final decision as to
the state of snow emergency that exists and when towing becomes necessary.
A. Parking Tickets Issued, Normal Conditions: During normal snow conditions (2 inch to 6 inch accumulation), parking tickets shall be issued by the Police
Department and all members thereof to the owner of any motor vehicle or recreational vehicle to be in violation of this Section, causing lane blockage,
inhibition or obstruction of the plowing or removal of snow and ice from "unplowed" public streets (or lanes thereof) during the snow season - the
months of December through March, inclusive.
B. Vehicle Towing, Emergency Conditions: During emergency snow conditions (in excess of 6 inch accumulation), it shall be deemed an emergency for
any motor vehicle or recreational vehicle to be in violation of this Section, or for any such vehicle to otherwise prevent or obstruct the plowing or
removal of snow and ice from public streets, and the Police Department and all members thereof are hereby authorized to remove and tow away or
cause the removal and towing by a commercial towing serving of any such vehicle. Vehicles so towed shall be taken to and stored in designated
locations and shall be restored to the owner or operator upon the payment of all towage and storage fees in such amounts as hereinafter provided. The
Police Department shall notify the owner of any such vehicle removed of its location as soon as is reasonably possible in accordance with Police
Department procedures established therefor.
C. Fees: Payment of towing, preparation and storage fees shall be paid directly to the commercial establishment which rendered the service, or in the case
of the City's operated vehicles, directly to the City. Such fees will be determined by the existing towing policy of the City at the time of the occurrence.
Such fees shall be in addition to any fines, penalties or court costs which may be assessed for the violations of any of the provisions of this or any other
ordinance violation. The City shall not be liable for any damages which may occur to any car or vehicle as a result of any towing, preparation or storage
as provided herein.
D. Unlawful Removal Of Vehicle: It shall be unlawful for any person to remove cause the removal of, or be in the possession of any car or vehicle taken
from a designated storage location without first having paid all towing, preparation and storage fees as above provided. Any person violating this
subsection shall be subject to an additional penalty of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. (Ord. 0-80-53, 12-15-1960)
8-3-1-2: OBSTRUCTION OF SNOW REMOVAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person and/or agent of any person to:
A. Plow or otherwise remove accumulated snow or ice from a private parking lot and deposit same on a City street or right of way in such a manner so as
to decrease the driveable width of any such street.
B. Plow snow from a private driveway and deposit same on a City street in such a manner so as to decrease the driveable width of any such street.
C. Obstruct, harass, prevent or otherwise interfere with any employee of the City engaged in snow and ice removal service or to obstruct, cause damage
to or otherwise interfere with any City owned or leased vehicle used in conjunction with snow and ice removal services. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Section shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and in
addition hereto shall be responsible and make full payment for any damage to City property. Citations for violations of this Section may be issued to the
owner of the property involved and also to any industry, management association or firm which acts as an agent for any such owner. (Ord. 0-80-53, 12-
15-1960)
8-3-1-3: FAILURE OF SNOW REMOVAL BY DEVELOPER:
If any street, prior to approval and acceptance thereof, becomes a necessary access route to reach lawfully occupied residences, the City may enter upon
such street to perform snow plowing and removal subject to the following conditions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 325/470
A. If the subdivider has not provided snow plowing and removal service necessary to provide a reasonable access route to lawfully occupied residences
within twelve (12) hours after an accumulation of two inches (2") of snow or more, the City may enter upon such street and perform snow plowing and
removal service, and shall be entitled to reimbursement for the costs thereof. Such performance of snow plowing and removal shall not constitute an
acceptance and/or approval of a street by the City.
B. The City will bill the developer for the actual cost incurred for the snow plowing or removal and an additional fifty percent (50%) charge for
administrative costs. If payment in full is not made by the developer within thirty (30) days after receipt of such billing, the City may take the necessary
action to obtain payment from the completion bond that the developer is required to post under the provisions of Section 6-3-6-2 of the Subdivision
Control Regulations of this Code.
C. If City snow removal services are desired, the developer shall execute an agreement document in a form supplied by the City authorizing snow plowing
and removal service by the City pursuant to the terms of this Section, and further stating that snow plowing and removal service performed hereunder
will not constitute approval and/or acceptance of any street by the City.
D. Nothing in this Section 8-3-1-3 shall limit any other lawful cause of action available to the City. (Ord. 0-80-53, 12-15-1960)
8-3-1-4: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a penalty of not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day a violation
occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-80-53, 12-15-1960)
8-3-2: INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT WITH COUNTY:
A. For and in consideration of waiver by the County of the insurance and surety bond requirements for projects which may be undertaken by the City,
involving a disturbance of any right of way of the County within the corporate limits of the City, the City does hereby agree that it shall indemnify, keep
and save harmless the County, its agents, officials and employees, against all injuries, deaths, loss, damages, claims, patent claims, suits, liabilities,
judgments, costs and expenses, which may in anywise accrue against the County in consequence of the granting of this agreement or which may in
anywise result therefrom, whether or not it shall be alleged or determined that the act was caused through negligence or omission of the City or its
employees, of a subcontractor or his employees, if any, and the City shall, at its own expense, appear, defend and pay all charges of attorneys and
costs and other expenses arising therefrom or incurred in connection therewith, and if any judgment shall be rendered against the County in any such
action, City shall, at its own expense, satisfy and discharge the same. The City expressly understands and agrees that any performance bond or
insurance protection required by this agreement, or otherwise provided by the City shall in no way limit the responsibility to indemnify, keep and save
harmless and defend the County as herein provided.
B. No amendment or repealer of this Section shall become effective until thirty (30) days next following written notice to the County of such proposed
modification or repealer. Said notice shall be served upon the County at the office of the Superintendent of Highways, 118 North Clark Street, Chicago,
Illinois, 60602. (Ord. 0-83-08, 4-4-1983)
8-3-3: DAMAGE TO STREETS:
A. Prohibited Acts; Authorized Acts: No individual, firm, association, syndicates, copartnerships, corporations, trusts or any other entity, hereinafter referred
to as person(s), shall injure, mark or deface any public street, curb, sidewalk, swale or other public improvement located in the street right of way,
except with the written permission of the City Engineer. No such permission shall be granted until a bond has been posted with the City in an amount
sufficient to restore all damaged property to its original condition. The City Engineer shall determine the amount of the bond and shall authorize the
return of bond funds only after the City Engineer is assured that, in the event of any such damage, the person(s) responsible have restored the affected
properly to its original condition. Should the person(s) responsible not initiate or complete the required restoration within a reasonable period of time,
the City Engineer shall utilize or authorize the utilization of bond funds to initiate or complete the required restoration.
B. Violation; Remedy: Any person(s) who violates any provision set forth in subsection A of this Section shall:
1. Be fined a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00) and a maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day beyond the first day
shall be considered a separate violation;
2. Be required to make full restitution to the City for all damages created (per subsection A of this Section);
3. Have all building permits suspended which pertain to properties adjacent or in proximity to the public property affected.
The City Engineer shall determine the damages and shall establish the cost of restoring damaged public property to comply with applicable City
design specifications.
C. Exceptions: The provisions set forth in subsection A of this Section shall not apply to:
1. City employees;
2. Contractors duly authorized by the City to perform work in the street right of way;
3. A governmental agency acting within the scope of its function. (Ord. 0-86-23, 8-18-1986)
8-3-4: MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS1:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 326/470
A. All driveways within public rights of way shall be kept in good repair by the owners or occupants of the abutting property. Such repair work, whether
done by the City or by the abutting owner, shall be under the supervision of the Director of Public Works.
B. The owner of private property abutting a public street shall be responsible for maintaining the frontage parkway free of growing weeds and other
obnoxious and unsightly vegetation which detracts from the beauty and cleanliness of the immediate neighborhood. When such parkway has been
improved to a lawn status, the property owner shall periodically mow and keep same free of rubbish and debris of all kinds.
C. The owner of private property which abuts upon a paved public sidewalk shall be responsible for keeping same clear of all debris and obstructions.
D. In the event the owners of private property are not also the occupants, the responsibilities set forth in this Section shall apply with equal force and effect
to the tenants of those in actual possession or control of the private property.
E. Any individual violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a penalty of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-
89-28, 7-3-1989)
8-3-5: OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC EASEMENTS:
A. Blockage Of Easement Or Right Of Way: It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupier of real property, under, over, upon or through which the City
owns as easement or right of way, to block or obstruct or knowingly permit the blockage or obstruction of said easement or right of way.
Further, no rocks, stones, posts, etc., shall be placed within two feet (2') of the edge of roadway pavement and all mailboxes shall be installed in
accordance with postal regulations.
B. Removal Required; Notice: It shall be the duty of the Superintendent, upon discovery of any obstruction which blocks or obstructs a City easement or
right of way, to serve notice upon the owner or occupant of such premises and to demand the removal of said obstruction forthwith.
C. Failure To Remove: If the person so served with notice, as provided in subsection B of this Section, does not cause removal of such obstruction or
blockage within thirty (30) days following receipt of said notice, the Public Works Superintendent may proceed to cause the same to be removed,
keeping a true and correct account of the expenses thereof, and such expenses shall be charged to and paid to the City by said owner or occupant;
provided, however, that in the event, in the opinion of the City Administrator, it is urgently necessary for the health, safety, morals and welfare of the
public that such obstruction be removed immediately or at any time prior to the expiration of said thirty (30) day period, the City may forthwith remove
the obstruction immediately following personal delivery of said notice to the owner or occupant, or if such premises are not occupied, by certified or
registered mail to the record owner thereof.
D. Lien, Procedure For Filing: The City's reasonable expenses of removal of said obstruction, as provided in subsection C of this Section, shall be and
constitute a lien upon said premises. Whenever a bill or statement from the City to the owner or occupant of such premises for such expenses remains
unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been tendered, the City Clerk may file with the County Recorder of Deeds of Cook County a statement of lien claim.
This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises involved, the amount of the unpaid bill and a notice that the City claims a lien for this
amount.
A copy of the said lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises; provided, however, that failure of the Clerk to record such lien or to mail such
notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for such expenses as provided in subsection E of
this Section.
E. Lien, Foreclosure: Property subject to a lien claim hereunder may be sold for nonpayment of the same upon foreclosure of said lien by the City in any
court of competent jurisdiction. Proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the City's charges and expenses after deducting costs, as in the case of
foreclosure of statutory liens. (Ord. 0-89-77, 12-18-1989)
Chapter 4
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
8-4-1: SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE:
8-4-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the CITY OF PROSPECT HEIGHTS CABLE COMMUNICATIONS CHAPTER. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-1-2: PURPOSES:
The purpose of this Chapter is to:
A. Provide for the franchising and regulation of cable television systems within the City; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 327/470
B. Provide for the payment of a fee and other valuable consideration to the City for the use of City streets and other public ways in the construction and
operation of cable television systems and to compensate the City for costs associated therewith; and
C. Provide for the regulation by the City of the rates and fees to be charged by grantees under this Chapter; and
D. Provide for the development of cable television as a means to improve communication between and among the citizens and public institutions of the
City; and
E. Provide remedies and prescribe penalties for violation of this Chapter and the franchise granted hereunder. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context clearly
indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in present tense include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
AGENCY: The person, department or agency designated by the City of Prospect Heights to act in matters related to cable television or in the absence of
such designation, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Prospect Heights.
AUXILIARY SERVICES: Any communication service in addition to "regular subscriber services" including, but not limited to, services for which a perprogram
or per-channel charge is made, pay TV, burglar alarm services, data or other electronic transmission services, facsimile reproduction services,
meter reading services, home shopping services, interactive two-way services and any other service utilizing any facility or equipment of a cable television
system operating pursuant to a franchise granted under this Chapter.
CABLE ACT: The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-549, 98 Stat. 2779 (1984) (codified at 47 USC sections 521 - 611 [1982 and
Supplement - 1987]) and any amendments thereto.
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM (OR CATV SYSTEM): Any nonbroadcast facility consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated signal
generation, reception and control equipment that distributes or is designed to distribute to subscribers audio, video and other forms of electronic or electric
signals, but such term shall not include any such facility that serves or will serve only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit dwellings under common
ownership, control or management, and does not use Municipal rights of way.
CHANNEL: A band of frequencies, six (6) megahertz wide in the electromagnetic spectrum capable of carrying either one video signal and a few nonvideo
signals or a large number of nonvideo signals.
CONVERTER: An electronic device provided by a grantee which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television
receiver of a subscriber, and by an appropriate channel selector also permits a subscriber to view all signals delivered at designated dial locations.
COUNCIL: The Mayor and City Council of the City of Prospect Heights.
CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS: Those quantitative goals and measures of service quality and procedures applied by the City of Prospect Heights to
the billing practices, phone service, repair service and hours of operation.
DEPRECIATE REPLACEMENT VALUE: An amount to be determined which represents the cost to duplicate or replace or reconstruct all the tangible
assets, as-built, less deductions for depreciation (straight-line method) representing the actual period in which such facilities have been in place in the City
of Prospect Heights, compared to the estimated useful life of such tangible assets. This estimate would be performed by a qualified and nationally
recognized consulting engineer, expert in matters of cable television management and financing.
FAIR MARKET VALUE: The price that a willing buyer would pay to a willing seller for a going concern based on the system valuation and sale multiples
prevailing in the industry.
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION OR FCC: The present Federal agency of that name as constituted by the Communication Act of 1934, or
any successor agency created by the United States Congress.
FRANCHISE: The nonexclusive rights granted hereunder, or as described in a franchise agreement entered into between the City of Prospect Heights and
a grantee, to construct and operate a cable television system along the public ways in the City, or within specified areas in the City, and is not intended to
include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City as may be required by other ordinance and
laws of the City.
FRANCHISE AREA: That portion of the City of Prospect Heights for which a franchise is granted under the authority of this Chapter. If not otherwise stated
in the franchise, the franchise area shall be the corporate limits of the City including all territory thereafter annexed to the City of Prospect Heights.
GRANTEE: The natural person, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, association, joint venture or organization of any kind granted a franchise by
the City of Prospect Heights under this Chapter and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.
GROSS REVENUES: All revenues, derived directly or indirectly, excluding interest income, by the grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents and any
person in which the grantee has a financial interest, from the operation or use of all or part of a cable television system franchised pursuant to this Chapter,
including, but not limited to, revenue from regular subscriber service fees, auxiliary service fees (including fees derived from the operation of any
institutional network), installation and reconnection fees, leased channel fees, converter rentals, studio rental, production equipment and personnel fees,
program duplication (dub) fees, programmer promotion fees and rebates, advertising fees, per subscriber fees, percentage of shopping service sales, and
all revenues derived from any income source not specifically excluded; provided, however, that gross revenues shall not include any taxes on services
furnished by the grantee herein imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the State, local or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee
on behalf of said governmental unit.
MODIFICATION AGREEMENT: Any agreement of modification and amendment to the franchise agreement entered into between the City of Prospect
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 328/470
Heights and the grantee and made a part of the franchise agreement.
PERSONS: Any people, firms, corporations, associations or other legally recognized entities.
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENT (PEG) CHANNELS: Those channels on the subscriber network dedicated pursuant to the franchise
agreement to public access governmental or educational use.
PUBLIC WAY: The surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk,
boulevard, drive, bridge, conduit, tunnel, park, parkways, waterways, utility easement or other public right of way or hereafter held by the City of Prospect
Heights which shall entitle the City and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the grantee's cable television system.
No reference herein, or in any franchise, to the "public way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the City that its ordinance to any
property is sufficient to permit its use of such terms, be deemed to gain only such rights to use property in the City as the City may have the undisputed
right and power to give.
RECONSTRUCTION: Any and all repair, revision or upgrade of a significant portion (60 percent or more) of the system, within the City of Prospect
Heights, including any construction, removal or installation associated with such revision, repair or upgrade.
REGULAR SUBSCRIBER SERVICE: The distribution to subscribers of signals over the cable television system on all channels except those for which a
per-program or per-channel charge is made, two-way services and those intended for reception by equipment other than a television receiver.
SCHOOLS: All public and private elementary and secondary schools, junior colleges, colleges and universities which have been granted a certificate of
recognition by the Illinois State Council of Education, pursuant to section 2-3.25 of the Illinois School Code.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person who receives the regular subscriber service and/or any one or more of such other services as may be provided by the
grantee's cable television system, and does not further distribute such service(s).
TWO-WAY SERVICE: The subscriber or any other location shall have the capability to choose whether or not to respond immediately or by sequential
delay by utilizing any type of terminal equipment whatever, by pushbutton code, dial code, meter, voice, video, including, but not limited to, audio and
video, electrical or mechanically produced signal, display and/or interrogation.
USER: A person or organization utilizing a system channel or system equipment and facilities for purposes of production and/or transmission of material,
as contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-3: GRANT OF AUTHORITY:
8-4-3-1: REQUIREMENT OF A FRANCHISE:
No person shall construct, install, maintain or operate a cable television system within the City, or within any other public property of the City, unless a
franchise has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. Such franchise shall not
take the place of any other license or permit which may be legally required of the grantee in order to conduct such a business. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-3-2: FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS:
A. After receiving applications for a franchise, the Council, after considering financial, technical, programming and rate proposals, and the legal and
character qualifications of the applicants, may, by ordinance, grant one or more nonexclusive franchises creating a right to construct and operate a
cable television system within the public ways of the City. Franchise(s) will be granted to the applicants which in the Council's judgment may best serve
the public interest, provided, however, no provision of this Chapter shall be deemed or construed as to require the Council to grant a franchise.
B. The application for a cable television franchise shall be submitted to the City or its designee, on a written application form furnished by the City, and in
accordance with procedures and schedules to be established by the City. The application form may request facts and information the City deems
appropriate. Applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an amount determined by the City, which amount shall be used
by the City to offset direct expenses incurred in the franchising and evaluation procedures, including, but not limited to, staff time and consulting
assistance.
C. An applicant (grantee) to whom the City grants a nonexclusive franchise shall, in addition to the nonrefundable fee specified hereinabove, pay to the
City at the time the grantee files the written instrument specified in Section 8-4-7-9, an amount determined by the Council to be used to offset all direct,
reasonable expenses actually incurred by the City in granting the franchise which are not defrayed by fees forthcoming from the provisions of
subsection B of this Section. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-4: FRANCHISE CONDITIONS:
8-4-4-1: FRANCHISE TERM AND NONEXCLUSIVITY:
The term of an original franchise shall be no more than fifteen (15) years from the date the franchise is accepted by the grantee. The term of a renewed
franchise shall be no more than fifteen (15) years. No franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter shall give any exclusive right to a grantee and every such
franchise shall be deemed to reserve the right to grant other franchises to use and occupy the public ways of the City for cable television or any other
purpose on such terms as the City may then deem appropriate. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-4-2: NOTICE TO THE GRANTEE:
Except as provided in subsection 8-4-4-4A of this Chapter the City shall not take any final action involving the evaluation, modification, renewal, revocation
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 329/470
or termination of the grantee's franchise unless the City: a) called a meeting for such purpose; b) advised the grantee in writing, at least thirty (30) days
prior to such meeting, as to its time, place and purpose and; c) published a notice, at least once, ten (10) days before the meeting in a newspaper of
general circulation within the City. The grantee and any interested person shall be entitled to be heard at such meeting. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-4-3: FRANCHISE REVIEW AND MODIFICATION:
A. It shall be the policy of the City to amend a franchise, upon application of the grantee, when necessary to enable the grantee to take advantage of
technological advancements which will afford it an opportunity to more efficiently, or economically serve its subscribers; provided, however, that this
Section shall not be construed to require the City to make any amendment. Further, within the term of the franchise, the City may after notice and
hearing as required in Section 8-4-4-2 of this Chapter, adopt a resolution providing for reasonable and appropriate modifications in grantee's franchise
of a nature that would not result in effectively terminating same, provided that the City shall not make any amendments or modifications to this Chapter
or a franchise granted hereunder which would alter the provisions of subsections 8-4-4-5D or 8-4-4-6E during the term of any franchise granted
hereunder.
B. The grantee shall reimburse the City for all of its costs, whether direct or indirect, relating to any amendment or modification of a franchise sought by the
grantee. Such costs shall include, but are not limited to, any outside consultant and attorney fees incurred in evaluating any proposed modification or
renewal. No reimbursement made pursuant to this Section shall constitute a franchise fee.
C. No modification or renewal of any cable franchise, whether at the request of the grantee or otherwise, shall be deemed to alter the "grandfathered"
status of any provision of a franchise.
D. Any failure by the grantee to provide reasonably requested information in regards to a modification request shall result in a denial of the request. (Ord.
0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-4-4: PERFORMANCE EVALUATION SESSIONS:
A. The City and the grantee shall hold performance evaluation meetings within thirty (30) days of the third, sixth, tenth, and twelfth anniversary dates of the
grantee's award of the franchise and as required by Federal and State law. All such evaluation meetings shall be open to the public. Grantee shall be
solely responsible for notifying the City, in writing, at least sixty (60) days in advance, of each of the specified performance evaluation meetings, and no
notice to the grantee pursuant to Section 8-4-4-2 of this Chapter shall be required.
B. Special evaluation meetings may be held at any time during the term of the franchise at the request of the agency or the grantee.
C. All evaluation meetings shall be open to the public and announced by the Council in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance with the notice
requirements of Section 8-4-4-2 of this Chapter. No such newspaper notice shall be required as to any adjourned meetings. Grantee shall notify
subscribers of all evaluation meetings including any adjourned meetings by announcement on the highest use origination channel on the system no
less than three (3) times between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. for five (5) consecutive days immediately
preceding each meeting.
D. Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation session may include, but not be limited to, service rate structures, franchise
fees, penalties, free or discounted services, applications of new technologies, system performance, services provided, programming offered, customer
complaints, privacy, amendments to this Chapter, modification to the franchise, judicial and FCC rulings, line extension policies and grantee or City
rules.
E. During a review and evaluation by the City, the grantee shall fully cooperate with the City and shall provide such information and documents as the City
may request to reasonably perform its review.
F. If at any time during its review, the City determines that reasonable evidence exists of inadequate CATV system performance, it may require the grantee
to perform test and analysis directed toward the suspected inadequacies. The grantee shall fully cooperate with the City in performing such testing and
shall prepare results and a report if requested within thirty (30) days after notice. Such report shall include the following information:
1. The nature of the complaint or problem which precipitated the special tests;
2. What system component was tested;
3. The equipment used and procedures employed in testing;
4. The method, if any, in which such complaint or problem was resolved;
5. Any other information pertinent to said tests and analysis which may be required;
6. The City may require the test to be supervised at grantee's expense by a professional engineer to be approved by the City not on the permanent
staff of the grantee. The engineer should sign all records of special tests and forward to the City such records with a report interpreting the results of
the test and recommending actions to be taken.
G. The City's rights under this Section shall be limited to requiring tests, analysis and reports covering specific subjects and characteristics based on said
complaints or other evidence when and under such circumstances as the City has reasonable grounds to believe that the complaints or other evidence
require that tests be performed to protect the public against substandard cable service. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 330/470
8-4-4-5: FRANCHISE RENEWAL:
A. To the extent applicable, section 626 of the Cable Act shall govern the procedures and standards for renewal of any franchise.
B. To the extent section 626 of the Cable Act is not applicable, the City shall, subject to applicable law, have the right to grant or deny renewal pursuant to
any reasonable procedures and standards in the exercise of its sole discretion.
C. Unless the City shall consent to some lesser notice, any request for renewal shall be made not later than thirty (30) months prior to the franchise
expiration date. Any request for renewal must be in writing. If no request for the renewal is made, the franchise shall expire according to its terms;
provided, however, that the Council may extend the term of the franchise in six (6) month increments during the franchise renewal process provided for
in this Section, subject to applicable law.
D. In any public meeting or special public meeting held pursuant to the Cable Act or otherwise to consider franchise renewal, the City Council shall hear
any interested persons during said special meeting and shall determine whether or not the grantee did reasonably comply with the terms and
conditions imposed by this Chapter and the franchise and whether the franchise proposal meets the future needs of the community. Notice of such
meeting shall be given in accordance with Section 8-4-4-2 and subsection 8-4-4-4C of this Chapter.
E. Any failure by the grantee to provide reasonably requested information in regards to a franchise renewal shall result in a denial of the request for
renewal.
F. If the City determines that the grantee has been in reasonable compliance with the terms and conditions imposed by this Chapter and the franchise, the
City may by resolution, renew the grantee's franchise, with any modifications it deems desirable, for a period of time not longer than fifteen (15) years.
G. Subject to applicable law, if the City does not renew the franchise, the City shall, to the extent then permitted by Municipal law, have the option to: 1)
acquire at fair market value all of the assets of the grantee operation within the City which value shall exclude any value attributable to the franchise
itself; or 2) require the sale at fair market value of all such assets to a succeeding grantee; or 3) require the removal of all such assets from the City.
Except as provided In Section 8-4-4-8, the Council's above stated options must be exercised within one year from the date of the franchise expiration,
unless such period is extended with the consent of the grantee.
H. The grantee shall reimburse the City for all of its costs, whether direct or indirect, relating to any renewal proceeding, whether or not the franchise is
renewed. Such costs shall include, but are not limited to, any outside consultant and attorney fees incurred in such renewal proceeding. No
reimbursement made pursuant to this Section shall constitute a franchise fee. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-4-6: FRANCHISE REVOCATION PROCEDURE:
A. Whenever a grantee shall refuse, neglect or wilfully fail to construct, operate or maintain its cable television system or to provide service to its
subscribers in substantial accordance with the terms of this Chapter and the franchise or to comply with the conditions of occupancy of any public way
or to make required extensions of service, or shall in any other way substantially violate the terms and conditions of this Chapter, the franchise, or any
applicable rules or regulations, or practices any fraud or deceit upon the City or its subscribers, or fails to pay franchise fees when due, or if a grantee
becomes insolvent, as adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction, or is unwilling to pay its uncontested debts, or is adjudged bankrupt, or seeks
relief under the bankruptcy laws, then the franchise may be revoked.
B. In the event the City or the agency believes that grounds for revocation exist or have existed, the City or the agency may notify a grantee, in writing,
setting forth the nature and facts of such noncompliance. If, within thirty (30) days following such notification, the grantee has not furnished reasonably
satisfactory evidence that corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, or that the alleged violations did not occur, or
that the alleged violations were beyond the grantee's control, the agency shall thereupon refer the matter to the City.
C. Upon referral from the agency or by its own motion, the City may, following notice of the grounds for revocation, and hearing pursuant to Section 8-4-4-
2 of this Chapter, revoke a franchise pursuant to subsection A of this Section.
D. In the event that a franchise has been revoked by the City, the City shall, to the extent then permitted by existing law, have the options to acquire, at the
lesser of depreciated replacement value, or fair market value, excluding any value attributable to good will, all the assets of the grantee's operations
within the City; or to require the sale, at the lesser of depreciated replacement value, or the fair market value, excluding any value attributable to good
will, of all such assets of the grantee's operations within the City to a successor grantee or to require the removal of all such assets from the City.
Unless some later date is agreed to by the grantee and except as provided in Section 8-4-4-8 of this Chapter, such option must be exercised within one
year from the date of the revocation of the franchise, or the entry of the final judgment by a court reviewing the question of the City's revocations, or the
entry of a final order upon appeal of same, whichever is later.
E. The termination of a grantee's rights under a franchise shall in no way affect any other rights the City may have under the franchise or under any
provision of law or ordinance. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-4-7: ARBITRARY AND CAPRICIOUS ACTION BY GRANTEE:
If a grantee arbitrarily and capriciously discontinues service to its subscribers, the grantee's franchise may be revoked by a resolution of the City following
notice to the grantee and an opportunity to be heard. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8-4-4-2 of this Chapter, notice to the grantee under this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 331/470
Section may be less than thirty (30) days. Provided, further, the City may seek appropriate judicial or other relief and/or may proceed to exercise its rights
and powers as provided for herein. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-4-8: PROVISION FOR ARBITRATION:
In the event the Council exercised its options to acquire all of the assets of the grantee, and the fair market value cannot be agreed upon, said value(s)
shall be determined by a panel of arbitrators, which panel may be requested by either the Council or the grantee no sooner than ninety (90) days after
notice that the City desires to purchase the system. The panel shall be composed of one arbitrator chosen by the City, one arbitrator chosen by the
grantee, and a third arbitrator chosen by the first two (2) arbitrators. The expenses of the arbitration, including the fees of the arbitrators, shall be borne by
the parties in such manner as the arbitrators provide in their award, but in no event will the City be obligated for more than one-half (1/2) of said expenses.
The determination of a majority of the arbitrators shall follow the rules and procedures of American Arbitration Association except where in conflict with an
express provision of this Chapter. The arbitration hearing shall take place in Cook County, unless otherwise agreed to by the parties in writing.
Notwithstanding any other timetable imposed by this Chapter, the City shall, within ninety (90) days following notice to it of the decision of the arbitrators,
either withdraw any notice it may have given of its intent or election to acquire the grantee's system or shall affirmatively accept the decision of the
arbitrators and affirm its election to purchase the system or assets. If the City fails to accept the arbitrator's decision and affirm its election to purchase
within the aforesaid ninety (90) day period, the rights of the City to purchase shall expire. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-4-9: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP TO GRANTOR:
In those circumstances wherein the City shall have elected to purchase ownership of all the assets of the grantee's operations within the City, the City
shall, unless the grantee shall agree to some other terms, pay, in cash to the grantee, the price of such assets plus any interest calculated at an annual
rate of two (2) percentage points over the prime rate given by the Continental Illinois National Bank to its most credit worthy borrowers of demand loans,
which may have accrued from the date the City or any interim operator assumed direction and control of the grantee's cable system within the City to the
date of payment. Such payment shall be made within twelve (12) months following the date upon which the election to purchase becomes irrevocable.
Title to the system or assets shall pass to the grantor upon such payment. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-4-10: GRANTEE'S OBLIGATION AS TRUSTEE:
A. At all times from the expiration or revocation of a franchise and until either:
1. A grantee transfers to the City or other succeeding operator of the system all of its rights, title and interest to all assets, real and personal, related to
its cable television system in the City; or
2. The City's right to either acquire or assign its rights to acquire any of the grantee's assets expires without the City having exercised such a right,
whichever occurs first, the grantee shall have a duty to such successor as a trustee holding such assets for the benefit of such successor and the
grantee shall not sell any of the system assets in the City nor shall the grantee make any physical, material, or administrative operational changes
that would tend to:
a. Degrade the quality of service to the subscribers,
b. Decrease gross revenues, or
c. Materially increase expenses without the expressed permission, in writing, of the City or its assigns.
Immediately upon the assumption of operating control of the system by the grantee, as trustee, or successor trustee, the City shall cause an
independent appraisal and inventory of all of the assets of the system to be made to verify and establish the existence and condition of all such
real and personal property of the system. The grantee shall at all times operate the system in accordance with terms of this Chapter and the terms
of the franchise as if the franchise had not expired or had not been revoked. In the event the grantee fails or refuses to operate the system as a
trustee, the City Council shall have the right to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for the appointment of a receiver or to operate the system
itself as a trustee in accordance with the terms of this Chapter and the terms of the franchise.
B. In the event of expiration or revocation of a franchise, this Section shall not be construed to give the grantee any vested or other franchise right, but the
right of the grantee in such circumstances shall exist only on a day-to-day basis until the transfer is affected.
C. As full compensation for its ownership interests during this interim period, the grantee shall be entitled to receive the net profit generated during the
period between the expiration or revocation of the franchise, as the case may be, and the transfer of title to the grantee's assets to the City or a
successor grantee. Net profit shall be determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and reported on a basis which is
consistent and comparable with the format of the books and accounts maintained by the grantee during the immediately preceding two (2) fiscal years
and as presented in the audited financial statements.
D. Further, this Section shall in no way limit the power of the City, upon expiration or revocation of a franchise, to require the grantee to cease all
operations whatsoever and/or remove its assets from the City, or otherwise exercise any rights the City would otherwise have. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-
1990)
8-4-4-11: FRANCHISE FEE:
A. The grantee, in consideration of the privileges granted under the franchise for the operation of a cable television system, and the expense of regulation
pursuant to the franchise incurred by the City, shall pay to the City a percent of its annual gross revenues during the period of its operation under the
franchise. This percent shall be set forth in the franchise and shall be no more than the maximum amount as may be set from time to time by
controlling Federal and State law. Such franchise fee shall be payable to the City within thirty (30) days of the close of each month in which the grantee
provides service to the City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 332/470
B. The grantee shall file with the City, at the time it makes any monthly payment pursuant to subsection A of this Section, a statement certifying the gross
revenues received by grantee during the preceding quarter. The grantee shall also file, within one hundred twenty (120) days following the conclusion
of the grantee's fiscal year, an annual report prepared and audited, at grantee's expense, by an independent certified public accountant acceptable to
the City, clearly showing the yearly total gross revenues. The audited annual report shall include documentation normally provided within acceptable
accounting standards, including a balance sheet, profit and loss statement, statement of revenues by category, applicable notations and auditor's
opinion of the information provided.
C. The City shall have the right, consistent with the provision of subsection 8-4-5-2C of this Chapter, to inspect the grantee's income records, the right of
audit and the recomputation of any amounts determined to be payable under this Chapter. Any additional amount due the City as a result of the audit
shall be paid within thirty (30) days following written notice to the grantee by the City which notice shall include a copy of the audit report. The cost of
said audit shall be borne by the grantee if it is properly determined, by an independent auditor chosen by the City and grantee, if necessary, that the
grantee's annual payment due to the City for the preceding year is increased thereby by more than five percent (5%), otherwise, such costs shall be
borne by the City.
D. In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest shall be
charged from such date at an annual rate of two (2) percentage points over the prime rate given by the Continental Illinois National Bank to its most
credit worthy borrowers of demand loans.
E. In the event the franchise is revoked or expires, the grantee shall file with the City, within thirty (30) days of such revocation or expiration a statement
clearly showing the gross revenues received by the grantee since the end of the previous fiscal quarter. The grantee shall pay the franchise fee due at
the time such statement is filed or within thirty (30) days, whichever is sooner. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-4-12: LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION:
A. The grantee shall save and hold the City, its corporate authorities, officers, boards, commissions, employees and agents harmless from any injury,
claim, demand, suit, judgment, execution liability, debt damages or penalty (hereinafter referred to as "claims") arising out of, resulting from, or alleged
to arise out of or result from, the construction, erection, installation, operation, maintenance of, or other activity connected with, the grantee's cable
television system, whether such acts or omissions are those of the grantee, whether or not any such act or omission is authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this Chapter or the grantee's franchise. These damages shall include, but not be limited to, penalties arising out of copyright
infringements and damages arising out of any failure by grantee to secure consents from owners, authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be
delivered by the grantee's cable television system. The grantor shall give immediate written notice to grantee of any "claim" or facts which might give
rise to a "claim" under this Section. Said notice shall state particulars sufficient to identify the "claim" and shall contain reasonably obtainable
information respecting the time, place, and circumstances of the occurrence underlying the "claim" or potential "claim". The grantor shall immediately
forward to grantee any demand, notice, summons, or other process received by it or its agents in connection with a "claim" described in this Section.
Further, the grantor shall cooperate with the grantee and assist in the investigation of any "claim" or potential "claim". The grantee shall have the right
to defend and settle any "claim", and the right to enforce any contribution or indemnity against any third party who may be liable to grantor or grantee
because of any occurrence giving rise to a "claim".
B. The grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of a franchise shall be deemed to have specifically agreed that it will pay all expenses incurred by the City
in defending itself with regard to all claims mentioned in subsection A of this Section. These expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses, such as
attorney fees, and shall also include the reasonable value to any services rendered by any employee of the City.
C. The grantee shall maintain at its own expense, and by its acceptance of a franchise shall be deemed to have specifically agreed that it will maintain
throughout the term of such franchise, comprehensive general liability insurance insuring the City and the grantee with regard to all claims mentioned in
subsection A of this Section in the minimum amounts of:
1. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to any one person, within the limit, however, of ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00) for
bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident;
2. Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for property damage, including damage to City property, resulting from any one accident;
3. Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for all other types of liability resulting from any one occurrence;
4. During any period of construction, adequate coverage to meet liability under the Illinois Structural Work Act;
5. Workers compensation insurance within statutory limits and employers liability insurance of not less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00). All policies of insurance required by this Section shall be placed with companies which are qualified to write insurance in the State of
Illinois by the Illinois Director of Insurance and which maintain throughout the policy term a general rating of "A" and a financial size category of "XV"
as determined by the A.M. Best Company. No insurance policy which provides for a deductible in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars
($250,000.00) shall be accepted to meet the requirements of this Section.
D. The grantee shall maintain at its own expense and by its acceptance of a franchise shall be deemed to have specifically agreed that it will maintain
throughout the term of such franchise, a faithful performance, license and franchise bond or letter of credit, as specified in the franchise agreement,
from an Illinois institution, running to the City, with at least two (2) good and sufficient sureties approved by the City, in the penal sum of two hundred
thousand dollars ($200,000.00), or such greater or lesser sum as may be specified in such franchise. When regular subscriber service is available to
more than ninety percent (90%) of the occupied dwelling units within the primary service area, as described in Section 8-4-6-2, the amount of the bond
or letter of credit shall be reduced to the amount specified in the franchise, or if no amount is specified therein, then to the sum of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00). Said bonds or letter of credit shall be conditioned that the grantee shall well and truly observe, fulfill, and perform each term and condition
of this Chapter and its franchise and that in case of any breach of condition of the bond, or letter of credit, the amount thereof, shall be recoverable
from the principal and sureties thereof by the City for all damages and costs, whether direct or indirect, resulting from the failure of the grantee to well
and faithfully observe and perform any provision of this Chapter or its franchise. Such damages and costs shall be deemed to include, as a minimum
and without limitation any expenses as may be incurred by the City as a result of grantee's failure to comply with the obligations imposed by this
Chapter and the franchise including, but not limited to, attorney fees and costs of any action or proceeding, the cost of refranchising, and the cost of
removal or abandonment of any property, or other costs which may be in default, which costs shall be conclusively presumed to amount to a sum equal
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 333/470
to at least the penal sum of such bond. The City shall have no obligation to devote the proceeds of such bond or letter of credit to the completion,
connection, operation or removal of grantee's cable television system, all of which shall remain the obligation of the grantee. The City's right to recover
under the bond or letter of credit shall be in addition to any other rights retained by the City under this Chapter and other applicable law.
E. In addition to the requirements of subsection D of this Section, the grantee shall maintain at its own expense, and by its acceptance of a franchise be
deemed to have agreed that it will maintain on deposit with the City throughout the term of such franchise a cash escrow or a letter of credit as
specified in the franchise agreement, from an Illinois financial institution in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or such greater or lesser
amount as may be specified in the franchise agreement. The form and content of such escrow or letter of credit shall be approved by the City Attorney.
The escrow or letter of credit shall be conditioned In the same manner as the bond hereinabove required and may be drawn on by the City to
compensate itself for any of the damages or costs specified in subsection D of this Section. In particular, but without limitation, such escrow or letter of
credit shall be drawn on in the case of any default or failure of the grantee to pay any fees, penalties, claims, liens or taxes due the City under Section
8-4-7-12 of this Chapter or the franchise. Upon drawing on such escrow or letter of credit for any reason, the City shall notify the grantee. The grantee
shall, within three (3) working days of the receipt of such notification, take all action required to restore the escrow or letter of credit to its original full
amount. The rights reserved to the City with respect to the escrow or letter of credit are in addition to all other rights of the City, whether reserved by
this Chapter or the franchise or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such escrow or letter of credit shall
affect any other right the City may have.
F. All insurance policies, bonds, escrows and letters of credit required by this Section shall contain a provision requiring at least thirty (30) days' written
notice to both the City and the grantee of any cancellation, termination, or other expiration and shall provide that no such cancellation, termination or
expiration shall be effective prior to such notice. Each such policy, bond, escrow and letter of credit must be approved by the Mayor and Council of the
City and copies of such documents, along with written evidence of payment by the grantee of required premiums or fees shall be filed and maintained
with the City Manager. Notices of such renewal of any expiring policy or bond shall be filed with the City Manager at least sixty (60) days prior to the
date of such expiration.
G. If the grantee proposes to secure a new insurance policy, bond or letter of credit, the grantee shall, at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of
any such existing insurance policy, bond or letter of credit, submit to the City Council a copy of the proposed new policy, bond or letter of credit, and
such proposed new policy, bond or letter of credit shall become effective only upon the expiration date of such expiring policy, bond or letter of credit if
the City Council of the City has approved the terms and coverage of the said proposed new policy, bond or letter of credit. The grantee shall comply
with all applicable provisions of this Section as to any such new policy, bond or letter of credit.
H. Nothing in this Section shall limit the right of the City to require any additional insurance policy, bond or letter of credit from the grantee in connection
with any transfer, upgrade, reconstruction or modification of the system or the franchise. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-4-13: TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE:
A. A franchise granted under this Chapter shall be a privilege to be held personally in trust by the grantee. Except as otherwise provided in the franchise
agreement, the franchise shall not be assigned, transferred, mortgaged, leased or sublet, sold or disposed of, transferred in trust, pledged, in whole or
in part, by voluntary sale, merger, sale and leaseback, consolidation or otherwise or by forced or involuntary sale, without prior consent of the City
expressed by resolution and then only such conditions as may therein be prescribed. Any sale, transfer or assignment not made according to the
procedures set forth in this Chapter shall render the franchise void. The sale, transfer or assignment in bulk of the major part of the tangible assets of
the grantee shall be considered an assignment and shall be subject to the provisions of this Section.
B. Any sale, transfer or assignment authorized by the City shall be made by a bill of sale or similar document, an executed copy of which shall be filed with
the City within thirty (30) days after such sale, transfer or assignment. The City shall not withhold its consent unreasonably; provided, however, the
proposed assignee agrees to comply with all the provisions of this Chapter and the franchise and reasonable amendments thereto, and must at a
minimum, satisfy the legal, financial, technical and character qualifications required by Section 8-4-3-2 of this Chapter.
C. Prior approval of the City shall be required where ownership or control of more than twenty percent (20%) of the right of control of the grantee is
acquired during the term of the franchise in any transaction or series of transactions by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom
owned or controlled twenty percent (20%) or more of such right of control, singularly or collectively on the effective date of the franchise. By its
acceptance of this franchise the grantee specifically grants and agrees that any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the City shall
render the franchise void. Prior approval of the City shall be required when the control or ownership of a previously approved and authorized
partnership is altered regardless of the percentage of alteration.
D. The consent of the City to any sale, transfer, lease, trust, mortgage or other instrument of hypothecation shall not constitute a waiver or release of any
of the rights of the City under this Chapter and the franchise.
E. Any failure by the grantee to provide reasonably requested information in regards to a franchise renewal shall result in a denial of the request for
renewal.
F. The City shall have the right of first refusal to purchase any portion of the system or system asset if the grantee puts that portion or system asset up for
sale.
G. The grantee shall reimburse the City for all its direct or indirect costs related to any transfer or change in control of the grantee or the franchise. Such
costs shall include, but not limited to, outside consultant and attorney fees incurred to evaluate any such transfer or change in control. No
reimbursement made under this Section shall constitute a franchise fee. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-5: SUBSCRIBER AND USER FEES AND RECORDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 334/470
8-4-5-1: SUBSCRIBER AND USER FEES:
A. By accepting a franchise granted pursuant to the terms and conditions imposed by this Chapter, the grantee agrees that the City shall have the authority
and right to cause the grantee's fees for regular subscriber service, and all other subscriber and user services to the extent permitted by law or FCC
rules and regulations, to conform to the provisions contained herein. The City shall also have the authority and right to fix fees and to deny increases or
order reduction of fees when it determines that in the absence of such action on its part, the grantee's fees or proposed fees do not conform to the
stipulations contained herein.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, and except in the case of extraordinary circumstances as approved by the City, the grantee shall not increase
the fees for services proposed in the franchise application above the rates specified in said application for a period of thirty six (36) months from the
time service is provided to the first subscriber pursuant to the grantee's franchise; provided, however, that the grantee shall have the authority and the
right to add to its service or installation fees any Federal, State or local taxes or fees directly imposed on subscribers, and for any additional copyright
fees that may be imposed as a result of legislative or judicial action at the Federal, State or local level taken after the filing of the franchise application.
If during the term of the franchise, the grantee receives refunds of any copyright payments, it shall without delay notify the City, suggest a plan for flowthrough
of the refunds to its subscribers, and retain such refunds in an interest bearing escrow account pending order of the City. After considering the
plan submitted by the grantee, the City shall order flow-through of the refunds with accrued interest to the grantee's subscribers in a fair and equitable
manner.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions hereof, no action shall be taken by the City Council with respect to the grantee's rates, nor rules and
regulations applicable thereto, until at least the expiration of thirty (30) months following the date service is provided to the first subscriber under the
franchise. At any time thereafter, the Council may after proper notice as provided in Section 8-4-4-2 of this Chapter, hold public hearings to consider the
necessity of regulating the subscriber and user rates charged by the grantee, and may, following such hearings establish procedures for the review of
subscriber and user rates and may order adjustments to such rates in accordance with the provisions of this Section subject to applicable law;
provided, however, that this Section shall not permit the City to order the grantee to rebate any fee or portion thereof charged during the period when
such fees were not subject to regulation by the City.
D. Grantee may, at its own discretion, in a nondiscriminatory manner, waive, reduce or suspend connection fees or monthly service fees for promotional
purposes.
E. The grantee shall comply in all respects with the customer service standards set out in the franchise agreement, or in any modification or amendment to
the franchise agreement, any standards set out in this Chapter, and any applicable State, Federal and local laws regarding billing practices. (Ord. 0-90-
56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-5-2: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
A. A grantee shall: 1) within thirty (30) days following the acceptance of a franchise, and 2) at least yearly thereafter, and 3) within thirty (30) days of the
change of ownership of three percent (3%) or more of any class or series of the outstanding voting stock or equivalent ownership interest of a grantee,
furnish the City a list, showing the names and addresses of persons owning three percent (3%) or more of any class or series of the outstanding voting
stock or equivalent ownership interest of the grantee together with a roster of the grantee's officers and directors (or equivalent managerial personnel)
and their addresses.
B. A grantee shall maintain books and records of its operations within the City to show the following in sufficient detail, consistent with generally accepted
accounting principles:
1. Total revenues, by service category.
2. Operating expenses, categorized by general and administrative expenses, technical expenses, programming expenses, and overhead where
applicable.
3. Capital expenditures, to include capitalized interest and overhead, if any.
4. Depreciation (straight-line) expense, by category.
C. A grantee shall maintain such books and records for the franchise area specified in the franchise separately from any other operations; provided,
however, that any expenses or expenditures which apply to both the system in said franchise area and any other operations shall be reasonably
allocated between all such operations, consistent with generally accepted accounting principles.
Such books and records shall be retained, in any reasonable form, for a period of not less than fifteen (15) years. The City shall have the right to
extend the retention period through the term of any renewed franchise.
D. The books and records of the grantee's operation within the City, which are required to be maintained pursuant to subsection B of this Section, shall be
made available in the grantee's local office during normal business hours, for inspection and audit by the City within thirty (30) days after such request
has been made.
E. Copies of the grantee's schedule of charges, contract or application forms for subscriber and user services, policy regarding the processing of
subscriber complaints, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted as the grantee's policy
in connection with its subscribers or users shall be filed with the City and shall be made available for inspection by the public in the grantee's local
office.
F. Within thirty (30) days of a request by the Municipality, the grantee shall compile and make available to the Municipality a list of all houses passed in the
franchise area, which list shall also designate which houses are subscribers to the system. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 335/470
8-4-6: SYSTEM OPERATIONS:
8-4-6-1: FRANCHISE AREAS:
A. Each franchise shall designate a primary service area ("PSA") and a proposed schedule for making service available throughout the PSA. If no PSA is
specified, it shall initially be defined as the corporate boundaries of the City existing on the effective date of the franchise or, at the discretion of the City,
the corporate boundaries existing on the effective date of any franchise modification or amendment granted pursuant to this Chapter. If no schedule is
specified, service shall be made available throughout the entire PSA within twenty four (24) months of the effective date of the franchise.
B. The PSA may be redefined by the City upon any franchise modification, amendment, transfer or renewal, to coincide with the corporate boundaries of
the City existing at that time.
C. Grantee shall furnish to the City a map of suitable scale indicating the primary service area to be served and showing all roads and public buildings
within the PSA. Such map shall also show the placement of all trunk lines and amplifiers. Revised maps shall be made available to the City within thirty
(30) days of a request. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-6-2: EXTENSION OF SERVICE:
Following completion of construction within the PSA, each grantee shall extend its CATV system and make CATV service available beyond the PSA as
follows:
A. Grantee shall, unless otherwise specified in the franchise, make service available in the initial PSA to all residences or businesses requesting such
service within twenty four (24) months of the effective date of the franchise agreement granted pursuant to this Chapter.
B. Unless otherwise specified in the franchise, within ninety (90) days after notification by the City of an annexation, having a minimum density of twenty
five (25) units per street mile, the grantee shall begin the construction process of its cable system within such annexed area so as to provide service to
each person requesting service in any such annexed area. Construction or extension of the system to those requesting service in such new areas shall
be completed within the time frame submitted by the grantee on the final design submitted to the City. The City will have final approval of such time
frame, however, such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Unless a variance is granted by the City such time frame shall not be longer than
ninety (90) days.
C. The City shall notify the grantee of the construction of any new development within the PSA by delivering to the grantee a final plat of survey, to include
final design for all utilities for that development. Within thirty (30) days of such notice of areas having a planned minimum density of twenty five (25)
units per street mile, unless a variance of this requirement is granted by the City, the grantee shall deliver to the City its proposed construction design
plan for the development and have applied for all necessary permits and licenses. Construction shall begin within thirty (30) days of the receipt of all
necessary permits and licenses. The grantee shall complete construction of its system in the development within the time frame as submitted on the
final design submitted to the City. The City will have final approval of such time frame, however, such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Unless a variance is granted by the City such time frame shall not be longer than ninety (90) days.
D. Within thirty (30) days after signing a contract and approved design with any multiple dwelling unit for the provision of cable service, the grantee shall
begin construction or extension of its system in such multiple dwelling unit. The grantee shall complete construction or extension of its system within
the time frame as submitted on the final design submitted to the City. The City will have final approval of such time frame, however, such approval shall
not be unreasonably withheld. Unless a variance is granted by the City such time frame shall not be longer than ninety (90) days.
E. Line extensions shall be completed within one year of the filing of a written request for service by not less than fifty percent (50%) of the potential
subscribers and/or users located in an area which does not meet the minimum densities specified above. If the grantee determines that a line
extension is not economically feasible, it may request relief from this provision. The City may or may not grant such relief, however, the request may
not be unreasonably denied.
F. All easements, other than utility easements, constructed for cable television service shall be recorded on plats of survey as directed by the City.
G. The grantee, in its application, may propose a line extension policy which will result in serving more residents of the City than as required above, in
which case the grantee's application will be incorporated by reference in the franchise, and will be binding on the grantee. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-6-3: INDIVIDUAL SERVICE DROPS:
A. Grantee shall extend and make cable television service available to any isolated subscriber within the primary service area requesting connection at the
standard connection charge, if the connection to such subscriber would require no more than a standard one hundred fifty foot (150') aerial or buried
drop line measured from the subscriber's structure nearest to a trunk or feeder cable required to be installed pursuant to Sections 8-4-6-1 and 8-4-6-2
of this Chapter to the subscriber's connection.
B. With respect to requests for connection requiring an aerial or buried drop line in excess of one hundred fifty feet (150'), grantee shall extend and make
available cable television service to such subscribers at a connection charge not to exceed the actual installation costs incurred by the grantee for the
distance exceeding one hundred fifty feet (150'). (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-6-4: SYSTEM DESCRIPTION AND SERVICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 336/470
A. The cable television system to be installed by the grantee shall comply in all respects with the technical performance standards for operation of the
system set out in the franchise agreement, or in any modification or amendment to the franchise agreement, and those standards set out in this
Chapter. However, if the standards set out in the franchise agreement fall below any applicable standards set out in this Chapter, as amended from
time to time, the standards in this Chapter shall take precedence. If any technical performance standards either in the franchise agreement or this
Chapter fall below the requirements of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), either now or in the future, the grantee shall be required to
meet the applicable FCC standard. The City reserves the right to amend this Chapter to impose new technical performance standards which shall be
applicable to all franchises granted pursuant to this Chapter, pursuant to applicable law. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the grantee from agreeing
to be bound by more stringent technical performance standards than those in the franchise agreement or this Chapter, which proposals shall, at the
option of the City, be incorporated into the franchise agreement or any modification thereto.
B. Applications for franchise may include proposals for the provision of public, education, local governments, and leased access channels. Such proposals
by a grantee, if accepted by the City, shall be incorporated into the franchise granted. No such proposal shall be accepted unless it complies with the
following minimum requirements:
1. The grantee shall have available equipment for local production and presentation of cablecast programs other than automated services and shall
permit its use for the production and presentation of public access programs. The grantee shall not enter into any contract, arrangement or lease for
use of its cablecast equipment which prevents or inhibits the use of such equipment for a substantial portion of time for public access programming.
2. The grantee shall have no control over the content of access programs, however, this limitation shall not prevent taking appropriate steps to ensure
compliance with the operating rules described herein; failure to comply with such operating rules shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.
3. The public access channel(s) shall be made available to residents of the City on a first-come, first-served, nondiscriminatory basis, consistent with
the goal of the maximum availability of access, free of charge. Charge for equipment, personnel and production of public access programming shall
be reasonable and consistent with the goal of affording users a low-cost means of television access. The grantee shall adopt operating rules for the
public access channel(s), to be filed with the City prior to the activation of the channel(s), designed to prohibit the presentation of any advertising
material designed to promote the sale of commercial products or services (including advertising by or on behalf of candidates for public office); lottery
information; programming in violation of any Federal, State or local law, as well as rules requiring first-come nondiscriminatory access, and rules
permitting public inspection of a complete record of the names and addresses of all persons or groups requesting access time. Such a record shall
be retained for a period of two (2) years.
4. The education access channel(s) shall be made available for the use of schools free of charge. The grantee shall adopt operating rules for the
education access channel(s), to be filed with the City prior to activation of the channel(s), designed to prohibit the presentation of any advertising
material designed to promote the sale of commercial products or services (including advertising by or on behalf of candidates for public office); lottery
information; programming in violation of any Federal, State or local law.
5. The local government access channel(s) shall be made available for the use of the City or such other unit of local government as shall be designated
by the City free of charge.
6. The leased access channel(s) as specified in the franchise application shall be made available to leased access users. Priority shall be given parttime
users on at least one channel. The grantee shall adopt operating rules for the channel(s), to be filed with the City Manager prior to activation of
the channel(s), designed to prohibit the presentation of lottery information, to the extent such information is prohibited by State law; and obscene or
indecent matter and shall establish rules to this effect; and other rules requiring nondiscriminatory access, sponsorship identification, specifying an
appropriate rate schedule and permitting public inspection of a complete record of the names and addresses of all persons or groups requesting
time. Such a record shall be retained until the earliest scheduled performance evaluation session described in Section 8-4-4-4 of this Chapter or for a
longer period as determined by the City.
C. Grantee shall provide, without charge within the primary service area, one service outlet activated for regular subscriber service to each fire station,
school, police station, public library, and such other buildings used for governmental purposes as may be designated in the franchise agreement;
provided, however, that if it is necessary to extend grantee's trunk or feeder lines more than three hundred feet (300') solely to provide service to any
such school or public building the City shall have the option either of paying grantee's direct costs for such extension in excess of three hundred feet
(300'), or of releasing grantee from the obligation to provide service to such building. Furthermore, grantee shall be permitted to recover, from any
public building owner entitled to free service, the direct cost of installing, when requested to do so, more than one outlet, or concealed inside wiring, or
a service outlet requiring more than three hundred feet (300') of drop cable; provided, however, that the grantee shall not charge for the provision of
regular subscriber service to the additional service outlets once installed.
D. The grantee shall not permit the transmission of any programming in violation of any Federal, State or local law. Grantee shall inform each subscriber of
the availability of a device capable of locking out any programming video and audio signals and shall provide such a device for each outlet to any
subscriber upon request at no additional charge. In addition, the grantee shall offer to provide and shall provide A/B switches to subscribers pursuant to
the guidelines established by the FCC.
E. In addition to any service outlets required by this Section, the grantee shall provide a single-service outlet activated for all subscriber programming
services offered by the grantee over its system at an office designated by the City and at the Northwest Municipal Cable Council office so as to allow
the City and the Northwest Municipal Cable Council to monitor the adequacy of grantee's service. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-6-5: OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND RECORDS:
A. Grantee shall construct, operate, and maintain the cable television system in full compliance with the technical performance and construction standards
set out in this Chapter and the franchise agreement, and all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and all other
applicable, Federal, State, or local laws and regulations, including the latest editions of the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Fire
Protection Association National Electrical Code. The cable television system and all its parts shall be subject to inspection by the City, and the City
hereby reserves the right to review grantee's construction plans prior to the commencement of construction. The City shall not, however, be required to
make inspections or approve the grantee's system and plans, and specifically disclaims such obligation. The grantee shall be solely responsible for
taking all steps necessary to assure compliance with such laws and regulations and the safety of its system as installed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 337/470
B. Grantee shall maintain an office, within the City unless otherwise stated in the franchise, which shall be open and accessible to the public with adequate
telephone service during normal business hours. Grantee shall employ an operator or maintain a telephone answering service twenty four (24) hours
per day, each day of the year, to receive subscriber complaints and to dispatch assistance in the case of any emergency or major system malfunction
affecting a number of subscribers.
C. Grantee shall design, construct, operate, and maintain the system at all times so that signals carried are delivered to subscribers without material
degradation in quality (within the limitations imposed by the technical state of the art).
D. Copies of all correspondence, petitions, reports, applications and other documents filed by grantee with Federal or State agencies having appropriate
jurisdiction in matters affecting cable television operation or received from said agencies shall be furnished simultaneously to the City by grantee.
E. In the case of any emergency or disaster, the grantee shall, upon request of the City, make available its facilities to the City, without cost, for emergency
use during the emergency or disaster period. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-6-6: TESTS AND PERFORMANCE MONITORING:
A. No later than ninety (90) days after any new or substantially rebuilt portion of the system is made available for service to subscribers, technical
performance tests shall be conducted by the grantee to demonstrate full compliance with the technical standards applicable pursuant to subsections 8-
4-6-4A and 8-4-6-5C of this Chapter, and the standards set out in the franchise agreement. Such tests shall be performed by, or under the supervision
of a qualified and independent registered professional engineer or an engineer with proper training and experience. A copy of the report shall be
submitted to the City Administrator, describing test results, instrumentation, calibration, and test procedures, and the qualifications of the engineer
responsible for the tests.
B. System monitor test points shall be established at or near the output of the last amplifier in the longest feeder line, at or near trunk line extremities, or at
the locations to be specified in the franchise. Such periodic tests shall be made at the test points as shall be required by the City or the agency.
C. At any time after commencement of service to subscribers, the City may require additional reasonable tests, including full or partial repeat tests,
different test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's terminal, at the grantee's expense to the extent such tests may be performed by the
grantee's employees utilizing its existing facilities and equipment; provided, however, that the City reserves the right to conduct its own tests upon
reasonable notice to the grantee and if noncompliance is found, the expense thereof shall be borne by the grantee. The City will endeavor to arrange
its requests for such special tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to grantee or to the subscriber.
D. A copy of the annual performance tests report required by the Federal Communications Commission shall be submitted to the City Administrator within
thirty (30) days of its completion.
E. The City shall have the right to employ qualified consultants it necessary or desirable to assist in the administration of this, or any other section of this
Chapter. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-6-7: SERVICE, ADJUSTMENT AND COMPLAINT PROCEDURE:
A. The grantee shall operate the cable television system continuously, with operating personnel available on call twenty four (24) hours per day, with a
publicly listed phone number to receive complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments at any time. The grantee shall also have customer service
offices in locations to be determined in the franchise agreement to be used by subscribers for payment and adjustments of bills, complaints, requests
for service, repairs or other transactions.
B. The grantee shall at all times maintain a force of one or more agents or employees in sufficient numbers and of sufficient technical qualifications to
safely, adequately and promptly repair any structural damages to system equipment which is located in, over, under, or upon public streets, ways or
places; and to immediately secure the public safety in the vicinity thereof, prior to and during the making of said repairs.
C. The grantee shall establish a maintenance service capable of locating and correcting major system malfunctions promptly which shall be available at all
hours, to correct such major system malfunctions affecting a number of subscribers.
D. The grantee shall interrupt system service after seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and before one o'clock (1:00) A.M. only with good cause and for the shortest
time possible and, except in emergency situations, only after cable-casting notice of service interruptions at least twenty four (24) hours in advance of
the service interruption. Service may be interrupted between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. for routine testing, maintenance,
and repair with notification, on any day except Saturday or Sunday or a legal holiday. Routing maintenance known as a "sweep" may be performed
during the daylight hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on any day except Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday up to twice a
year upon notification to the City and the subscribers in accordance with this Section.
E. The grantee shall comply with all customer service standards set out in the franchise agreement. Such standards may include, but not be limited to,
phone service, repair service, installations, notifications, billing and disconnect procedures. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the grantee from
agreeing to be bound by more stringent customer service standards than those in the franchise agreement, which proposal shall be incorporated into
the franchise agreement.
F. The grantee shall keep appropriate records of all requests for installation of service, service calls, and outages, showing the date completed and any
corrective action taken. Such records shall be available to the City during normal business hours and retained in the grantee's files until the next
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 338/470
scheduled performance evaluation session described in Section 8-4-4-4 of this Chapter or for a longer period as directed by the City. A summary of
such calls shall be prepared by the grantee and submitted to the City annually.
G. Nothing in this Section shall limit the right of the City to prescribe additional consumer protection standards. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-6-8: STREET OCCUPANCY:
A. Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different, or additional
poles, conduits, or other facilities whether on the public way or on privately owned property within the City until the written approval of the City and, if
necessary, of the property owner is obtained. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld by the Municipality. No location of any pole, wireholding
structure or other facility of the grantee shall be a vested interest and such poles, structures and facilities shall be removed, relocated or
modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever the City or any other governmental authority determines that the public convenience would be
enhanced thereby. Nothing herein or in any franchise shall be construed to entitle grantee to the use of any property other than the public way.
B. The City shall be entitled to make use of the grantee's poles and other wire-holding structures so long as such use does not unreasonably interfere with
grantee's operations.
C. Where a public utility serving the City desires to make use of the poles or other wire-holding structures of the grantee but agreement therefor with the
grantee cannot be reached, the City may require the grantee to permit such use for such consideration and upon such terms as the City shall
determine to be just and reasonable, if the City determines that the use would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with the
grantee's operations.
D. All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be installed and located in compliance with all applicable local ordinances and so as to cause
minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any public way and at all times shall be kept and
maintained in a safe, adequate, and substantial condition, and in good order and repair, consistent with the provisions of subsection F of this Section.
The grantee shall at all times employ reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing
failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices
shall be used at such times and places as are required by applicable ordinances and at such additional times and places as are reasonably required for
the safety of all members of the public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by the grantee shall be placed and maintained in such a
manner as not to interfere with the usual travel or other existing or projected uses of such public way. Unless expressly provided otherwise in the
franchise, the grantee shall at all times comply with any and all rules and regulations enacted or to be enacted by the City with reference to
construction activity in public ways. Pursuant to the terms of this Chapter and the franchise agreement, the grantee shall, to the maximum extent
possible, complete all installation or construction to be performed at each residence or business, including the installation of new equipment and the
burial of lines, in one service call. All temporary service lines shall be buried as quickly as practicable.
E. Grantee shall remove, replace, or modify at its own expense, the installation of any of its facilities when directed to do so by the City.
F. All installations shall be underground in those areas of the City when public utilities providing both telephone and electric service are underground at the
time of installation. In areas where either telephone or electric facilities are aboveground at the time of installation, the grantee may install its service
aboveground; provided, that at such time as those facilities are required to be placed underground by the City or are placed underground, the grantee
shall likewise place its services underground without additional cost to the City or to the individual subscriber so served within the City. Where not
otherwise required to be placed underground by this Chapter, the grantee's system shall be located underground at the request of the adjacent
property owner, provided that the excess cost over aerial location shall be borne by the property owner making the request.
G. The grantee shall, at its cost and expense, in a manner approved by the appropriate Municipal official, repair, replace or restore any street, sidewalk,
alley, public way or any other public or private property disturbed, damaged or in any way injured by or on account of its activities, and shall be
obligated to conduct such repair, replacement or restoration for a period of one year thereafter, so as to ensure that any defective repair, replacement,
or restoration work by the grantee is corrected and ensure that the affected property remains in as good a condition as it was in before the work
involving such disturbance or damage was done. In the event the grantee fails to perform the repair, replacement or restoration in a manner approved
by the City or property owner within thirty (30) days after the disturbance, disruption or damage to such public or private property, provided that
acceptable weather conditions have existed, the City shall have the right to direct that such corrective work be performed at the cost and expense of
the grantee. Upon written demand for reimbursement for the cost of repair, replacement or restoration of damaged property, the grantee shall promptly
remit such reimbursement to the City or the affected property owner. In the event of nonpayment by the grantee for a period of forty five (45) days after
a written demand for reimbursement is made, the letter of credit specified in subsection 8-4-4-12E of this Chapter may be utilized for such payment.
H. Whenever, in case of emergency, it becomes necessary in the judgment of the City to remove or damage any of the grantee's facilities, no charge shall
be made by the grantee against the City for restoration or repair.
I. At the request of any person holding a valid building moving permit issued by the City or other appropriate governmental authority and upon at least forty
eight (48) hours' notice, grantee shall temporarily raise, lower, or cut its wires as may be necessary to facilitate such move. The direct expense of such
temporary changes, including standby time, shall be paid by the permit holder, and the grantee shall have the authority to require payment in advance.
J. Grantee shall not cut or trim any tree, shrub or vegetation on public property without first obtaining a written authorization from the City. Any such work
shall be done at grantee's expense and shall be subject to the supervision and direction of the City.
K. The desire of each subscriber as to the point of entry into his or her residence, common areas, or business shall be observed to the maximum possible
extent. Runs in building interiors and exteriors shall be unobtrusive as possible. The grantee shall comply with a subscriber's request that the grantee
use white cable in the interior of the subscriber's residence or business, however, subscribers will be informed that the use of white cable constitutes a
custom install and shall be subject to appropriate charges not to exceed the actual cost incurred by the grantee. In addition: 1) no permanent fixture for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 339/470
the reception of cable service may be attached to any residence or business without the express written consent of the owner(s) of that residence or
business, 2) the cost of removal of such equipment shall be borne by the owner.
L. Except in cases requiring emergency repair, or related to a specific service problem, or installation of regular subscription services at the subscriber's
residence or business, the grantee must give each subscriber at least three (3) days' notice before attempting to perform any construction,
reconstruction or installation at subscriber's residence or business. Such notice shall be by door hanger or by mail. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-6-9: CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE AND REPORTS:
A. Upon accepting the franchise, grantee shall, within sixty (60) days, file the documents required to obtain all necessary Federal, State and local licenses,
permits and authorizations required for the conduct of its business, and shall submit monthly reports to the City Administrator's office on progress in this
respect until all such documents are in hand. Failure of the grantee to pursue all necessary steps to secure the aforementioned authorizations with due
diligence shall constitute a substantial violation of this Chapter.
B. Franchise applications shall include a schedule for construction of the cable television system, including a timetable for commencement of cable
television service to subscribers. Said schedule shall be incorporated into the franchise and shall be enforceable as to the grantee under the provisions
of this Chapter.
C. In the event that reconstruction becomes necessary, the grantee shall provide a schedule for such reconstruction including a timetable, by area within
the City, for completion of the reconstruction. The grantee shall provide a report on progress of the reconstruction weekly until said reconstruction is
complete. The report shall include a map that clearly defines the areas which are complete, and the next areas to be affected by the reconstruction
activity. The grantee shall abide by all provisions in this franchise agreement when undertaking any reconstruction work. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-6-10: PROTECTION OF PRIVACY:
A. Grantee shall not permit the transmission of any signal, aural, visual or digital, including "polling" the channel selection, from any subscriber's premises
without first obtaining informed consent of the subscriber which shall not have obtained from the subscriber as a condition of any service for which
transmission is not an essential element. The request for such consent shall be contained in a separate document, which specifically enumerates and
describes the transmissions being authorized and includes a prominent statement that the subscriber is authorizing the permission in full knowledge of
its provision and shall be revocable at any time by the subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever. This provision is not intended to prohibit the
use or transmission of signals useful only for the control or measurement of system performance or used for billing subscribers.
B. Grantee shall not permit the installation of any special terminal equipment in any subscriber's premises that will permit transmission from subscriber's
premises of two-way services utilizing aural, visual or digital signals without first obtaining written permission of the subscriber as provided in
subsection A of this Section.
C. Grantee, or any of its agents or employees, shall not, without the specific written authorization of the subscriber involved, as provided in subsection A of
this Section, sell or otherwise make available to any party any information which identifies the viewing habits or responses of individual subscribers.
D. The grantee shall comply with the provisions for the protection of subscriber privacy contained in section 631 of the Cable Act. If said requirements
should be deleted, the City reserves the right to amend this Chapter to incorporate similar standards. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-6-11: OTHER BUSINESS ACTIVITIES:
A. The grantee, its subsidiaries and affiliates are specifically prohibited from engaging directly or indirectly, in the sale or leasing of television receivers,
radio receivers, or television or radio parts, except such parts and accessories required for any type of cable connections, such as converters and
connection plugs and accessories, individually or with any person, anywhere in the City, whether or not for a fee or charge, and is further prohibited
from engaging in any type of repair service to television receivers or radio receivers.
B. Grantee is expressly prohibited from requiring the removal or from offering to remove or to provide any inducements for removal of any potential or
existing subscriber antennas. The grantee may remove an existing antenna only with the express written consent of the owner. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-
1990)
8-4-6-12: AREAWIDE INTERCONNECTION OF CATV SYSTEMS:
A. Each grantee, if ordered to do so by resolution of the City shall interconnect access and/or local origination channels of its CATV system with all other
CATV systems in adjacent areas.
B. Upon receiving an order to interconnect, the grantee shall make a good faith effort to obtain agreements for the sharing of interconnection costs among
all interconnecting companies. The City may extend the time to interconnect or may rescind its order to interconnect upon finding that the grantee has
made a good faith effort but has been unable to obtain a reasonable interconnection agreement or that the cost of the interconnection would cause an
unreasonable increase in subscriber rates.
C. Each grantee shall cooperate with any entity established for the purpose of regulating, financing, or otherwise providing for the interconnection of CATV
systems.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 340/470
D. The City may require a grantee to provide local origination equipment that is compatible with that used by other CATV systems within the adjacent
areas.
E. Grantee shall make every reasonable effort to cooperate with cable television franchise holders in contiguous communities in order to provide cable
service in areas outside the grantee's franchise area.
F. The City shall make every reasonable effort to cooperate with the franchising authorities in contiguous communities, and with the grantee, in order to
provide cable television service in areas outside the City. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-7: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
8-4-7-1: LIMITS ON GRANTEE'S RECOURSE:
A. Grantee shall have no recourse against the City for any loss, expense or damage resulting from the terms and conditions of this Chapter or the
franchise or because of the City granting or enforcement thereof nor for the City's failure to have the authority to grant the franchise. The grantee
expressly agrees that upon its acceptance of the franchise it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of
the City to grant said franchise.
B. The grantee, by accepting the franchise, acknowledges that it has not been induced to accept same by any promise, verbal or written, by or on behalf of
the City or by any third person regarding any term or condition of this Chapter or the franchise not expressed therein. The grantee further pledges that
no promise or inducement, oral or written, has been made to any City employee or official regarding receipt of the cable television franchise other than
as contained in the franchise agreement.
C. The grantee further acknowledges by acceptance of the franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions of this Chapter and the franchise
and accepts without reservation the obligations imposed by the terms and conditions thereof.
D. The decision of the Council concerning grantee selection and awarding of the franchise shall be final.
E. The grantee shall not apply for any waivers, exceptions, or declaratory rulings from the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or any other
Federal or State regulatory agency without prior written notice to the City. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-7-2: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAW:
The grantee shall, at all times, comply with all laws of the State and Federal governments and the rules and regulations of any Federal or State
administrative agency. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-7-3: SPECIAL LICENSE:
Upon such conditions as the City may deem necessary, and not withstanding the provision of Section 8-4-3 of this Chapter, the City may issue a license,
easement or other permit to anyone other than a grantee to permit that person to traverse any portion of the City in order to provide service outside the
City. Such license or easement, absent a grant or franchise in accordance with this Chapter, shall not authorize nor permit said person to provide a cable
television service of any nature to any home or place of business within the City, nor the right to render any service or connect any subscriber within the
City to a grantee's cable television system. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-7-4: FRANCHISE VALIDITY:
A. The grantee agrees, by the acceptance of the franchise, to accept the validity of the terms and conditions of this Chapter and the franchise in their
entirety and that it will not, at any time, proceed against the City in any claim or proceeding challenging any term or provision of this Chapter or the
franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary or void, or that the City did not have the authority to impose such term or condition.
B. In case of conflict or ambiguity between this Chapter, the franchise or the grantee's franchise application, the grantee agrees that the provision which
provides the greatest benefit to the City shall prevail. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-7-5: FAILURE TO ENFORCE FRANCHISE:
The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this Chapter or the franchise by any failure of the City upon any
one or more occasions, to insist upon the grantee's performance or to seek grantee's compliance with any one or more of such terms or conditions. (Ord.
0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-7-6: RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE GRANTOR:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 341/470
A. The City hereby expressly reserves the following rights which shall not be deemed to be waived or abrogated by any franchise granted pursuant to this
Chapter:
1. To exercise its governmental powers, now or hereafter, to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the City.
2. To adopt, in addition to the provisions contained herein and in the franchise and in any existing applicable ordinance, such additional regulations as it
shall find necessary in the exercise of its police power.
3. To amend this Chapter or any franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter as provided in Section 8-4-4-3 of this Chapter, to require reasonable and
appropriate modifications in a grantee's franchise of a nature that would not result in effectively terminating same; provided, that the City shall not
make any amendments or modifications to this Chapter or a franchise granted hereunder which would alter the provisions of subsection 8-4-4-5D or
8-4-4-6E of this Chapter, during the term of any franchise granted hereunder.
4. To renegotiate any franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter should substantial section(s) of the Chapter or franchise be rendered void by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), or by subsequent changes in applicable Federal, or State laws. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-7-7: EMPLOYMENT REQUIREMENT:
The grantee shall not refuse to hire, nor discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person regarding compensation, terms, conditions, or
privileges of employment because of age, sex, race, color, creed, or national origin. The grantee shall take affirmative action to ensure that employees are
treated fairly and equally during employment, without regard to their age, sex, race, color or national origin. The condition includes, but is not limited to, the
following: recruitment advertising, employment interviews, employment rates of pay, upgrading, transfer, demotion, lay-off, and termination. (Ord. 0-90-56,
12-3-1990)
8-4-7-8: TIME ESSENCE OF AGREEMENT/FORCE MAJEURE:
Whenever this Chapter or the franchise sets forth any time for any act to be performed by the grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence and the
grantee's failure to perform within the time allotted shall, in all cases, be sufficient grounds for the City to invoke the remedies available under the terms
and conditions of this Chapter and the franchise.
Whenever a period of time is provided for in this Chapter for either the City or the grantee to do or perform any act or obligation, neither party shall be
liable for any delays due to: war; riot; insurrection; rebellion; strike; lockout; unavoidable casualty or damage to personnel, materials or equipment; fire;
flood; storm; earthquake; tornado; orders of a court of competent jurisdiction; any act of God; or any cause beyond the control of said party. And, in any
event, said time period shall be extended for the amount of time said party is so delayed. An act of omission shall not be deemed to be beyond a grantee's
control if committed, omitted, or caused by a corporation or other business entity which holds a controlling interest in the grantee, whether held directly or
indirectly. Further, the failure of a grantee to obtain financing, or to pay any money due from it to any person, including the Council, for whatever reason,
shall not be an act or omission which is "beyond the grantee's control". (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-7-9: ACCEPTANCE:
This Chapter and the franchise and their terms and conditions shall be accepted by the grantee by written instrument filed with the City within thirty (30)
days after the granting of the franchise, unless said period is extended by the City at its sole discretion. In its acceptance, the grantee shall declare that it
has carefully read the terms and conditions of this Chapter and the franchise and accepts all of the terms and conditions imposed by this Chapter and the
franchise and agrees to abide by same. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-7-10: PUBLICATION COSTS:
The grantee shall assume the cost of publication of this Chapter and franchise and such is payable at the time of the grantee's filing of acceptance as in
Section 8-4-7-9 of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-7-11: RESELLING SERVICE PROHIBITED:
No person receiving within the City, any cable service, program or signal transmitted by a cable television company operating under a franchise issued by
the City shall resell such service, program or signal without the expressed, written consent of both the grantee and the Council. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-7-12: PENALTIES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach or affix or to cause to be attached or affixed any equipment or device which allows access to or use of any
cable television service without payment to the grantee for same.
B. As time is of the essence, the grantee's failure to perform within the time allotted shall, in all cases, be sufficient grounds for the City to invoke remedies
available under the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement, this Chapter, and any applicable State, Federal and local laws, as now exist, or as
may be amended in the future, in addition to recovery of any monies owed by the grantee to the City or damages to the City as a result of any acts or
omissions by the grantee pursuant to this Chapter or the franchise agreement.
1. Whenever a violation exists which has a specific time set forth, the City shall notify the grantee in writing, setting forth the nature and the facts of
such noncompliance and giving ten (10) days' notice of a formal hearing in which the grantee may bring forth evidence that: a) the problem has been
resolved, or b) reasons why the violation is beyond the grantee's control, or c) that the problem did not exist.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 342/470
2. In the event a violation exists which does not have a specific time to comply, the City shall notify the grantee in writing, by certified mail, setting forth
the nature and the facts of such noncompliance and giving thirty (30) days' notice of a formal hearing as outlined above.
C. If after hearing evidence from all interested parties, the City concludes that the violation has not been sufficiently remedied, they may charge to and
collect from the letter of credit or cash escrow provided for in Section 8-4-4-12 of this Chapter, the following penalties:
1. For failure to activate the system in accordance with the franchise agreement, unless the City approves the delay, the penalty shall be two hundred
dollars ($200.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.
2. For failure to complete system construction, in accordance with grantee's franchise, within the primary service area, unless the City approves the
delay, the penalty shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.
3. For failure to provide data, documents, reports or information as required in this Chapter or the franchise agreement unless the City approves the
delay, the penalty shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.
4. For failure to cooperate or provide data, documents, reports, or information in conjunction with the performance evaluation session provided for in
Section 8-4-4-4 of this Chapter, upon thirty (30) days' notice of request, unless City approves the delay, the penalty shall be two hundred dollars
($200.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.
5. For failure to test, analyze and report on the performance of the system within thirty (30) days after a request by the City, unless the City approves
the delay, the penalty shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.
6. For failure by grantee to modify the system or provide additional service within thirty (30) days after required by the City following a performance
evaluation session, unless the City approves the delay, the penalty shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, such
failure occurs or continues.
7. For failure by grantee to comply with construction, reconstruction, line extension, operation or maintenance standards, unless the City approves the
delay, the penalty shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.
8. For failure to comply with any customer service standards, unless the City approves the delay, the penalty shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) per
day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.
9. Exclusive of the penalties set out above in this Section, persons, whether natural or artificial, or commercial entities who violate any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day a violation continues or is permitted
to exist shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In addition to any penalty which may be imposed herein, the City may initiate injunctive relief,
including the issuance of temporary restraining orders and preliminary injunctions in the Circuit Court of Cook County, including Municipal Branch
Districts within the jurisdiction of the City, to abate any violation of this Chapter the continuation of which would be injurious to welfare of the residents
or which would frustrate or defeat the intent and purpose of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-7-13: GRANTEE MAY PROMULGATE RULES:
Grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable it
to exercise its rights and perform its services under this Chapter and the rules of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), and to assure
uninterrupted service to each and all of its subscribers.
Such rules and regulations shall not be deemed to have the force of law. Such rules and regulations shall be filed with the City and shall not, unless the
City consents in writing to an earlier effective date, take effect until thirty (30) days after such filing. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-7-14: DELEGATION OF POWERS:
Any right, power or duty of the Mayor and Council of the City, the City Administrator, the agency or any official of the City under this Chapter may be
transferred or delegated by ordinance, resolution, or other appropriate action of the City to an appropriate officer, employee, or department of the City, or
any legal authority, including any intergovernmental agency created for the purpose of regulating the operation and development of the cable television
system. (Ord. 0-90-56, 12-3-1990)
8-4-7-15: SEVERABILITY:
If any section of this Chapter or the franchise, or any portion thereof, is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or
administrative agency, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, except as otherwise provided for herein. (Ord. 0-90-56,
12-3-1990)
Chapter 5
SEWERS
8-5-1: RATES ESTABLISHED:
There be and are hereby established the following rates and charges for the use and service of the sewerage system of the City, effective with all billings
dated April 1, 2017 and thereafter:
Residential users $20.00 per month
Commercial users 24.50 per month
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 343/470
Multi-unit base 49.00 per month
Multi-unit (each additional unit) 6.25 per month
(Ord. 0-17-20, 7-24-2017)
8-5-2: BILLING PROCEDURES:
Billing procedures shall be determined by the City Administrator. All bills shall be due and payable on the date of rendition thereof. (Ord. 0-82-12, 5-17-
1982)
8-5-3: LIEN:
In the event that charges for sewer services are not paid within thirty (30) days of rendition of the bill for such service; such charges shall be deemed and
are hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter such delinquencies shall constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such service is supplied, and
the City Clerk be and is hereby authorized and directed to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Cook County or with the Registrar of Titles of Cook County, if applicable, and the filing of such statements shall be deemed notice of the lien of such
charges for such service. (Ord. 0-82-12, 5-17-1982)
8-5-4: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
All sewerage service may be discontinued without further notice if the rates or charges for such service are not paid within thirty (30) days of rendition of
the bill therefor. (Ord. 0-82-12, 5-17-1982)
8-5-5: PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR PAYMENT:
The rates and charges herein established shall be collected from the owners, occupants or users of the premises within the City from and after the
effective date hereof. (Ord. 0-82-12, 5-17-1982)
8-5-6: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
All sewer pipes and connections shall comply with and be installed in accordance with the provisions of all applicable ordinances of the City. (Ord. 0-82-12,
5-17-1982)
8-5-7: SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
No person shall make any connection to any sanitary sewer owned or controlled by the City, except upon application to the City Administrator and
issuance by said City Administrator of a permit authorizing the connection to be made.
A. Inspection Fee: An inspection fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to the Collector of the City at the time that application for a permit
is made. If more than one inspection is required before the connection is approved by the City, an additional fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each
subsequent inspection shall be paid. (Ord. 0-87-19, 4-20-1986)
B. Connection Fees: The fees for a service connection to any sanitary sewer owned or controlled by the City shall be as follows:
Date Application Made Connection Fee
During the calendar year: 2001 $ 900.00
2002 925.00
2003 950.00
2004 975.00
2005 1,000.00
2006 1,025.00
2007 1,050.00
2008 1,075.00
2009 1,100.00
2010 1,125.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 344/470
This connection fee shall be paid at the time application is made for a permit. (Ord. 0-01-11, 5-7-2001, eff. 5-17-2001)
C. Requirement For Connection: No building or structure shall be served by a private individual waste disposal facility if an operating sanitary sewer main
is accessible to said property; provided, however, that any building or structure currently served by such a private individual waste disposal facility may
continue to be so served notwithstanding the accessibility of a sanitary sewer main, through December 31, 1988. A sanitary sewer main shall be
deemed accessible to a building or structure if the property on which such building is located is within four hundred feet (400'), measured along a
street, alley, or easement, of the sewer main, and a connection conforming with the standards of the applicable ordinances of the city or regulations of
any other entity having control of such main may be made thereto.
D. Contractor's Bond: Before any work is commenced for the connection of a building drain to a sanitary sewer main, the individual or firm constructing the
building drain shall provide a bond payable to the collector of the city in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to be in force for a period of
one year from the date of completion of the work. Any sewer builder contemplating making several connections to a sanitary sewer main of the city
may, with the permission of the city administrator, give to the collector of the city a general bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to
be in force for a period of not less than one year from the date of completion of the work. The aforesaid bonds shall be in a form approved by the city
attorney, executed by surety or sureties approved by the collector and conditioned on the fulfillment of the applicable ordinances of the city.
E. Specifications For Connection: All building drains to be connected to the sewer main of the city shall be constructed in accordance with the following
specifications:
1. Materials: All sewer pipe used shall conform to one of the following:
(Minimum Size: No sanitary sewer service conveying raw sewerage shall be less than 6 inches in diameter.)
a. Extra strength clay sewer pipe - shall meet the requirements of ASTM Des:C200. Joints shall meet the requirements of ASTM Des:C425, flexible
compression joints using materials having resilient properties.
b. Concrete sewer pipe - shall meet the requirements of ASTM Des:C14. Joints shall meet the requirements of ASTM Des:C443, flexible
compression joints using flexible, watertight rubber gaskets.
c. Cast iron sewer pipe - shall meet the requirements of ASA Spec. A21.6, Class 22. Fittings shall meet the requirements of ASA Spec. A21.10. Pipe
and fittings shall be coated inside and out with coal-tar pitch varnish. Joints shall meet the requirements of ASA Spec. A21.11, flexible
compression joint using flexible, watertight rubber gasket.
d. Polyvinyl chloride pipe (PVC) - shall meet the requirements of ASTM- D-3034 type PSM, SDR35 and shall be manufactured and supplied in
accordance with UNI-3-81 (UNI-Bell Plastic Pipe Associated). All PVC pipe shall be installed in accordance with UNI-Bell specification UNI-B-5-79.
e. Ductile iron pipe - shall meet the requirements of AWWA C151-75, with AWWA C-111 joints used where minimum separation cannot be
maintained between water and sewer lines.
2. Laying Pipe: Sewer service shall be laid on a uniform grade with a minimum slope of 0.63% and in accordance with the applicable portions of ASTM
Des:C12, unless otherwise approved by the City Public Works Director.
Sewer trenches shall be of the minimum widths necessary to provide adequate working space for placing and jointing the pipe and for drainage of
water. Mechanical excavation of trenches shall be stopped approximately three inches (3") above the final invert grade elevation, and the bottom
third of the pipe barrel and provide uniform bearing throughout its length. Should the excavation be carried below the final invert grade elevation, the
trench bottom shall be brought back to grade with granular material. Should rock be encountered, it shall be excavated to a depth of six inches (6")
below the bottom of the pipe and the trench bottom brought back to grade with granular material.
The pipe may be laid in a continuous layer of sharp sand, crushed stone or gravel, as specified in ASTM Des:C12.
Pipe laying will be permitted only in dry trenches with stable bottoms. Should the materials encountered at the trench bottom be unsuitable for pipe
bedding, such materials shall be removed and the trench bottom brought back to grade with granular material, or a concrete cradle placed as
necessary to provide adequate bedding for the pipe.
Trenches and other excavations shall be properly shored, sheeted and braced in compliance with OSHA requirements to provide safe and adequate
working conditions, to prevent shifting of material and to prevent damage to the work or to adjacent structures and property.
3. Backfill: All trenches shall be backfilled to the original surface of the ground. The time elapsing before backfilling is begun shall be subject to the
approval of the City Public Works Director. In all backfilling, all compressible and destructive rubbish, organic material and refuse which might cause
later settlement and all lumber and braces shall be removed from the excavated trench.
The backfilling around pipes shall be carefully done by hand and tamped to the top of the pipe. The remaining upper portion of the excavated trench
may be backfilled by machine. The work shall be done in such a way as to prevent dropping of material directly on top of the pipe through any great
vertical distance.
Trenches in or adjacent to walks, drives, and other paved areas and under existing structures and utilities shall be backfired with granular material.
All other trenches and excavations shall be backfilled to the original grade with excavated materials.
4. Existing Septic Tank; Connection: Except as otherwise permitted by the City Engineer, connection to an existing septic tank system shall be made
between the house and the septic tank.
5. Sanitary Sewer To Building Sewer; Connection: The connection of the building sewer to a sanitary sewer main shall be made at a "Y" branch and if
no properly located "Y" branch is available, the owner shall, at his expense, install one of the following:
a. Sanitary sewer service connections to existing sewer mains shall be made with a tapping machine and saddle tightly secured to the existing
sanitary sewer.
b. Sanitary sewer service connections to sewer mains twelve feet (12') or more in depth shall be constructed with a six inch (6") tee and riser and
backfilled with select granular material or encased in concrete at the option of the City Public Works Director.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 345/470
6. Elevation Requirements: The building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation not greater than thirty six inches (36") below grade level
at the highest point of the foundation unless this requirement is specifically waived by the City Council, it being the intention of the City Council to
require overhead sewers.
7. Excavation Guidelines: All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the
public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the City Public Works Director.
8. Discharge Prohibited: No connection shall be made to the building drain permitting the discharge of any storm water, surface water, ground water,
roof runoff, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer operated by the City.
F. Inspection: After installation of the building drain, but before backfilling of the trench, the City Public Works Director, or his designee shall be notified and
shall promptly inspect the construction of the building drain. No trench shall be backfilled until the construction is approved.
G. Expiration Of Permits: No permit issued pursuant to this Section shall be valid for a period of time longer than six (6) months from the date of its
issuance. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Administrator of the City may, upon application before the expiration of six (6) months from the
issuance of the permit, extend the validity of the permit for an additional six (6) month period on such terms and conditions as he deems appropriate.
H. Cost Of Installing Building Drain: All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building drain to the sewer main shall be
borne by the owner of the property. The owner shall indemnify the City for any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
I. Violations: Any person violating any subsection of this Section shall be punishable by a fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day or part thereof on which a violation occurs or continues or is
permitted to occur or continue. (Ord. 0-87-19, 4-20-1986)
8-5-8: INTEREST ON DELINQUENT SERVICE CHARGES:
Interest at the rate of one and one-half percent (11/2%) per month shall be due upon charges for sewer services which are not paid within thirty (30) days
of rendition of the bill for such service. (Ord. 0-82-12, 5-17-1982)
8-5-9: COMPLIANCE WITH COURT DECREE:
A. The Director, Department of Public Works, or his designated agent, shall inspect the sewer or sewer system in every building or premises served by the
Prospect Heights sewer system as frequently as in his judgment may be necessary to ensure that such system is in compliance with applicable
Federal, State and local regulations, and the decree entered by the Circuit Court of Cook County on July 28, 1989, and appended hereto by reference.
The Director shall notify or cause to be notified, in writing, the owner or authorized agent of the owner of any such building or premises, to correct,
within a reasonable time set by the Director, any sewer installed or existing contrary to or in violation of this Section.
B. The Director, or his designated agent, shall have the right of entry into any building or premises during reasonable hours, for the purpose of making an
inspection of the sewer system installed in such building or premises; provided, that with respect to the inspection of any single-family dwelling, consent
to such inspection shall first be obtained from a person of suitable age and discretion therein or in control thereof.
C. Persons or entities who violate any provision of this Section shall be subject to a fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day or part thereof a violation occurs or is permitted to occur or continue. In
addition to any penalty which may be imposed herein, the City may initiate injunctive relief in the Circuit Court of Cook County, including the Municipal
Branch Districts within the jurisdiction of the City, to abate any violation of this Section the continuation of which would be injurious to the welfare of the
residents or which would frustrate or defeat the intent and purpose of this Section. (Ord. 0-91-59, 11-18-1991)
8-5-10: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this Chapter shall be as follows:
ADMINISTRATOR: The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20C), expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 m) outside the inner face of the
building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater, storm, surface and ground water drainage.
COMMERCIAL USER: Includes transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services.
CONTROL MANHOLE: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop.
The purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the City representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 346/470
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
EFFLUENT CRITERIA: As defined in any applicable "NPDES permit".
FEDERAL ACT: The Federal Clean Water Act (33 USC 466 et seq.) as amended. (Pub. L. 95-217).
FEDERAL GRANT: The U.S. Government participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II-Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and implementing regulations.
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food.
INDUSTRIAL USERS: Includes establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of
substance into products.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER: Includes schools, churches, penal institutions and users associated with Federal, State and local
governments.
MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY: An industrial user of the publicly owned treatment works that: a) has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or
more per average work day; or b) has a flow greater that ten percent (10%) of the flow carried by the Municipal system receiving the waste; or c) has in its
waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under section 307(a) of the Federal Act; or d) is found by the permit issuant
authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact,
either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water. It has
replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analysis.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the Administrator or, where appropriate, by the Director, after enactment of
the Federal Clean Water Act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the Federal Act.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body or surface or ground water.
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, company, Municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution,
enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division of
Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
POPULATION EQUIVALENT: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is
one hundred fifty (150) gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.25 pounds of BOD and 0.31 pounds of suspended solids.
PRETREATMENT: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into the wastewater treatment works.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 cm) in
any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the City. It shall also include sewers within or outside the City boundaries that serve
one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the City sanitary system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed with City funds.
RESIDENTIAL USER: All dwelling units such as houses, and mobile homes, but not including apartments or permanent multi-family dwellings.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm, surface and ground waters or
polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: Used interchangeably with "wastewater".
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
SEWERAGE: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
STATE ACT: The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
STATE GRANT: The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond
Act and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois.
STORM SEWER: A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 347/470
water.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into the sewers.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS): Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste and which are removable
by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA Division
of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality
standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
USER CLASS: The type of user "residential", "institutional/governmental", "commercial" or "industrial" as defined herein.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint, of course, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any ground water, surface water and stormwater that may be present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
transport effluent to a watercourse.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used
as synonymous with "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution control plant".
WATER QUALITY STANDARDS: As defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of Illinois.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 0-92-39, 9-8-1992; amd. Ord. 0-17-20, 7-24-2017)
8-5-11: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
A. No unauthorized persons shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the City Administrator.
B. All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those discharges in compliance with Federal standards promulgated pursuant to the
Federal Act and more stringent State and local standards.
C. A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the
additional anticipated waste load.
D. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
E. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the Director of the Department
of Public Works, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
F. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing
and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City.
In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American
Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois shall apply.
G. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which is approved in
accordance with subsection B of this Section, and discharged to the building sewer.
H. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
I. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code, or other applicable rules
and regulations of the City, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution
Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. All such connections shall
be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Director of the Department of
Public Works before installations.
J. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Director of the Department of Public Works when the building sewer is ready for inspection
and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Director of the Department of Public Works or his
representative.
K. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City. (Ord. 0-92-39,
9-8-1992)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 348/470
8-5-12: USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS:
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
B. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the Director of the Department of Public Works. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged on approval of the Director of the Department of Public Works, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
C. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
4. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics,
wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or
ground by garbage grinders.
D. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of
the Director of the Department of Public Works that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the Director of the Department of Public Works will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes
in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the
sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The
substances prohibited are:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150F), sixty five degrees Celsius (65C).
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100
mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees (32) and one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150F).
3. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4)
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater, shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of the Department of Public Works.
4. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not.
5. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine
requirement to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the Director of the Department of Public Works for such materials.
6. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Director of the Department of Public Works as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of
the State, Federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
7. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Director of the Department of Public
Works in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
8. Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5.
9. Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg at any time except as permitted by the Director of the Department of Public
Works in compliance with applicable State and Federal regulations.
10. Any cyanide in excess of 0.10 mg/l at any time except as permitted by the Director of the Department of Public Works in compliance with applicable
State and Federal regulations.
11. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids
(such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
b. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);
c. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works;
d. Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein.
12. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 349/470
E. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in subsection D of this Section, and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40 CFR 403,
June 26, 1978, and any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the Director of the Department of Public Works may have a deleterious
effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Director of the Department of Public Works may:
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
If the Director of the Department of Public Works permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of the Department of Public Works and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
F. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Director of the Department of Public Works, they are necessary for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Director of
the Department of Public Works, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
G. Where preliminary treatment of flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by
the owner at his expense.
H. Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when required by the Director of the Department of Public Works, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Director of the Department of Public Works. The
manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
I. The owner of the property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of waters
and wastes to illustrate compliance with this Chapter and any special conditions for discharge established by the City or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge.
The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the City, but no less than once per year
the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the Federal, State and
local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the City at such times and in such a
manner as prescribed by the City. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and reporting required by the City. At such times
as deemed necessary the City reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
J. All measurements, test and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this Chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods, and shall be determined at the control manhole
provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer at the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried
out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb
and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or
whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty four (24)
hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples. (Ord. 0-92-39, 9-8-1992)
8-5-13: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
A. The Director of the Department of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of the City, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The Director of the Department of
Public Works or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any process, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or
other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and sources of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste
treatment.
B. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection A of this Section, the Director of the Department of Public Works or
duly authorized employees of the City, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all
safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the City employees
and the City shall indemnify the company against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company
and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain conditions
as required in subsection 8-5-12A of this Chapter.
C. The Director of the Department of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved. (Ord. 0-92-39, 9-8-1992)
8-5-14: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF SECTIONS 8-5-10 THROUGH 8-5-13:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 350/470
A. Any person found to be violating any provision of Sections 8-5-10, 8-5-11, 8-5-12, and 8-5-13 of this Chapter shall be served by the City with written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period
of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The City may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any
provision of those Sections.
B. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection A of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on
conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of Sections 8-5-10, 8-5-11, 8-5-12 and 8-5-13 of this Chapter shall become liable to the City by reason of
such violation. (Ord. 0-92-39, 9-8-1992)
Title 9
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
ANIMAL CONTROL
9-1-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect animals from neglect and abuse, to protect residents from annoyance and injury by animals, to assist in providing
housing for animals in the custody of the city, to cover the cost of licensing and caring for animals, to encourage responsible pet ownership, and provide
for the assessment of penalties for violators and for the enforcement and administration of this chapter. (Ord. 0-77-26, 10-17-1977)
9-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
ANIMAL: Every living creature, domestic or wild, other than a human being.
ANIMAL CONTROL CENTER: A place or places designated by the city for the housing of animals in the temporary custody of the city.
AT LARGE: Any animal is "at large" on private or public property unless it is: a) under control, by leash or tether, of the owner or a member of the owner's
immediate family over ten (10) years of age; or b) supervised by the owner in a fenced yard; or c) restrained by a leash or tether within the property
borders; or d) kept within the property borders by electronic means; or e) kept in an area such as a kennel run. Any dog or cat that is unlawfully at large
pursuant to this chapter may be deemed to be a stray animal.
BITE: To be seized with the teeth or jaws so that a person or animal has been nipped, crippled, wounded or pierced and saliva of the biting animal has
contacted the resulting break or abrasion of the skin, but does not necessarily have to draw blood.
BOARDING KENNEL: A licensed facility other than an animal hospital, a city pound or animal shelter where animals, normally dogs and cats not owned by
the proprietor, are temporarily sheltered, fed, watered and exercised in return for a fee.
CAT: A member of the animal species Felis catus.
CONTROL: The animal is on a leash not more than eight feet (8') in length; or is under voice control in the presence of a competent person; or is on or
within a vehicle being driven or parked; or is within the property limits of its owner or keeper or upon the premises of another person with the consent of
that person.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury to, or to otherwise endanger the
safety of humans or other domestic animals; or
Any dog which attacks a human being or other domestic animal without provocation; or
Any dog which is a "pit bull terrier", which shall herein be defined as any American pit bull terrier or Staffordshire bull terrier or American Staffordshire
terrier breed of dog or any mixed breed of dog which contains as an element of its breeding the breed of American pit bull terrier, Staffordshire bull terrier
or American Staffordshire terrier as to be identifiable as partially of the breed of American pit bull terrier, Staffordshire bull terrier or American Staffordshire
terrier.
DOG: A member of the animal species Canis familiaris.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL: Dogs, cats, domesticated sheep, horses, cattle, goats, swine, fowl, ducks, geese, turkeys, confined domestic hares and rabbits,
pheasants and other birds and animals raised and/or maintained in confinement.
EUTHANASIA: Death brought about by any method which produces rapid loss of consciousness to a painless death.
GUARD DOG: Any dog professionally trained to protect persons or property by attacking or threatening to attack any person found within the area
patrolled by dog.
INOCULATION (Against Rabies): The injection of a rabies vaccine approved by the Illinois department of agriculture and administered by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the company's recommendation for the vaccine used.
OWNER: Any person having right of property in any animal; who keeps an animal; who has an animal in his care or custody; or who knowingly permits an
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 351/470
animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him. Native wildlife remaining on or about any premises shall not be included in this definition.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, society, association or other legal entity, any public or private institution, municipal corporation,
unit of local government or any other business unit.
PET SHOP: An establishment operated by a person which acquires animals, birds, reptiles and fish bred by others whether an owner, agent or on
consignment and sells, offers to sell, exchanges or offers for adoption with or without charge such animals, birds, reptiles and fish as domestic pets to the
general public at wholesale or retail.
STRAY ANIMAL: Any owned animal that is not controlled.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal which bites or in any other manner attacks or attempts to attack, except that any animal that bites, attacks or attempts to
attack any person entering unlawfully upon its owner's premises, or which is provoked to attack, shall not be deemed a vicious animal.
VOICE CONTROL: The immediate recall of a dog at the sound of the voice of the owner or person in control. (Ord. 0-77-26, 10-17-1977; amd. Ord. 0-90-
35, 8-20-1990; Ord. 0-08-38, 9-2-2008)
9-1-3: ENFORCEMENT:
This chapter shall be enforced by the police officers serving the city or such other person or persons officially designated by the city council. (Ord. 0-77-26,
10-17-1977)
9-1-4: ANIMALS AT LARGE; STRAYS:
A. Unlawful To Run At Large:
1. No person shall permit at any time his animal, except cats as set forth below, to run at large. No leash shall be longer than eight feet (8') in length.
2. It shall be unlawful for any cat to run at large unless inoculated for rabies and wearing a license tag issued for the current year by the city clerk and a
tag evidencing an immunity from rabies for the current license year.
3. Any animal illegally running at large in the city shall be impounded in the Animal Control Center. (Ord. 0-08-38, 9-2-2008)
B. Stray Animals: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any domestic animal to cause or allow the same to run at large in the city or be picketed or tied in
any public place for the purpose of grazing or feeding. It shall be the duty of the police officers serving the city or any other officer or employee of the
city authorized by the city to apprehend and impound any animal not under control. In the event any such animal cannot be safely taken up and the
animal is deemed to be a threat to any person or property, said police officers or other officer or employee designated by the city is hereby empowered
to eliminate same. Depending upon circumstances, impounding shall be in the Animal Control Center. (Ord. 0-97-78, 12-15-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
1. Known Ownership:
a. When the owner of a stray animal is known through licensing, collar identification or other immediate means, the enforcement officers shall notify
such person of the impounding in the most expeditious manner available.
b. Should an animal be impounded, there shall be no release made until an impoundment fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) is paid to the city and kennel
boarding fees paid at the Animal Control Center. If the impounded animal is one requiring a license, release shall not be made until such license is
acquired. (Ord. 0-77-26, 10-17-1977)
c. The known owner of the stray animal shall have three (3) working days from the time of personal notification excluding Saturday and Sunday and
personal holidays in which to claim the animal. Failure by the known owner to obtain release of the impounded animal within this time period shall
be deemed an act of disclaiming and the enforcement officers shall consign said animal to a recognized animal humane society or licensed animal
shelter. (Ord. 0-97-15, 4-7-1997, eff. 4-17-1997)
2. Unknown Ownership:
a. When the owner of a stray animal cannot be ascertained, the animal shall be locally impounded for no less than seventy two (72) hours.
b. If unclaimed beyond this time period, the enforcement officer shall consign said animal to a recognized humane society or licensed animal shelter.
If, in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian, such animal is not suitable as a pet, same shall be euthanized.
3. Disclaimed Ownership: If for any reason the owner of any stray animal chooses to disclaim ownership of same upon receipt of the impounding
notification, the enforcement officer shall proceed to consign the disclaimed animal as provided in section 9-1-6 of this chapter, without regard to the
time periods cited above. (Ord. 0-77-26, 10-17-1977)
4. Violations; Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this subsection B shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Any person cited under the provisions of this subsection B4 not paying the fine within ten (10) days
shall face an additional penalty of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 0-16-19, 6-13-
2016)
9-1-5: IMPOUNDING ANIMALS; RECORD:
The enforcement officers of the city may impound, at their discretion, unlicensed dogs or cats four (4) months of age or older; any animal found running at
large; any abandoned animal; or any animal maintained in violation of this chapter.
A record shall be made of all impounded animals, entering the breed, color and sex, whether licensed or not, if known, and the name and address of the
owner or keeper, if known. If practicable, the police shall keep licensed animals separated from unlicensed ones. (Ord. 0-77-26, 10-17-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 352/470
9-1-6: DISCLAIMED ANIMALS:
If for any reason the owner of an animal chooses to disclaim ownership of same or voluntarily delivers the animal to be disclaimed to any enforcement
officer of the city; executes formal acknowledgement of such an act; and pays the consignment fee involved, the enforcement officer shall process the
consignment of said animal to a recognized humane society or licensed animal shelter. (Ord. 0-77-26, 10-17-1977)
9-1-7: RABIES INOCULATION REQUIRED:
A. Requirements: It is the duty of all persons owning or keeping a dog over four (4) months of age, or a cat over four (4) months of age, to have such
animals inoculated against rabies. The rabies inoculation shall be given in an amount sufficient to provide immunities from rabies for one year and shall
be administered by a licensed veterinarian. A certificate from a licensed veterinarian shall be furnished to the city clerk. If the rabies inoculation is
effective for a period in excess of one year, the certificate shall so state. (Ord. 0-97-79, 12-15-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
B. Violations; Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Any person cited under the provisions of this section not paying the fine within ten (10) days shall face an
additional penalty of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 0-16-19, 6-13-2016)
9-1-8: ANIMAL BITES:
The enforcement officer of the city shall cause to be investigated reports of animal bites. If an animal has bitten a person, an enforcement officer shall
notify the owner of the animal and the animal shall be delivered promptly to a licensed veterinarian who shall confine or cause to be confined or observed
such animal as provided in the animal control act. If the owner is not known, such enforcement officer shall take such animal promptly to a licensed
veterinarian to be confined, as provided in the animal control act. (Ord. 0-77-26, 10-17-1977)
9-1-9: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW:
Every owner of an animal in the city shall comply with the animal control act of the state, the provisions of which are adopted by reference, three (3) copies
of said act being on file in the office of the city clerk as provided by law1. (Ord. 0-77-26, 10-17-1977)
9-1-10: FEMALE DOGS OR CATS IN HEAT:
Any person in control of a female dog or cat in heat shall confine such dog or cat in an enclosed area as to preclude other dogs or cats from being
attracted to or becoming in contact with such female animal, except for planned breeding. (Ord. 0-77-26, 10-17-1977)
9-1-11: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. Any person owning or keeping within the city limits any dog or cat, four (4) months of age or over, shall obtain a license for each animal within ten (10)
days of acquiring such animal or becoming a resident of the city.
Written application for such license shall be made to the city clerk and shall state the name, address and telephone number of the owner and the
name, breed, and sex of such animal, proof of rabies inoculation, and any other information deemed necessary. A current proof of rabies inoculation for
a dog or cat shall be required at the time of the application for license, which shall certify that the inoculation is valid. Upon payment of the license fee,
the city clerk shall issue a memorandum of registry and tag for each animal. In the event a tag is lost, replacement tags costing one dollar ($1.00) may
be purchased from the city clerk. No tag shall be transferred from one animal to another. The license shall expire on March 31 of each calendar year. A
new license, but not a renewal of a license for the previous year, shall be issued after October 1 for a half year fee. (Ord. 0-95-63, 12-18-1995)
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to keep such dog within the city unless it wears a collar with the animal license tag for the current license
year and a tag evidencing an immunity from rabies for the current license year attached at all times the animal is off the premises of the owner.
C. The city clerk shall keep a complete registry of all licensed animals, describing the same by name, species, breed, and sex, the name, address and
telephone number of the owner as given, and the number of the proof of rabies inoculation and license tag.
D. Animals belonging to nonresidents keeping animals temporarily within the corporate limits of the city shall be exempt from this section; provided,
however, that such animals have a license from the jurisdiction of the owner, if required, and that all the other provisions of this chapter must be
complied with. (Ord. 0-77-26, 10-17-1977)
E. The annual license fee shall be twenty four dollars ($24.00) for each animal when the registration is submitted on or before March 31 of each calendar
year. The annual license fee shall be forty eight dollars ($48.00) for each animal when the registration is submitted on or after April 1 of each calendar
year. The license shall expire on March 31 of each calendar year. There shall be no license required for dogs used to assist the blind or governmental
police dogs.
The annual renewal fee for an animal previously registered shall be twelve dollars ($12.00) when the renewal registration is submitted on or before
March 31 of each calendar year. The annual renewal license fee shall be twenty four dollars ($24.00) for each animal when the renewal registration is
submitted on or after April 1 of each calendar year.
Violation of this subsection is subject to a twenty four dollar ($24.00) fine per required license, plus any applicable boarding or license fees. (Ord. 0-11-
26, 9-12-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 353/470
F. If animals at large are impounded, the following fee schedule shall apply:
License (if applicable) See subsection E of this section
Housing costs - daily fee $15.00
Stray animal impoundment 15.00
Bordetella shot (necessary to kennel animal) 12.50
Unlicensed dog penalty 10.00
The fees in this subsection are to recover city costs related to boarding animals at large. (Ord. 0-97-13, 4-7-1997, eff. 4-17-1997)
9-1-12: ANIMAL CARE:
A. No owner shall fail to provide his animals with sufficient wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care
when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment.
B. No person shall beat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal.
C. No person shall own, keep, harbor or otherwise maintain within the city any breeds of fowl that are or will be used in the pursuit of and staging of
cockfighting on any premises.
D. No person shall promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct or carry on any animal fight or any other type of contest, game of fight of a similar nature, nor
any simulated version of same that involves baiting or inciting an animal toward intent to fight.
E. No person shall hold a greased pig contest.
F. No person shall be permitted to keep animals in violation of the "Illinois humane care for animal act" or the "Illinois animal welfare act"2.
G. No owner may abandon any animal where it may become a public charge or may suffer injury, hunger or exposure.
H. Each owner shall provide for each of his animals a sufficient quantity of good quality, wholesome food and water; adequate shelter and protection from
the weather; veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; and humane care, treatment and attention so as not to cause undue discomfort or
suffering for such animal. If the owner cannot be located after a reasonable search, or if the owner shall be known to be absent due to injury, illness,
incarceration or other involuntary circumstances, it shall be the duty of the enforcement officers of the city to act upon the complaint as directed by the
Illinois humane care for animals act.
I. No person shall give away or use any live animal as a prize for or an inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition or as an inducement to
enter a place of amusement or offer such animal as an incentive to enter any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting
trade.
J. No person shall bring or cause to have brought into the city, sell, offer for sale, barter or display living baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl or rabbits
which have been dyed, colored or otherwise treated so as to impart to them an artificial color, or give such animals away as pets or sell, offer for sale,
barter or give away at no cost or as novelties or prizes.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit legitimate commerce and poultry for agricultural or food purposes.
K. No person shall knowingly poison or cause to be poisoned any domestic animal. The only exception will be a written permit from the Illinois department
of agriculture for the purpose of controlling diseases transmissible to humans or other animals and only when all other methods and means have been
exhausted. Such a permit shall name a person or persons conducting the poisoning, specify the products used, give the boundaries of the area
involved and specify the precautionary measures to be employed to ensure the safety of humans and other animals. Any drugs used for euthanasia
shall be by or under the direction of a licensed veterinarian.
L. No person shall kill or wound, attempt to kill or wound or take the next or eggs or bird that is protected by Federal3 or State4 law. Birds that are
regulated by the Illinois Department of Conservation are excluded from this restriction during the period of regulation5.
M. No person shall keep or permit to be kept or displayed for exhibition purposes any wild animal contrary to Federal or State regulations.
N. No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any animal,
provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 354/470
O. No person shall leave any animal unattended in a motor vehicle or enclosed trailer when the outside temperature shall exceed thirty degrees Celsius
(30C) (86F) or contain any animal in such a manner that said animal does not have proper air circulation while confined in a motor vehicle, trailer,
kennel, doghouse or any type of container or structure in which an animal may be confined.
P. No person shall own any animal which is known to be infected with any disease transmissible to other animals or humans including severe parasitism,
unless such animal shall be confined in such a manner as not to expose other animals or humans.
Q. Any animal which is on any public way or public place which appears to be injured or severely diseased and for which care is not being provided on the
scene by the owner or any injured or severely diseased animal that has strayed onto private premises shall be removed, if possible, to the care of the
nearest humane society, veterinarian or veterinary hospital willing to accept same without guarantee of payment. If no such facility is willing to accept
said animal, then said animal shall be removed to the Animal Control Center. If immediate removal shall not appear practical or possible or if the
removed animal is in critical condition such animal may be deprived of life by the most humane method available on the scene unless the owner shall
come forward beforehand and assume responsibility for the immediate removal and care.
R. Any person who, as the operator of a vehicle, strikes an animal, shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible; or shall immediately
report such injury to the animal owner, if known; or the Police Department serving the City; or to the local humane society.
S. Any person having a dead animal within his possession or control or upon any premises owned or occupied by such person without the proper permit
shall dispose of the dead animal in compliance with the Illinois Dead Animal Disposal Act6.
T. Every person in possession or control of any stable or place open for public use where any animals are kept, shall maintain the stable or place at all
times in a clean, sanitary condition and conform to the Illinois Fire Prevention Regulations. (Ord. 0-77-26, 10-17-1977)
9-1-13: ANIMAL EXCREMENT:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit a dog to be off the premises of the owner unless such person has in his immediate possession a
device for the removal of excrement and a depository for the transmission of excrement to an appropriate public receptacle or a receptacle located
upon property owned or possessed by such person.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person in control of causing or permitting any dog to be off the premises of the owner to fail to remove excrement left by such
dog to an appropriate public receptacle owned or possessed by such person. (Ord. 0-77-26, 10-17-1977)
9-1-14: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES:
No owner shall permit or suffer his animal to:
A. Molest persons or vehicles by chasing or barking or biting;
B. Attack other domestic animals;
C. Damage property other than of the owner;
D. Bark, whine or howl excessively;
E. Create noxious or offensive odors. (Ord. 0-77-26, 10-17-1977)
9-1-15: PROHIBITED ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to keep any lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot, jaguar, cheetah, margay, mountain lion, Canada lynx, bobcat, jaguarundi, hyena or coyote, or
any poisonous reptile in any place other than a properly maintained zoological park, circus, scientific or educational institution, research laboratory,
veterinary hospital or animal shelter. (Ord. 0-77-26, 10-17-1977)
9-1-16: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF ANIMALS:
A. No person shall keep more than four (4) pigeons, except as in those circumstances enumerated in section 9-1-15 of this chapter or in pet shops.
B. No person shall keep more than two (2) animals in a unit of multi-family residence. The limitations on this subsection shall not apply to small animals
such as hamsters, guinea pigs and fish, that are permanently kept in cages or aquariums.
C. No person shall keep and/or maintain any horse on any premises in the city unless such premises are comprised of at least three (3) acres. One horse
may be kept on premises which exceed three (3) acres in area and one additional horse may be kept for each additional two (2) acres of area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 355/470
D. No person shall keep any cattle, sheep, goats, pigs or swine on any premises in the city unless such premises consists of ten (10) acres or more in
area. (Ord. 0-77-26, 10-17-1977)
9-1-17: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
A. Muzzled Or Caged: No owner shall permit any vicious animal or dangerous dog to be on any street, alley or other public place within the city or upon
the private premises of any person other than an owner of such animal unless such animal is securely muzzled or caged. Vicious animals and
dangerous dogs on the premises of an owner shall be confined so that they cannot attack persons lawfully on the premises and the premises shall be
maintained so that children cannot gain access thereto. Any animal in violation of this section shall be impounded. (Ord. 0-90-35, 8-20-1990)
B. Confined Within An Enclosure: A dangerous dog is "unconfined" if such dog is not securely confined indoors or confined in a secure enclosure upon the
premises of an owner of such dog. "Enclosure" means a fence or a structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable
to prevent the entry of young children. Enclosure shall be securely locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to
prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. If the enclosure has no bottom, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than one
foot (1'). An owner of such dog shall be required to post warning signs on the premises stating that a dangerous dog is confined on the premises. At
least one such sign shall be posted at each driveway to said premises. (Ord. 0-03-05, 2-3-2003, eff. 2-13-2003)
C. Rabies Control: If any vicious animal or dangerous dog cannot be safely taken and impounded when necessary for the protection of any person or
property, such animal may be slain by a police officer or person authorized by the city; provided, however, that in all cases where any animal so slain
has bitten any person or caused an abrasion to the skin of such person, no injury shall be done to the head of the animal and it shall be the duty of the
person slaying the animal to immediately deliver the carcass to a licensed veterinarian to prepare the head and brain for delivery to Cook County rabies
control department. (Ord. 0-90-35, 8-20-1990)
If any animal such as a mouse, rat, squirrel or any other animal bites a person or other animal and subsequently expires, the bite shall be reported and
the carcass delivered to the city health inspector or to such place as designated by the health inspector. (Ord. 0-90-35, 8-20-1990; amd. Ord. 0-05-23,
7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
D. Guard Dogs: It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain guard dogs in any area for the protection of persons or property unless the
following provisions are met:
1. The dog(s) shall be confined to an enclosed area adequate to ensure they will not escape; or
2. The dog(s) shall be under the absolute and continuous control of an owner at all times when not securely enclosed; and
3. The owner or other person(s) in control of the premises upon which a guard dog is maintained shall post warning signs on, over or next to all exterior
doors stating that such a dog is on the premises. At least one such sign shall be posted at each driveway or entranceway to said premises. Such
signs shall be in lettering clearly visible from either the curb line or a distance of fifty feet (50'), whichever is less, and shall contain a telephone
number where some person responsible for controlling such guard dog can be reached twenty four (24) hours a day; and
4. Prior to the placing of a guard dog on any property, the person or persons responsible for the placing shall inform the animal control officer, the
police department and the fire department, in writing, of their intention to post said dog or dogs, the number of dogs to be posted, the location where
said dog or dogs will be posted, the approximate length of time said dog or dogs will be guarding the area, the daily hours said dog or dogs will be
guarding the area, the breed, sex, age and rabies tag number of said dog or dogs. Such notice must be renewed every six (6) months.
E. Insurance: All owners, keepers or harborers of registered dangerous dogs or guard dogs must provide proof to the city clerk of public liability insurance
in a single incident amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for bodily injury to or death of any person or persons or for damage to property owned
by any person(s) which may result from ownership, keeping or maintenance of such animal. Such insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of
the policy will be made unless ten (10) days' written notice is first given to the city administrator. (Ord. 0-90-35, 8-20-1990)
9-1-18: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-08-38, 9-2-2008)
9-1-19: PROHIBITED AREAS:
A. Public Buildings And Stores: It shall be unlawful for any animal, even though on a leash, to be in or enter any public building, food establishment, or any
store except a store for the sale of animals, anywhere within the city during the time that any of said places are open for use by the public.
B. School Premises: It shall be unlawful for any animal, even though on a leash, to go or be upon any school premises or upon a path or sidewalk
extending through or within any school premises. The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs leading blind persons nor to animal exhibits or
animal obedience training classes. (Ord. 0-77-26, 10-17-1977)
9-1-20: BOARDING KENNELS AND PET SHOPS:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a boarding kennel or pet shop without first having obtained a license
therefor. Application for such license shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of the license ordinances of the city7. Such application
shall specify existing district zoning of the premises and the precise location upon the premises of the kennels or pens in which animals are to be kept.
(Ord. 0-77-26, 10-17-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 356/470
B. Investigations:
1. License Issuance: Upon receipt of such application, the health officer of the city shall cause an investigation to be made to determine the fitness and
suitability of the premises for such business. Upon recommendation of the health inspector and upon payment by such applicant to the city clerk of
the license fee as set out in this section, the city clerk shall issue or cause to be issued to such applicant a license. A valid license certificate shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in such place of business. No license shall be issued hereunder unless the applicant is in compliance with the animal
welfare act of the state. (Ord. 0-98-53, 11-16-1998, eff. 11-26-1998; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
2. License Fee: The annual license fee for any boarding kennel or pet shop shall be as follows:
Pet shops $ 66.00
Kennel with a capacity of 1 to 10 animals 66.00
Kennel with a capacity of 11 to 25 animals 132.00
Kennel with a capacity of 26 or more animals 198.00
(Ord. 0-02-09, 4-1-2002, eff. 4-11-2002; amd. Ord. 0-09-07, 3-13-2009)
3. Single License For Same Premises: Should the business of buying, selling or dealing in birds, dogs or other small animals as household pets or for
domestic purposes be conducted, operated, managed or carried on in connection with a boarding kennel on the same premises by the same person,
then only one license need be obtained. The amount of such license shall be the highest license fee applicable to a kennel. The licensee of any
kennel or pet shop shall be held responsible for the proper licensing of each dog and cat which may be owned, kept or harbored at such kennel or
pet shop in the city. (Ord. 0-98-53, 11-16-1998, eff. 11-26-1998)
C. Sanitation Requirements: Every kennel and pet shop shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be free and clear from decaying food and filth of any
kind. All kennels, barns and pens shall be cleaned and disinfected on a regular schedule, and shall be kept in a sanitary condition satisfactory to the
health inspector of the city who shall have the right to cause an inspection of said premises to be made from time to time.
D. Revocation Of License: If the report of the health inspector consistently indicates that the person conducting such kennel or pet shop has not complied
with the provisions of this chapter and with city ordinances regulating health, safety and sanitation, the city council may revoke any license granted
hereunder. (Ord. 0-77-26, 10-17-1977; amd. Ord. 0-05-23, 7-5-2005, eff. 7-17-2005)
9-1-21: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be held to have been committed on each day that such violation shall occur or continue. (Ord.
0-03-05, 2-3-2003, eff. 2-13-2003)
Chapter 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
9-2-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
A. Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to provoke, make or aid in making a breach of peace; or
B. Does or makes any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture or display which, under the circumstances, creates a clear and present danger of
a breach of peace or imminent threat of violence; or
C. Refuses or fails to cease and desist any peaceful conduct or activity likely to produce a breach of the peace where there is an imminent threat of
violence, and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to protect the otherwise peaceful conduct and activity, and have requested that said
conduct and activity be stopped and explained the request if there be time; or
D. Fails to obey a lawful order of disbursal by a person known by him to be a peace officer under circumstances where three (3) or more persons are
committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity which acts are likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or
alarm; or
E. Assembles with three (3) or more persons for the purpose of using force or violence to disturb the public peace; or
F. Appears in any public place manifestly under the influence of alcohol, narcotics or other drugs, not therapeutically administered, to the degree that he
may endanger himself or other persons or property, or annoy persons in his vicinity; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 357/470
G. Carries in a threatening or a menacing manner, without authority of law, any pistol, revolver, dagger, razor, dangerous knife, stiletto, knuckles, slingshot,
an object containing noxious or deleterious liquid, gas or substance or other dangerous weapon, or conceals said weapon on or about the person or
vehicle; or
H. Pickets or demonstrates on a public way within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any primary or secondary school building while the school is in session
and one-half (1/2) hour before the school is in session and one-half (1/2) hour after the school session has been concluded, provided that this
subsection does not prohibit the peaceful picketing of any school involved in a labor dispute; or
I. Pickets or demonstrates on any public way within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any church, temple, synagogue or other place of worship while services
are being conducted and one-half (1/2) hour before services are to be conducted and one-half (1/2) hour after services have been concluded, provided
that this subsection does not prohibit the peaceful picketing of any church, temple, synagogue, or other place of worship involved in a labor dispute.
Any person convicted of disorderly conduct shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense. (Ord. 0-78-21, 6-19-1978)
9-2-2: INCITING RIOTS:
It is unlawful to create a clear and present danger of a riot or assault, battery or other unlawful trespass against any person or group of persons because of
his or their race, religion, color, national origin, or ancestry, or to create a clear and present danger of arson, vandalism, defacement, or other unlawful
trespass against property because of the race, religion, color, national origin, or ancestry of the owner, possessor or authorized user or users of said
property, or in the case of a cemetery, of the decedent buried therein.
The term "person" as used in this Section shall include one or more individuals, copartnerships, corporations, firms, organizations, associations, leagues
or other bodies.
Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense. (Ord. 0-78-21, 6-19-1978)
9-2-3: DRINKING IN PUBLIC:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or to possess any alcoholic liquor as defined by law in an open container on any street, alley or other public
place within the City.
B. The provisions of subsection A of this Section shall not apply to the drinking or possession of alcoholic liquor at such public places licensed to sell
alcoholic liquor by the City or at block parties pursuant to a permit issued by the City.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic liquor in any public way in any motor vehicle upon a public place in the City.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor in or upon or about any motor vehicle upon any public place
in the City except in the original package and with the seal unbroken.
E. "Public place" shall mean any highway, road, street or alley located within the City, any property owned or controlled by the Federal, State or a local
government, all parking lots and common areas serving commercial or industrial establishments, and all common areas and parking areas serving
multi-family residential structures containing four (4) or more dwelling units, except those common areas on the property so designated in writing by the
owner, manager or management company, homeowner's or condominium association, or other entity having control over said common areas.
F. Any person violating any provision of this Section shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense. (Ord. 0-98-58, 12-7-1998, eff. 12-17-1998)
9-2-4: DAMAGE, DESTROY PROPERTY:
A. Defacing And Injuring Houses Of Worship And Cemeteries: Any person who wilfully defaces, mars, injures, destroys or removes any vault, tomb,
monument, gravestone, memorial of the dead, church, synagogue, or any other structure constituting a place of worship of any religion, sect, or group
or any part of any contents thereof, or any fence, tree, shrub or plant appurtenant thereto, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
B. Damage To Public Property: No person shall cut, injure, mark, or deface any public building, sewer, water pipe, hydrant or other City property, or any
tree, grass, shrub or walk in any public way or public park. Any person violating any provisions of this Section shall be fined not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 0-78-21, 6-19-1978)
9-2-5: DISTURBING PLACES OF WORSHIP:
Any person who shall disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly met for religious worship by making a noise, or by rude and indecent behavior or
profane discourse within the place of worship, or so near to the same as to disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting, shall be fined not exceeding fifty
dollars ($50.00) for each offense. (Ord. 0-78-21, 6-19-1978)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 358/470
9-2-6: FALSE FIRE ALARMS:
Whoever, without reasonable cause, by outcry or otherwise makes or circulates or causes to be made or circulated any false alarm of fire, shall be fined
not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 0-78-21, 6-19-1978)
9-2-7: VANDALISM:
A. Definitions: Whenever any of the following terms shall be used in this Section they shall have the meanings indicated:
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY: Includes any real estate including improvements thereof and personalty, whether tangible or intangible.
B. Offenses: No person shall commit any of the following acts within the corporate limits of the city. Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly:
1. Damage, deface or destroy any property of another person without his consent; or
2. By means of fire or explosive device, damage, deface, or destroy any property of another person; or
3. Start a fire on the land of another person without his consent; or
4. Deposit on the land or in a building of another person, without his consent, any stink bomb, or any offensive smelling compound and thereby
interfere with the use and occupancy by another of the land or building; or
5. Without authority, enter into any building, house trailer, motor vehicle, aircraft or watercraft or any part thereof of another person without his consent.
C. Penalty: The following penalties shall be imposed upon any person convicted of a violation of this section:
1. Such restitution or reparation as the court may require in an amount not to exceed actual loss or damage to property or pecuniary loss. Nothing in
this subsection C1 shall preclude such additional civil remedies available to a complaining party for any sum not recovered.
2. In addition or in lieu of such restitution or reparation, as hereinabove provided, a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 0-77-09, 4-4-1976)
9-2-8: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms specified have the following meanings:
KNOWINGLY: Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inquiry or inspections.
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor by a circuit court of the state, but does not include a person appointed
guardian or given custody of a minor under the juvenile court act. The term "legal guardian" does not include guardian ad litem.
MINOR: A person who is above the age of eleven (11) years, but not yet eighteen (18) years of age.
PARENT: A natural or adoptive parent or a court designated guardian.
UNEMANCIPATED MINOR: A person under the age of eighteen (18) years still under the care and custody of his or her parents.
UNSUPERVISED: A lack of visual or oral oversight coupled with lack of sufficient proximity to obtain immediate control over the item or minor.
WILFUL: Proceeding from a conscious and voluntary intentional motion of the will.
B. Responsibility Established: The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in
the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility, and said minor shall be deemed to have committed
the acts described below with the knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian, in violation of this section, upon the occurrence of the events
described in subsections B1 through B4 of this section.
1. An unemancipated minor residing with a parent or legal guardian shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute
prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency
resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or
property; and
2. Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by
personal service, with a certificate of personal service returned, from a police department serving in the city following said adjudication or nonjudicial
sanction; and
3. If at any time within one year following receipt of the notice set forth in subsection B2 of this section, said minor is either adjudicated to be in violation
of an ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection B1 of this section, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency
resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection B1 of this section.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person including a parent or legal guardian, to knowingly or wilfully cause, aid or encourage any unemancipated minor to
violate or attempt to violate any federal or state law or municipal ordinance or to knowingly or wilfully act in such a manner as to directly tend to
cause a child to violate or attempt to violate any federal or state law or municipal ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 359/470
C. Liability Of Parent Or Legal Guardian Of Minor Offender: The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who has custody of such minor shall
be liable for any fine, condition or restitution or reparation imposed by a court, peer jury, or station adjustment upon a minor for a violation of any
provision of state law, county ordinance, or this code; provided, the minor has not paid the fine or made restitution or reparation within the time ordered
by the court; adjustment agreement, and further provided, that said parent or guardian has been served with summons or notice to appear in the
original cause as provided by law.
D. Penalty: Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 0-97-53, 9-15-1997, eff. 9-25-1997)
9-2-9: CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS:
A. Definitions: Whenever used in this section:
CURFEW HOURS: 1. Eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the
following day; and
2. Twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on any Friday or Saturday and until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day.
EMERGENCY: Any unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not
limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN: 1. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
2. A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
MINOR: Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes
the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
PARENT: A person who is:
1. A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or
2. At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
REMAIN: To:
1. Linger or stay; or
2. Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
B. Offenses:
1. A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
2. A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place
or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
3. The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment during curfew hours.
C. Defenses:
1. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B of this section that the minor was:
a. Accompanied by a minor's parent or guardian;
b. On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 360/470
c. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
d. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
e. Involved in an emergency;
f. On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police
department about the minor's presence;
g. Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minors, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official, school, religious, or
other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for
the minor;
h. Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly, or
i. Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the emancipation of mature minors act, as amended.
2. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B3 of this section that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
D. Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall not issue a citation or make any arrest under this section
unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in
subsection C of this section is present.
E. Penalties: A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Failure
to pay this fine within ten (10) days will result in an additional penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 0-04-17, 4-19-2004, eff. 4-29-2004)
9-2-10: FIREARMS:
A. Carrying Concealed Weapons Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to carry on or about his person, or within ready access in his
automobile or vehicle, any concealed weapon, including, but not limited to, a revolver, pistol, slingshot, blackjack, cross knuckles or knuckler of lead,
brass or other metal, or bowie knife, razor, dagger or sawed off gun, machine gun, submachine gun, or any device for releasing or discharging tear gas
or any other obnoxious or poison gas or for laying a smoke screen, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon.
B. Discharge Prohibited: No person shall fire or discharge any cannon, gun, revolver, pistol, fowling piece or other firearm, or any air gun, within the city,
except in a rifle or revolver range under proper supervision.
C. Sale Of Firearms To Minors: No person shall sell, loan or furnish to any minor any gun, pistol or other firearm, or any air gun or ammunition for any
firearm or air gun within the city.
D. Unlawful Possession By Minors: It is declared unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be in possession of any of the following
items:
1. Bowie, switchblade, ballistic knives, throwing stars, or other edged weapons as defined by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1(1);
2. Metallic knuckles or numchucks;
3. Slingshots;
4. Arrows designed for firing from a bow or crossbow device, except when such person is engaged in lawful hunting, supervised target shooting, or the
otherwise legal transportation of such device;
5. Stun gun or laser;
6. Any device or attachment of any kind designed, used or intended for use in silencing the report of a firearm;
7. Machine gun as defined by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1;
8. Any bomb, bombshell, grenade, bottle or other container containing any explosive substance of over one-quarter (1/4) ounce for like purposes, such
as, but not limited to, black powder bombs, molotov cocktails, pipe-bombs or artillery projectiles;
9. Firearms, or the ammunition therefor, as defined by 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 63/1.1, except when such person is engaged in lawful hunting,
supervised target shooting, or the otherwise legal transportation of such device;
10. Fireworks, as defined by 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 30/2.
E. Unsupervised Possession Prohibited: It is unlawful for any parent or legal guardian to permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be in,
or come into, the unsupervised possession of any items listed in subsection D of this Section.
F. Exemptions: The prohibitions relating to the discharge of weapons or the carrying of the same concealed shall not apply to the officers or members of
the police force of the City, nor to any officer of any court whose duty may be to serve warrants or to make arrests, not to persons authorized under the
statutes of the State or the United States to carry concealed weapons, nor to special police officers appointed as watchmen.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 361/470
G. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense, and shall be subject to such additional civil and/or criminal remedies as are provided under law. (Ord. 0-97-54, 9-15-1997,
eff. 9-25-1997)
9-2-11: POSSESSION OF CANNABIS:
A. Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to grow, possess, sell, give away, deliver, exchange, or distribute cannabis, including marijuana, in an
amount not to exceed thirty grams (30 g).
B. Definition: As used in this Section and Section 9-2-12 of this Chapter, "cannabis" shall mean marijuana, hashish and other substances which are
identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant;
and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all
other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include
the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compounds, manufacture,
salt derivative mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant
which is incapable of germination. (Ord. 0-97-77, 12-15-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
C. Use Of Intoxicating Compounds: No person shall breathe, inhale or drink any compound, liquid or chemical containing toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene,
acetone, toulene, ethyl acetate, methyl ethyl ketone trichloroathane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone, or
any other substance for the purpose of inducing a condition of intoxication, stupefaction, depression, giddiness, paralysis or irrational behavior, or in
any manner changing, distorting or disturbing the auditory, visual or mental processes. For the purposes of this Section, any such condition so induced
shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition.
D. Sale Of Intoxicating Compounds: No person shall knowingly sell or offer for sale, deliver or give to any person under seventeen (17) years of age,
unless upon written order of such person's parent or guardian, any compound liquid or chemical containing toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone,
toluene, ethyl acetate, menthyl ethyl ketone, trichloroathane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone, or any
other substance which will induce an intoxicated condition, as defined in subsection C of this Section, when the seller, offeror or deliverer knows or has
reason to know that such compound is intended for use to induce such condition.
E. Prescription For Intoxicating Compounds: This Section shall not apply to any person who commits any act described herein pursuant to the direction or
prescription of a practitioner authorized to so direct or prescribe. For purposes of this Section, "practitioner" shall mean any person authorized by law to
practice medicine in all its branches in this State, to practice dentistry in this State, to practice veterinary medicine in this State, or to practice chiropody
in this State. (Ord. 0-93-32, 8-2-1993)
F. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this Section shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Any person cited under the provisions of this Section not paying the fine within ten (10) days shall face an additional penalty of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). (Ord. 0-97-77, 12-15-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
9-2-12: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
A. Definitions: The following words and phrases when used in this Section shall, for the purposes of this Section, have the following meanings, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CANNABIS: As defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/3, as amended.
COCAINE SPOON: A spoon with a bowl so small that the primary use for which it is reasonably adapted or designed is to hold or administer
cocaine, and which is so small as to be unsuited for the typical, lawful uses of a spoon. A cocaine spoon may or may not be labeled as a "cocaine"
spoon or a "coke" spoon.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Any drug, substance, or immediate precursor enumerated in Schedules 1 through 5, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes,
as amended (commonly known as the Controlled Substances Act).
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled
substance as defined in Schedules 1 through 5, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, or cannabis as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
550/3, as amended. It includes, but is not limited to:
A. Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance or cannabis or from which a controlled substance or cannabis can be derived;
B. Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing a controlled
substance or cannabis;
C. Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance or cannabis;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 362/470
D. Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances or cannabis;
E. Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances or cannabis;
F. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, manitol, annite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances or cannabis;
G. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in compounding controlled
substances or cannabis;
H. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances or
cannabis;
I. Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances or cannabis;
J. Containers or other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances or cannabis;
K. Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish oil into the human
body, such as;
1. Metal, wooden, acrylic glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls;
2. Water pipes;
3. Carburetion tubes and devices;
4. Smoking and carburetion masks;
5. Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held
in the hand;
6. Chamber pipes;
7. Carburetor pipes;
8. Electric pipes;
9. Air-driven pipes;
10. Chillums;
11. Bongs;
12. Ice pipes or chillers.
MARIJUANA OR HASHISH PIPE: A pipe characterized by a bowl which is so small that the primary use for which it is reasonably adapted or
designed is the smoking of marijuana or hashish, rather than lawful smoking tobacco, and which may or may not be equipped with a screen.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association.
B. Determining Drug Paraphernalia: In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, the following factors should be considered in addition to all
other logically relevant factors:
1. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;
2. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any State or Federal law relating to any controlled substance;
3. The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
4. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 363/470
5. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or should
reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this section; the innocence of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, as to
the direct violation of this section shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
6. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;
7. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;
8. National or local advertising concerning its use;
9. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
10. Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor
or dealer of tobacco products;
11. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
12. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community;
13. Expert testimony concerning its "use".
C. Sale Of Drug Paraphernalia Prohibited; Exceptions:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, display, furnish, supply or give away any cocaine spoon, marijuana pipe, hashish pipe or any
drug paraphernalia.
2. The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses,
hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians,
pharmacists or embalmers in the normal lawful course of their respective businesses or professions, nor to common carriers or warehousers or their
employees engaged in the lawful transportation of such paraphernalia, nor to public officers or employees while engaged in the performance of their
official duties, nor to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma or any other medical condition requiring self-injection. (Ord. 0-93-32, 8-2-1993)
D. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues. (Ord. 0-97-76, 12-15-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
9-2-13: POSSESSION OR PURCHASE OF TOBACCO, TOBACCO ACCESSORIES OR SMOKING HERBS BY MINORS:
A. Definitions:
SMOKING HERBS: All substances of plant origin and their derivatives, including, but not limited to, broom, Calea, California poppy, damiana, hops,
ginseng, Lobelia, jimsonweed and other materials of the Datura genus, passionflower, and wild lettuce which are processed or sold primarily for use as
smoking materials.
TOBACCO: Loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, vaporizers which are intended to simulate smoking tobacco, electronic
cigarettes (a.k.a. e-cigs or e-cigarettes), or any electronic nicotine delivery system and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking
accessories.
TOBACCO ACCESSORIES: Cigarette papers, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines and other items, designed primarily
for smoking or ingestion of tobacco products or of illegal substances or of substances whose sale, gift, barter or exchange is made unlawful pursuant to
law. (Ord. 0-15-02, 1-26-2015)
B. Possession And/Or Purchase Of Tobacco By Minors Prohibited: No minor under eighteen (18) years of age shall purchase, attempt to purchase, or
possess any cigar, cigarette or tobacco in any of its forms.
C. Sale Of Tobacco To Minors Prohibited: No person shall sell, purchase for, or furnish any cigar, cigarette or tobacco in any of its forms, to any other
minor under eighteen (18) years of age.
D. Illegal Purchase, Posting Warning: Every place in the city where tobacco products are sold, including every vending machine which offers tobacco
products for sale, shall display at all times in a prominent place a printed card which shall be issued by the city clerk and which shall read substantially
as follows:
Warning to Minors
Persons under the age of eighteen (18) are subject to a fine up to $500.00 under the Ordinance of the City of Prospect Heights, for purchasing or
obtaining any tobacco product.
E. Sale Of Tobacco Accessories Or Smoking Herbs To Minors: No person shall sell, purchase for or furnish any minor under eighteen (18) years of age
any tobacco accessories or smoking herbs.
F. Suspension Or Revocation Of Retailer's License: Any person possessing a retailer's license within the city shall be subject to suspension or revocation
of said license for any violation of the provisions of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 364/470
G. Purchase Or Possession Of Tobacco Accessories Or Smoking Herbs By Minors Prohibited:
1. No minor under eighteen (18) years of age shall possess or purchase any tobacco accessories or smoking herbs.
2. No person in the furtherance of facilitation of obtaining tobacco accessories or smoking herbs shall display or use a false or forged identification card
or transfer, alter or deface an identification card. (Ord. 0-97-49, 8-4-1997, eff. 8-14-1997)
H. Self-Service Not Allowed: It shall be unlawful to sell, offer, give away, or display tobacco products for sale at any location where the consumer can
acquire those products through self-service. All tobacco products will be displayed from behind a sales/service counter so that no consumer can
access tobacco products without assistance by an employee of the licensee. This restriction shall not apply to customer self-service through vending
machines. However, vending machines must be directly visible by the owner or licensee of the premises, or his/her employee(s). (Ord. 0-03-37, 9-29-
2003, eff. 10-9-2003)
I. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense and five hundred dollars
($500.00) for the second offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 0-02-03, 2-19-2002, eff. 3-1-2002)
Chapter 3
POLICE ALARM SYSTEMS
9-3-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter shall regulate police alarm systems. The primary purpose of this Chapter is to reduce the number of unnecessary responses by police to
mechanically or electronically activated burglar and holdup alarms and to charge the cost of such responses to that portion of the City resident and
business population that wishes to use such alarms. There have been an overwhelming number of responses to mechanically or electronically activated
alarms that are for nonbona fide or unnecessary reasons.
A. The City Council does hereby find that nonbona fide or unnecessary alarms severely impact and endanger the safety and general welfare of the
residents of the City. In addition to the significant cost involved in responding to such alarms and the concurrent loss of manpower and ineffective
utilization of equipment, such alarms require emergency responses, which may contribute to a high accident rate.
B. The City Council does also hereby find that, with respect to police alarms, it is often difficult for the City to prove that the occurrence of such is bona fide
or nonbona fide. Therefore, the way to reduce nonbona fide police alarms and to charge the cost of such responses to that portion of the City resident
and business population that wishes to use such alarms is to impose a gradually increasing service charge on the occurrence of more than three (3)
police alarms for an alarm system in one calendar year, regardless of whether the alarm was bona fide or nonbona fide.
C. Moreover, the failure to pay service charges or the occurrence of eleven (11) or more alarm occurrences in one calendar year shall constitute grounds
for revocation of an alarm user permit and for the police not to respond to additional alarm occurrences. Nothing in this subsection, however, shall be
deemed to require or obligate the police to respond to an alarm occurrence. (Ord. 0-99-21, 9-20-1999, eff. 9-20-1999)
9-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
ALARM OCCURRENCE: Is the activation of an alarm system for or as a result of any reason whatsoever which notified the Police Department to respond
to the premises on which the alarm system exists.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any assemblage of mechanical or electrical equipment or devices (or a single device such as a solid state unit which plugs directly into
a 110-volt AC line) arranged to signal the presence of an unauthorized intrusion or other activity requiring urgent and immediate attention. The term alarm
system shall include the terms "automatic holdup alarm system", "burglar alarm system", and "holdup alarm system".
The following alarm systems are specifically excluded from the provisions of this definition: fire alarm systems, medical emergency systems, alarm
systems used solely to alert or signal persons within a premises, and alarm systems which monitor temperature, humidity, or any other condition not
directly related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion into a premises or an attempted robbery or burglary at a premises.
ALARM USER: The person, family, household, firm, entity, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or state, or subdivision thereof, in
possession or in control of any building, structure, facility or property in the City of Prospect Heights wherein an alarm system is currently being maintained
or is hereinafter maintained.
ALARM USER PERMIT: A permit issued by the city for the privilege and ability to operate an alarm system within the city. No person, entity or alarm user
shall be issued an alarm user permit without first completing an application for an alarm user permit in a form satisfactory to the city and without first
paying the alarm user permit fee referred to below. Alarm user permits shall be valid for one year time periods, and may be renewed upon the payment of
the renewal fee referred to below.
POLICE: As the term is used in this chapter shall apply to any law enforcement agency or city department responsible for law enforcement activities within
the city of Prospect Heights.
SERVICE CHARGE: The amount of money determined by the city council to be reasonable compensation for the services and liabilities assumed by the
city in responding to alarm occurrences. (Ord. 0-99-21, 9-20-1999, eff. 9-20-1999)
9-3-3: PERMIT SYSTEM; PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 365/470
A. Requirement Of Valid Alarm User Permit; Penalty:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person, entity or alarm user to maintain or operate an alarm system without a valid and effective alarm user permit.
a. The maintenance or operation of an alarm system without an alarm user permit or after an alarm user permit has been revoked pursuant to
section 9-3-5 of this chapter shall constitute an offense punishable by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense and each day that the violation continues shall be regarded as constituting a separate offense.
b. The city shall have no obligation to respond to an alarm occurrence for an alarm system that does not have a valid and effective alarm user permit.
c. In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the city may, whenever it shall have knowledge of any alarm system not operated or maintained in
accordance with the provisions of this section, take all necessary steps to effect the removal of such alarm system.
B. Requirement For "Delay Mechanism": No alarm user permit shall be issued for any alarm system that is not equipped with an alarm delay mechanism
that allows for at least a fifteen (15) second delay before activation of the alarm. (Ord. 0-99-21, 9-20-1999, eff. 9-20-1999)
C. Alarm User Permit Fee:
1. There shall be an alarm user permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), or pro rata portion thereof, for the first calendar year, payable to the city with
submission of the alarm user permit application.
2. There shall be an annual renewal fee of forty dollars ($40.00), payable to the city on or before March 31 of each new calendar year. The annual
renewal license fee shall be eighty dollars ($80.00) when the renewal registration is submitted on or after April 1 of each calendar year. (Ord. 0-11-
26, 9-12-2011)
9-3-4: SERVICE CHARGES:
A. Imposition Of A Service Charge:
1. Excessive Occurrences: More than three (3) alarm occurrences in a calendar year from any alarm system for which an alarm user permit has been
obtained shall result in the imposition of service charges in the amount of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) per occurrence.
B. Notice: After the city has recorded three (3) alarm occurrences within a calendar year from any alarm user permit holder, the city shall notify the alarm
user, in writing by first class mail or by direct police service, of such fact and of the fact that additional alarm occurrences will result in the imposition of
service charges. Upon additional alarm occurrences, the city shall invoice the alarm user permit holder on a calendar basis for the service charge
which has been imposed. (Ord. 0-16-19, 6-13-2016)
C. Payment Of Service Charge: All service charges must be paid within thirty (30) days of mailing of the invoice rendered pursuant to subsection B of this
section.
D. Waiver Of Service Charges/Nullification Of Alarm Occurrence: The chief of police or designee shall have the authority, but not the obligation, to waive
any service charge and/or nullify the existence of any alarm occurrence only after finding, in his sole discretion, that one or more of the following
circumstances exist:
1. Evidence of an actual intrusion or an obvious intrusion attempt.
2. Evidence of electrical utility outage conditions lasting eight (8) hours or longer and affecting a general neighborhood area.
3. Evidence of a tornado, earthquake or other violent and extreme conditions of nature or acts of God, excluding thunder, snow, ice and electrical
storms.
4. Alarm occurrences during the thirty (30) day period following installation of an alarm system.
Requests for waiver or nullification made by an alarm user shall be considered by the chief of police or designee only if the request is made in writing
and the request is made within five (5) days following receipt of notice of the service charge (for requests for waiver). (Ord. 0-99-21, 9-20-1999, eff.
9-20-1999)
9-3-5: REVOCATION OF ALARM USER PERMIT:
A. Mayor To Revoke Permit: The mayor of the city shall revoke an alarm user permit for either of the two (2) following grounds:
1. Failure To Pay Service Charge: The failure to pay any service charge imposed pursuant to and in the manner described in this subsection (and
which payment has not been waived by the chief of police) shall constitute grounds for revocation of an alarm user permit, subject to the provisions
of this section.
2. Multiple Alarm Occurrences: Eleven (11) or more alarm occurrences for one alarm system in one calendar year (none of which having been nullified
by the chief of police) shall constitute grounds for revocation of an alarm user permit, subject to the provisions of this section, regardless of whether
the service charge for any of said alarm occurrences has been paid.
B. Notice And Hearing Prior To Revocation:
1. Notice: The mayor shall, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the revocation of an alarm user permit, notify the alarm user in writing, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or by direct police service, of the grounds for revocation and of the city's intent to revoke the alarm user permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 366/470
2. Written Hearing Request: Within ten (10) days of receipt of such notice, the alarm user may submit a written request to the mayor for a hearing
before the mayor, setting forth the reasons the alarm user permit should not be revoked. Said submission must include a written statement verifying
the existence of an alarm maintenance contract for the alarm system in question or other documentation in support of valid maintenance efforts. The
submission of such request shall suspend the authority of the mayor to revoke the alarm user permit.
a. Failure To Submit Request: If the alarm user fails to so submit a request for hearing within the stated time period, the mayor shall issue a written
statement of revocation, such written statement shall include an explanation of the consequences of revocation. Said written statement shall be
sent to the alarm user by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by direct police service. Revocation shall be effective immediately upon receipt
by the alarm user of said written statement.
b. Written Notice: If a request for a hearing is submitted within the stated time period, written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
served on the alarm user by the mayor by first class mail at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
c. Hearing: At said hearing, the alarm user, or his authorized representative, shall have the right to confront and examine witnesses and to present
evidence on his own behalf. After the hearing, the mayor may either support revocation or cancel the notice of revocation. In the event that the
mayor supports revocation, the mayor shall so advise the chief of police and revocation shall be effective immediately upon receipt by the alarm
user, or his agent, of a written statement of revocation, issued by the city administrator, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by direct
police service, explaining the consequences of revocation.
C. Reinstatement Of Revoked Permit: Alarm user permits that have been revoked pursuant to this section may be reinstated upon submission to the city
by the alarm user of a new alarm user permit application and payment of a fifty dollar ($50.00) reinstatement fee and of all past due service charges;
provided however, that no revoked alarm user permit may be reinstated within the six (6) month period following the effective date of the revocation.
Upon reinstatement, the alarm user shall be in the same position for purposes of calculating alarm occurrences and service charges as an alarm user
that has received an alarm user permit for the first time. (Ord. 0-99-21, 9-20-1999, eff. 9-20-1999)
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
9-4-1: PURPOSE, CREATION AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The stated purpose of this chapter is to provide for fair and efficient enforcement of city ordinances as may be allowed by law and directed by
ordinance, through an administrative adjudication of violations of city ordinances and establishing a schedule of fines and penalties, and authority and
procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties. To that end, there is hereby adopted division 2.2 of article 1 of the Illinois municipal code1.
B. Creation: There is hereby established an executive department of the municipal government to be known as the city of Prospect Heights ordinance
enforcement department and to have the power to enforce compliance with all municipal ordinances as from time to time authorized by the city council,
except for any offense under the Illinois vehicle code (adopted by the city under title 10 of this code) that is a traffic regulation governing the movement
of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under section 6-204 of the Illinois vehicle code.
C. Scope: The following violations may be adjudicated under this chapter:
1. Any ordinance or statute regulating the parking, standing or condition of vehicles as provided in 11-208.3 of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3, as amended.
2. Automated traffic law violations as defined in sections 1-105.2 and 11-208.3 of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-105.2, 11-
208.3, as amended.
D. This Chapter Not Exclusive: This chapter shall not be the exclusive method by which the city may adjudicate the violations described in this section.
(Ord. 0-07-05, 1-22-2007)
9-4-2: ORGANIZATION OF DEPARTMENT:
A. Organization: The city of Prospect Heights' ordinance enforcement department shall be composed of a hearing officer appointed by the mayor with the
advice and consent of the city council; and, an ordinance enforcement administrator, system coordinator and hearing room personnel, appointed by the
city administrator or the administrator's designee, with the power and authority as hereinafter set forth.
B. Hearing Officer: A hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Illinois for at least three (3) years.
C. Hearing Officer Powers And Duties: The hearing officer shall preside over all adjudicatory hearings and shall have the following powers and duties:
1. Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is relevant to the existence of a city code violation;
2. Issuing subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant testimony at the hearing, upon the request of the parties or their representatives;
3. Preserving and authenticating the record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
4. Issuing and signing a written finding, decision and order stating whether a city code violation exists; and
5. Imposing penalties, sanctions, mandatory compliance directives or such other relief consistent with applicable city code provisions and assessing
costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation, except however, that in no event shall the hearing officer have authority to impose a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 367/470
penalty of incarceration.
D. Hearing Officer Training: Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings under this chapter, the hearing officer shall have successfully
completed a formal training program which includes the following:
1. Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings over which the hearing officer shall preside;
2. Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that he/she will adjudicate;
3. Observation of administrative hearings; and
4. Participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence and issuing final orders.
E. Ordinance Enforcement Administrator: The ordinance enforcement administrator is authorized and directed to:
1. Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of city ordinance violation as may be permitted by law and directed by ordinance.
2. Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required under this chapter or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this
chapter.
3. Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final determination of liability.
4. Certify copies of final determination of an ordinance violation adjudicated pursuant to this chapter, and any factual reports verifying the final
determination of any violation liability which was issued in accordance with this chapter, the laws of the state of Illinois including 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes ("ILCS") 5/11-208.3 as from time to time amended.
5. Certify reports to the secretary of state concerning initiation of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as
hereinafter set forth, and those of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5.
6. Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.
7. Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection agencies and pursuit of all postjudgment remedies available by current law.
F. System Coordinator: The system coordinator is hereby authorized and directed to operate and maintain the computer programs, including, but not
limited to:
1. Input of violation notice information.
2. Establishing court dates and notice dates.
3. Record fine and penalty assessment and payments.
4. Issue payment receipts.
5. Issue succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final determination of liability; issue notice of immobilization; issue notice of impending
impoundment; issue notice of impending driver's license suspension, as directed by the ordinance enforcement administrator in accordance with the
provisions hereinafter set forth.
6. Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at administrative hearings, pleas entered, judgments entered, sanctions imposed, if
any, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
G. Hearing Room Personnel: Hearing room personnel shall be full time or part time personnel to perform such services as directed by the hearing officer
and may be authorized and directed to:
1. Maintain hearing room decorum.
2. Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of the circuit court.
3. Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and as directed by the hearing officer or ordinance enforcement administrator.
(Ord. 0-07-05, 1-22-2007)
9-4-3: VIOLATION NOTICES:
A. Notices Of Violation:
1. Violation notice of any ordinance violation including violations of title 10, "Motor Vehicles And Traffic", of this code shall be issued by the persons
authorized under this code and shall contain information and shall be certified and constitute prima facie evidence of the violation cited as hereinafter
set forth.
2. All full time, part time and auxiliary police officers, community service officers, code enforcement officers and inspectors, as well as other specific
individuals authorized by any city official or city department shall have the authority to issue violation notices.
3. Any individual authorized hereby to issue violation notices and who detects an ordinance violation authorized to be adjudicated under this chapter or
a violation of any section of any city ordinance, is authorized to issue notice of violation thereof and shall make service thereof as is hereinafter set
forth. (Ord. 0-07-05, 1-22-2007)
B. Contents Of Notice: The violation notice shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following information:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 368/470
1. The name of the party violating the ordinance, if known.
2. The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).
3. The particular ordinance violated.
4. Vehicle make and state registration number (if the make is available and readily discernible).
5. The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment.
6. The identification number of the person issuing the notice.
7. The date and location of the adjudicating hearing of ordinance violations which date shall be not less than thirty (30) nor more than forty (40) days
after the date of the violation notice. The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held and the penalties for failure to appear at
the hearing.
8. A statement that the payment of the indicated fine, and of any applicable penalty for late payment, shall operate as a final disposition of the violation.
(Ord. 0-08-40, 9-2-2008)
C. Verification Of Notice: The correctness of facts contained in any violation notice shall be verified by the person issuing said notice by:
1. Signing his/her name to the notice at the time of issuance; or
2. In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a single certificate, to be kept by the ordinance enforcement administrator,
attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under his/her control.
D. Processing Of Notice: The original or a facsimile of the violation notice shall be retained by the ordinance enforcement administrator where a docket
number shall be stamped on all copies and a hearing date noted. The notice shall be kept as a record in the ordinary course of business by the
ordinance enforcement administrator. One copy of the violation notice shall be returned to the person issuing the notice that he or she may prepare
evidence for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated. One copy of the violation shall be served by first class mail to the alleged violator along
with a summons commanding the alleged violator to appear.
E. Evidentiary Effect Of Notice: Any violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facie correct
and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice. (Ord. 0-07-05, 1-22-2007)
9-4-4: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
A. Subpoenas: At any time prior to the date set for the hearing, the hearing officer assigned to hear the violation, at the request of the authorized person
issuing the violation notice or the alleged violator, may direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing.
B. Continuances: No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under this chapter except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the alleged violator. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance
authorized by a hearing officer under this chapter shall not exceed twenty five (25) days.
C. Hearing And Evidence:
1. At the hearing, a hearing officer shall preside, shall hear testimony, and shall accept any evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of a city
code violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this chapter.
2. The case for the city may be presented by an attorney designated by the mayor or by any other city employee, except that the case for the city shall
not be presented by an employee of the ordinance enforcement department. The case for the alleged violator may be presented to the alleged
violator, his or her attorney, or any other agent or representative of the alleged violator.
3. If on the date set for hearing the alleged violator or his or her attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the alleged violator in default and
shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation.
4. Upon finding the alleged violator in default, the ordinance enforcement administrator shall send or cause to be sent notices by first class mail,
postage prepaid, to the violator who received the notice of an ordinance violation; or, in the case of a violation of title 10 of this code, the registered
owner or operator of the "cited vehicle" at the address as is recorded with the secretary of state, and shall be sent to the lessee of the "cited vehicle"
at the address last known to the lessor of the "cited vehicle" at the time of the lease. Service of notices sent in accordance herewith shall be
complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
D. Findings, Decision And Order: At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the evidence presented at
the hearing as to whether or not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as the findings, decision, and
order. The findings, decision, and order shall include: 1) the hearing officer's findings of fact; 2) a decision of whether or not a code violation exists
based upon the findings of fact; and 3) an order that states the sanction or dismisses the case if a violation is not proven. A monetary sanction for a
violation under this chapter shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be served on the
violator within five (5) days after it is issued. Service shall be first class mail. Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of fine money shall be
in the same manner as set forth in this code. (Ord. 0-07-05, 1-22-2007)
9-4-5: ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENTS:
A. Debt Due Village: Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the
exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the administrative review law shall be a debt due and owing the city and, as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 369/470
such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
B. Enforcement Of Judgments: After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the administrative review law may be sought for a final
determination of the code violation, the city attorney may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of Cook County for purpose of obtaining a
judgment on the findings, decision, and order. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and orders
against a person in such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action, the city shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision, and order, which
shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision, and order was issued in accordance with state
law and the applicable city ordinance. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided for by section 2-203 of the
code of civil procedure or by certified mail, return receipt requested, provided that the total amount of fines, other sanctions, and costs imposed by the
findings, decision, and order does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision, and
order was entered in accordance with the requirements of state law and the applicable city ordinance and that the violation had an opportunity for a
hearing and for judicial review:
1. The court shall render judgment in favor of the city and against the violator for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order, plus costs.
The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money.
2. The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that are requested by the city to enforce the order of the hearing officer to correct a code
violation.
C. Notice Of Suspension Of Driver's License: A notice of impending suspension of a person's driver's license shall be sent to any violator determined to be
liable for the payment of any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on ten (10) or more vehicular standing or parking regulation violations:
1. The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within forty five (45) days of the date of the notice will result in the city notifying
the secretary of state that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5, incorporated
herein by reference.
2. The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the secretary of
state.
3. A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and owing the city within the time specified may result in proceeding with collection
procedures in the same manner as a judgment entered by any court of competent jurisdiction.
4. A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located within the city may be immobilized and impounded for failure to pay fines or penalties for
ten (10) or more vehicular standing or parking regulation violations.
D. Judicial Review/Administrative Review Law: The findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review in the circuit court of Cook
County. The provisions of the administrative review law, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial
review of the findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer under this chapter. (Ord. 0-07-05, 1-22-2007)
9-4-6: SCHEDULE OF FINES:
A. General Fines For Any Ordinance Other Than Title 10 Of This Code (Vehicle Code): The hearing officer may impose the fine prescribed by ordinance or
statute for violation of any city ordinance adjudicated under this chapter.
B. Fines For Violation Of Title 10 Of This Code (Vehicle Code) Other Than Handicapped Parking And Regulated Parking: For violation of any provision of
title 10, "Motor Vehicles And Traffic", of this code; or any compliance violation; or violation of any other city ordinance regulating the standing, parking,
or condition of motor vehicles, other than for handicapped parking, the fine shall be a maximum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation.
C. Fines For Violations Of Handicapped Parking Regulations: For violation of any city ordinance regulating handicapped parking, the fine shall be a
maximum of two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 0-07-05, 1-22-2007)
9-4-7: VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Authorization To Impound, Boot Or Tow Motor Vehicle: Any motor vehicle whose registered owner has been determined to be liable for ten (10) or more
vehicular standing or parking regulation violations, for which the fines or penalties assessed remain unpaid, may be immobilized, booted or towed and
impounded if:
1. The ordinance enforcement administrator has determined that a person has been determined to be liable for ten (10) or more ordinance violations,
for which the fines or penalties remain unpaid.
2. The person determined to be liable for ten (10) or more violations is the registered owner of a motor vehicle located within the city geographical
boundaries.
3. A seizure notice has been sent to the registered owner of the motor vehicle located within the geographical boundaries of the city.
B. Contents Of Seizure Notice: A seizure notice shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following:
1. That a final determination has been made on ten (10) or more ordinance violations, for which the fines and penalties remain unpaid.
2. A listing of the violations for which the person has been determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation:
a. The ordinance violation notice number;
b. Date of issuance; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 370/470
c. Total amount of fines and penalties assessed.
3. That the motor vehicle owned by the person and located within the city are subject to immobilization and/or towing and impoundment if the fines and
penalties are not paid within, but not later than fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice.
4. Date of immobilization.
5. Date of impending towing and impoundment.
6. That the registered owner may contest the validity of the notice by appearing in person before the ordinance administrator within fifteen (15) days of
the date of the notice and submitting evidence which would conclusively disprove liability, such as the following:
a. That the registered owner was not the owner or lessee of the vehicle on the date or dates the notices of violation were issued; or
b. That the fines or penalties for the violations cited in the notice were paid in full; or
c. That the registered owner has not accumulated ten (10) or more ordinance violation notices which are unpaid, not adjudicated or for which no
appearance was made.
7. That the motor vehicle of the registered owner to whom notice is sent has failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as specified in the notice
and has failed to appear with evidence to conclusively disprove liability before the ordinance enforcement administrator to contest the validity of the
notice.
C. Request For Hearing In Case Of Impoundment And Towing Of Motor Vehicle: Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity of the
immobilization or towing and impoundment, the ordinance enforcement administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest the validity of
the immobilization or towing and impoundment on the next scheduled hearing date or if sooner scheduled by the ordinance enforcement administrator
for good cause shown, but in no case shall the hearing be scheduled later than thirty (30) days after the request for hearing is filed and shall serve
notice of the hearing date upon the registered owner by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address as is set forth on the request for hearing.
Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed in the United States mail.
D. Notice Affixed To Vehicle In Cases Of Immobilization: Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a notice shall be affixed to the vehicle in a conspicuous
place. Such notice shall warn that the vehicle is immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in its damage. The notice shall also
state that the unauthorized removal of or damage to the immobilizing restraint is a violation of sections 16-1 and 21-1 of the Illinois criminal code. The
notice also shall provide the following information specifying that a release of the immobilizing restraint may be had by:
1. Paying all the fines and penalties, if any, on the outstanding complaints for which notice has been sent prior to the date of the immobilization; or
2. Completing appearance forms on all outstanding parking violation complaints for which notice had been sent prior to the date of the immobilization
and depositing collateral in the amount of fifty percent (50%) of the total fines for these outstanding parking violation complaints, or five hundred
dollars ($500.00), whichever is less.
E. Towing Of Immobilized Vehicle: Except where the vehicle is otherwise subject to towing, if the immobilizing restraint has not been released as
hereinabove provided, within seventy two (72) hours of its placement, the vehicle may be towed and impounded.
F. Postimpoundment Notice: Within ten (10) days after a vehicle has been impounded, notice of impoundment shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the registered owner of the vehicle. The notice shall state that the owner has the right to a postimmobilization and posttowing hearing as
provided in subsection G of this section and that if the vehicle is not claimed within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, the vehicle may be sold
or otherwise disposed of in accordance with the Illinois vehicle code.
G. Hearing In Case Of Vehicle Immobilization: The owner of an immobilized vehicle or other interested person shall have the right to a hearing to
determine whether the immobilization or any subsequent towing was erroneous or whether the vehicle was properly included on an immobilization list,
if the owner files a written demand for a hearing before the ordinance enforcement administrator within fourteen (14) days after issuance of the notice
specified in subsection F of this section or within fourteen (14) days of immobilization, whichever is later. The hearing shall be scheduled as set forth in
subsection C of this section. Failure to request or attend a scheduled hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. In the event of such
failure, any amount deposited pursuant to subsection D of this section shall be forfeited. A hearing provided by this section shall not determine the
validity of or otherwise adjudicate any citation or notice of ordinance violation issued relative to the immobilized vehicle, but shall only relate to whether
the vehicle was properly immobilized or towed by determining whether the owner previously submitted evidence required by this chapter.
H. Fines And Fees For Immobilization: The fine for immobilization shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and the fine for impoundment and towing
shall be an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). The owner of the vehicle shall also be charged reasonable storage and towing fees
should the vehicle be removed to a private storage facility, provided that no fees shall be assessed for any immobilization or tow which has been
determined to be erroneous.
I. Towing Services: The ordinance enforcement administrator shall appoint or retain the services of an individual agency or company to tow and impound
vehicles in accordance herewith, provided that that individual, agency or company is fully insured and licensed according to local or state law and has
available a secured impound area within which to retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For the purpose of this section a "secured area" shall mean an
area bounded by a fence, chainlink or otherwise, of a sufficient height and with locking gates so as to minimize or prevent unauthorized entry into the
impounded vehicles. (Ord. 0-07-05, 1-22-2007)
Title 10
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 371/470
Chapter 1
VEHICLE LICENSES
10-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is propelled otherwise than by muscular power, including, but not limited to, motorcycles, motor driven cycles,
trucks, tractors, trailers of all types, reconstructed and antique vehicles, trackless trailers and school buses except coaches, cars and engines traveling
upon fixed rails, are defined as "motor vehicles" for the purpose of this chapter. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and
designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor is defined as a "motorcycle", and every motor
scooter and every bicycle with motor attached is defined as a "motor driven cycle".
TRACTOR, SEMITRAILER UNITS/ONE VEHICLE: A self-propelled vehicle operated as a tractor and one semitrailer shall be considered as one vehicle in
computing the license fees provided herein, and no additional license fees shall be required for said semitrailer so used. (Ord. 0-76-10, 8-2-1976)
10-1-2: MOTOR VEHICLE CLASSIFICATIONS:
All motor vehicles which are designed and used for the carrying of not more than ten (10) passengers shall be classed as passenger vehicles. Those
motor vehicles which are designed and used for pulling or carrying freight or property or which are used for the carrying of more than ten (10) persons
shall be classed as commercial vehicles for the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 0-76-10, 8-2-1976)
10-1-3: VEHICLE LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
A. All owners of motor vehicles residing in the city and all owners of passenger vehicles which have their situs or base in the city regardless of where such
owner resides shall obtain a license and pay the appropriate fee for such motor vehicle.
B. Each owner of a motor vehicle residing in the city shall pay an annual license fee as set forth in this chapter for the use of such motor vehicle.
C. Each owner of a passenger vehicle (as classified in section 10-1-2 of this chapter) which has its situs or base in the city shall pay an annual license fee
as set forth in this chapter for the use of such passenger vehicle in the city. For purpose of this section the "situs or base" of a passenger vehicle shall
mean the location where such vehicle is garaged or most regularly parked when not in use by its operator who resides in the city.
D. Applications for vehicle licenses shall be made to the city on a form provided. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, operator or custodian of each
motor vehicle coming within the meaning of this chapter to make such application when due. The license issued pursuant to such application shall be
issued only for the vehicle described in the application. (Ord. 0-13-22, 10-28-2013)
10-1-4: LICENSE PERIOD:
Effective January 1, 1998, the vehicle license period shall be annual, for the period from April 1 through March 31, provided that vehicle licenses may be
issued beginning on or about January 1 immediately preceding the effective license year at the annual fee for that license period. (Ord. 0-13-21, 10-28-
2013)
10-1-5: LICENSE PLATES, LABELS, STICKERS:
Every person who procures a vehicle license pursuant to this chapter shall receive at the time of payment of the fee a city license plate, label, sticker or tag
without extra charge therefor; such plate, label, sticker or tag shall be numbered serially and bear the number and year for which issued. Each such label
or sticker shall be permanently affixed to the lower right hand corner of the windshield, per instructions on the sticker, at all times that the vehicle is
operated in the city. Each such motorcycle tag or plate shall be affixed with bolts to the rear license plate. (Ord. 0-84-07, 6-4-1984)
10-1-6: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-13-21, 10-28-2013)
10-1-7: LICENSE FEES:
A. Effective October 1, 2012, the annual fees for vehicle licenses shall be determined by the following schedule:
Classification License Fee
Base Fee
If Purchased
January 1 -
March 31
Late Fee
If
Purchased
After April
1
Late Fee
If
Purchased
After June
1
Partial Year
Prorated
Fee
October 1 -
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 372/470
December
31
Passenger vehicles (including, but not limited to, motor cars) $70.00 $105.00 $140.00 $35.00
Other motorized vehicles (including, but not limited to, motorcycles and motor
scooters)
35.00 45.00 70.00 17.50
Antique vehicles and recreational vehicles (must have state issued antique or
recreational vehicle license plate)
25.00 35.00 50.00 12.50
Senior citizens. Must be 65 years of age or older (only 1 vehicle license issued at lower
rate to same household)
30.00 45.00 60.00 15.00
Disabled. Only 1 vehicle license issued at lower rate to same household (must have
state issued disability license plate)
30.00 45.00 60.00 15.00
Commercial vehicles. Gross weight in pounds including vehicle and maximum load:
Class Weight In Pounds
B 8,000 or less 90.00 135.00 180.00 45.00
D 8,001 to 12,000 130.00 195.00 260.00 65.00
F 12,001 to 16,000 170.00 255.00 340.00 85.00
H 16,001 and over 210.00 315.00 420.00 105.00
Transfer fees 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00
Duplicate fees 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00
B. Base Fee: The base fee shall be due:
1. For all licenses obtained during the period of January 1 through March 31 prior to a given license year.
2. For all vehicles newly titled to residents during a license year until September 30 of the license year.
3. For all vehicles of new residents during a license year until September 30 of the license year.
C. Late Fees: The above late fees shall be due for licenses for vehicles owned prior to the start of the license year but for which the license was not timely
purchased.
D. Partial Year Prorated Fee: The prorated fee shall apply to:
1. Newly titled vehicles obtained on or after October 1 through December 31 for the current license year;
2. New individual or business residents who become residents on or after October 1 through December 31 of the current license year.
E. New Vehicle/New Resident Applications: For all vehicles newly titled to residents during a license year or operated by residents new to the city, the
resident must apply for a license within thirty (30) days after the applicant has acquired title to such vehicle or has become a resident of the city. For
businesses, the application for a license shall be made within thirty (30) days after the applicant establishes its principal offices in the city. (Ord. 0-12-
40, 10-22-2012)
10-1-8: REDUCED LICENSE FEES:
A. Senior Citizens: The annual fee for passenger vehicles shall be as shown in section 10-1-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 0-08-19, 5-19-2008, eff. 5-30-2008;
amd. Ord. 0-10-04, 3-22-2010, eff. 4-2-2010)
B. Disabled Veterans' Licenses: Any disabled veteran who is qualified to obtain a disabled veterans' plate from the state pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3-609, as amended, shall be entitled to one vehicle license issued pursuant to this chapter for one motor vehicle without the payment of any
fee. (Ord. 0-92-45, 11-2-1992)
C. Disabled: The annual fee for passenger vehicles shall be as shown in section 10-1-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 0-08-19, 5-19-2008, eff. 5-30-2008; amd.
Ord. 0-10-04, 3-22-2010, eff. 4-2-2010)
The increments to the fees herein prescribed are assessed to cover the additional costs of administration and not as a penalty, and the payment of
such increments to the stipulated fee schedule shall not exempt any person from any penalties imposed for the operation of motor vehicles without
proper license. (Ord. 0-92-45, 11-2-1992)
10-1-9: EXEMPTION TO VEHICLE LICENSE FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 373/470
The city, school districts, park districts and such other bodies politic, when approved by the mayor and city council, may be issued vehicle licenses at no
fee. (Ord. 0-77-22, 6-20-1977)
10-1-10: DUPLICATE ISSUE:
Duplicate issue of vehicle licenses may occur when the original license has become mutilated beyond serviceability, lost, stolen or for other proper cause.
Whenever possible, the original license shall be surrendered upon duplicate issue. Application for duplicate issue shall be made on a special form
provided for that purpose which shall contain a brief statement by the applicant citing the circumstances requiring need for reissue. The fee set out in
section 10-1-7 of this chapter shall be charged for duplicate issue unless it is clearly established that the need for reissue is no fault of the applicant, at
which time no fee shall be charged. (Ord. 0-13-21, 10-28-2013)
10-1-11: TRANSFER OF VEHICLE LICENSE:
Transfer of vehicle license from one person to another is prohibited. Transfer from one vehicle to another vehicle of the same ownership is authorized
when such transfer complies with all provisions attaching thereto. The transfer fee shall be as set out in section 10-1-7 of this chapter. Transfer of a vehicle
license from one classification vehicle to another classification vehicle of the same ownership when the second classification vehicle is of a greater fee
class may be made by paying the difference in the fee on an annual or prorated basis as shall be found applicable. The transfer fee shall be waived in
such cases. Transfers from one classification to another classification when the second classification is of a lesser fee class may be made with no transfer
fee charge; provided, however, no rebate shall be allowed. (Ord. 0-13-21, 10-28-2013)
10-1-12: LEASED OR RENTED VEHICLES:
Leased or rented vehicles shall be licensed in the name of the owner or custodian of the vehicle and if such vehicle is in custody of the resident of this city
assigned to him in total use, the resident shall be required to license such vehicle as provided herein. Lease or rental agencies located within the city shall
be required to license all vehicles based in the city that are registered in the state. (Ord. 0-85-03, 2-4-1985)
10-1-13: EXTENSION OF APPLICATION TIME:
The mayor, with approval of the city council, has the right to extend the period during which application for vehicle licenses can be made for a period not to
exceed sixty (60) days. If such extension is made, there shall be no increase in fees during such extended period. (Ord. 0-77-22, 6-20-1977)
10-1-14: USE OF FUNDS:
A special fund shall be established for deposit of the proceeds of the sales of the motor vehicle licenses, and the proceeds shall be used for the purpose of
improving, paving, repairing or maintaining the streets and other public roadways within the city, provided that the actual cost of the collection of the fees
charged herein and the disbursement thereof may be deducted from the total amount collected, and not to exceed thirty five percent (35%) of such fees
may be used for payment of salaries and wages of police officers engaged in the duties of regulating traffic. (Ord. 0-76-10, 8-2-1976)
10-1-15: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day the offense or violation exists or is committed. (Ord. 0-76-10, 8-2-1976)
Chapter 2
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this Title the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Section:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: A. A vehicle parked or otherwise located on the public way; and
1. In such a state of disrepair that it is incapable of being driven; or
2. That has not been moved for a period of at least seven (7) days and from its condition, the period during which it has not been moved or some
other circumstance, appears to have been abandoned; or
B. Vehicles parked in a public parking lot or in a private parking lot without the consent of the lot owner, proprietor or agent of the property, which
person has requested that the vehicle be towed; or
C. A vehicle defined as abandoned, or capable of being towed, by any other ordinances of the Municipality and which does not fall into the categories
of "hazardous" or "unlawful" vehicles, and therefore is not subject to an immediate tow.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 374/470
ALLEY: A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of lots or buildings and not used for general traffic circulation.
ARTERIAL STREET: Any U.S. or State numbered route, controlled access highway or other major radial or circumferential street or highway designated
as part of a major arterial system of streets and highways.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles of the Fire Department, police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of Municipal
departments, public service corporations or other local governments as are designated or authorized by law.
BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is more than sixteen
inches (16") in diameter.
BUS: Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more, than ten (10) passengers and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other
than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
BUS STAND: A designated area in the roadway, parallel and adjacent to the curb or shoulder to be occupied exclusively by buses for purposes of
maintaining schedules or awaiting passengers.
BUS STOP: A designated area in the roadway, parallel and adjacent to the curb or shoulder used for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway when within any six hundred feet (600') along such highway there are buildings
in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but not being limited to, motels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which
occupy at least three hundred feet (300') of frontage on one side or three hundred feet (300') collectively on both sides of the highway.
CHAUFFEUR: A. All persons employed by another for the principal purpose of driving a motor vehicle; and
B. All persons who drive a school bus transporting children; and
C. All persons employed in connection with the operation of any school, day camp, summer camp or nursery school, who drive any motor vehicle
transporting children to or from any school, day camp, summer camp, or nursery school; and
D. All persons who drive any motor vehicle when in use for the transportation of persons or property for compensation;
except the term "chauffeur" shall not include any person who operates a road machine, a farm tractor or a motor vehicle incidental to some other and
principal occupation where the motor vehicle is operated solely and in furtherance of such other and principal occupation, provided that the motor
vehicle is not used for the transportation of passengers or property for hire.
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY: Every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have
no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway.
CROSSING GUARD: An adult civilian authorized to supervise and expedite the crossing of pedestrians at assigned crossings.
CROSSWALK: A. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway;
B. Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
EXPLOSIVES: Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which
contains any oxidizing and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by
concussion, by percussion or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the
resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive, effects on contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb.
FARM TRACTOR: Every implement of husbandry, designed and used primarily to move and operate other implements of husbandry.
FLAMMABLE LIQUID: Any liquid which has a flash point of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70F) or less, as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closedcup
test device.
FUNERAL PROCESSION: A caravan or motorcade consisting of two (2) or more motor vehicles, in combinations of any of the following: automobiles
designed and used for carrying not more than seven (7) passengers, funeral hearses, and floral cars, when such vehicles are proceeding to places of
burial. For purposes of this Title, pedestrians or equestrian units may also constitute funeral processions either alone or in combinations of any of the
motor vehicles described in this Section.
GROSS WEIGHT: The weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon.
HAZARDOUS VEHICLE: A. A vehicle that has been involved in an accident and is disabled or cannot be immediately moved by the owner or operator of
the vehicle.
B. A vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the health or welfare of the members of the public; or
C. A vehicle abandoned or disabled on a public street, way or alley that, because of its position in relation to the public way or its physical appearance,
is impeding the orderly flow of traffic or poses a potential danger to pedestrians and other operators of vehicles.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 375/470
HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
HOLIDAYS: When used in this Title or on official signs authorized by this Title, holidays shall mean New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
HOUSE TRAILER: A. A trailer or semitrailer which is designed, constructed and equipped as a dwelling place, living abode or sleeping place (either
permanently or temporarily) that is equipped for use as a conveyance on streets and highways; or
B. A trailer or a semitrailer whose chassis and exterior shell is designed and constructed for use as a house trailer, as defined in subsection A of this
definition, but which is used instead permanently or temporarily for the advertising, sale, display or promotion of merchandise or services, or for any
other commercial purpose except for the transportation of property for hire or the transportation of property for distribution by a private carrier.
INTERSECTION: A. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles travelling upon different
roadways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
B. Where a highway includes two (2) roadways forty feet (40') or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
LANED ROADWAY: A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
LOADING ZONE: A designated area in the roadway, adjacent to the curb or shoulder, to be occupied exclusively by vehicles during the loading or
unloading of passengers or material.
MERGING TRAFFIC: A maneuver executed by the drivers of vehicles on converging roadways to permit simultaneous or alternate entry into the junction
thereof, wherein the driver of each vehicle involved is required to adjust his vehicular speed and lateral positions so as to avoid a collision with any other
vehicle.
METAL TIRE: Every tire the surface of which is in contact with the highway which is wholly or partly of metal or other hard, nonresilient material.
MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE: Every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five (5) horsepower, and every
bicycle with motor attached.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is propelled otherwise than by muscular power, including, but not limited to, motorcycles, motor-driven cycles, pole
trailers, reconstructed vehicles, road tractors, school buses, semitrailers, special mobile equipment, specially constructed vehicles, trackless trailer
coaches, trailers, trucks and truck tractors. Motor vehicles which are designed and used for the carrying of not more than seven (7) persons shall be
classified as motor vehicles of the first division. Those motor vehicles which are designed and used for pulling or carrying freight or which are used for the
carrying of more than seven (7) persons shall be called motor vehicles of the second division.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact
with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
OFFICIAL TIME PERIOD: Central Standard or daylight-saving time, whichever may be in current use in this City.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES: All signs, signals, markings and devices placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
ONE-WAY STREET OR ALLEY: A public way in which traffic is permitted to travel in only one direction.
OPERATOR: Every person, other than a chauffeur, who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon a highway or who is exercising
control over or steering a vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle.
OWNER: A person who holds legal title of a motor vehicle, or in the event a motor vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement, and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of such motor vehicles entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or
mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this Title.
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
PARKING METER: A mechanical device located upon a public street, sidewalk or other place designated as a parking meter zone, which device may be
activated by the insertion of appropriate United States coins and which thereafter clocks the number of minutes of parking privilege thereby extended to
the person depositing such coin or coins.
PARKING METER ZONE: A designated and marked off area in the roadway, adjacent to the curb or shoulder or any other place so designated, to be
occupied exclusively by vehicles for the purpose of parking for the period of time allocated to the zone by the parking meter.
PARKWAYS: The area between the outer edge of a roadway and the property line of the adjoining property.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
PERSON: Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation.
PNEUMATIC TIRE: Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the load.
POLE TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or
pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 376/470
pipes or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
POLICE OFFICER: Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY: Every way or place in private ownership in use for vehicular travel by the owner and those having expressed or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
PROPERTY LINE: The line of demarcation between a public way and private property abutting thereon.
PUBLIC BUILDING: Any building or portion of any building occupied and used by any governmental agency.
PUBLIC PASSENGER VEHICLE: A motor vehicle used for the transportation of passengers for hire, except those devoted exclusively to funeral purposes
or to the operation of metropolitan transit authorities or public utilities under the laws of the State of Illinois.
PUBLIC WAY: Any sidewalk, roadway, alley or other thoroughfare open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purposes of travel.
PUSHCART: A conveyance designed to be propelled by a person afoot.
RAILROAD: A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than street cars, operated upon stationary rails.
RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL: Any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the
presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
RAILROAD TRAIN: A steam engine, electric or other motor vehicle without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails except street cars.
RECKLESSNESS: The state of mind accompanying an act which either pays no regard to its probable or possible injurious consequences, or which,
though foreseeing such consequences, persists in spite of such knowledge.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a
distance of three hundred feet (300') or more is in the main improved with residences and buildings in use for business.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
ROAD TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
ROADWAY: That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways
collectively.
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone.
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle owned or operated by or for a public or governmental agency or by or for a private or religious organization for the
transportation of pupils in connection with any school activity. This definition does not include a bus operated by a public utility or a Municipal corporation
authorized to conduct local or interurban transportation of passengers.
SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle with or without motive power other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
SOLID TIRE: Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.
SPECIAL MOBILE EQUIPMENT: Every vehicle not designed or used primarily for the transportation of persons or property and only incidentally operated
or moved over a highway, including, but not limited to: ditch digging apparatus, well-boring apparatus and road construction and maintenance machinery
such as asphalt spreaders, bituminous mixers, bucket loaders, tractors other than truck tractors, ditchers, leveling graders, finishing machines, motor
graders, road rollers, scarifiers, earth moving carryalls and scrapers, power shovel and drag lines, and self-propelled cranes and earth moving equipment.
The term does not include house trailers, dump trucks, truck mounted transit mixers, cranes or shovels, or other vehicles designed for the transportation of
persons or property to which machinery has been attached.
STAND OR STANDING: The halting of a vehicle whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers.
STOP: Complete cessation from movement.
STOP OR STOPPING: Any halting, even momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
STREET: The entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
SUBURBAN DISTRICT: That portion of the City other than the business, urban and residence districts.
TAXI METER: Any instrument or device which records and indicates charge or fare measured by distance traveled, waiting time and extra passengers.
TAXICAB STAND: A designated area in the roadway, adjacent to the curb or shoulder, to be occupied exclusively by taxicabs for purposes of standing or
waiting passengers.
TERMINAL: A designated area, including buildings, structures and equipment located at the origin or destination of a transportation movement, and used
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 377/470
for the transferring, handling, delivering and receiving of passengers and property.
THROUGH HIGHWAY OR STREET: Every highway or street or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right of way and at the
entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways or streets is required by law to yield right of way to vehicles on such through highway or
street in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided in this Title.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, street cars and other conveyances either singly or together while using any highways for
purposes of travel.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL: Any device, whether manual, electrical or mechanical, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
TRAILER: Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
TRUCK: Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
TRUCK TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part
of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
UNLAWFUL VEHICLE: A. A vehicle that has been reported stolen or is the subject of a search and seizure by the Police Department; or
B. A vehicle parked in violation of State of Illinois statutes or ordinances of the Municipality which prohibit parking at the location in question or for the
period of time for which the vehicle has been parked, and where either the statute or the ordinance authorize the vehicle to be towed and the signs
posted at the location in question note that fact.
URBAN DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including any street which is built up of structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses
situated at intervals of less than one hundred feet (100') for a distance of a quarter of a mile or more.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
YIELD RIGHT OF WAY: The act of granting the privilege of the immediate use of the intersecting roadway to traffic within the intersection and to vehicles
approaching from the right or left, but when the roadway is clear proceeding into the intersection. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-2-2: OBEDIENCE TO LAWS AND PUBLIC OFFICERS:
A. Obedience To Traffic Laws: It is unlawful and, unless otherwise declared in this Title, it is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required in this Title.
B. Obedience To Police Officers: Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in accordance with the provisions of this Title
and in emergencies as public safety and convenience require. No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any
police officer. Except in case of an emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the Police Department to direct or attempt to direct
traffic.
C. Direction Of Traffic At Scene Of Fire: Any Fire Department officer in command, or any fireman designated by him may exercise the powers and
authorities of a police officer in directing traffic at the scene of a fire or where the Fire Department has responded to any emergency call for so long as
Fire Department equipment is on the scene, in the absence of or in assisting police. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-2-3: PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO OBEY REGULATIONS1:
A. The provisions of this Title applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the
United States, this State or any county, city, town, district or other political subdivision of the State, except as provided in this Section and subject to
such specific exceptions as are set forth in this Title with reference to authorized emergency vehicles.
B. The driver of any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any stop sign shall
slow down as necessary for safety, but many proceed cautiously past such red or stop sign or signal. At other times, drivers of authorized emergency
vehicles shall stop in obedience to a stop sign or signal.
C. No driver of any authorized emergency vehicle shall assume any special privilege under this Title except when such vehicle is operated in response to
an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law.
D. The provisions of this Title shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of
the highway, but shall apply to such persons in vehicles when traveling to or from such work. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-2-4: TRAFFIC LAWS APPLICABLE TO BICYCLE RIDERS, ANIMALS:
Every person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon a roadway, shall be subject to the provisions of this Title applicable
to the driver of the vehicle, except those provisions of this Title which by their nature can have no application. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 378/470
Chapter 3
PEDESTRIANS
10-3-1: SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS:
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals at intersections heretofore declared in this Title but at all other places pedestrians shall be accorded
the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this Title. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-3-2: RIGHT OF WAY AT CROSSWALKS:
A. Where traffic-control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so
yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, except as otherwise
provided in this Title.
B. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway,
the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
C. Whenever stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection or at a plainly marked crosswalk between intersections, pedestrians shall
have the right of way over drivers of vehicles as set forth in this Title. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-3-3: CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS:
A. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within the marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall yield
the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
B. Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided, shall yield the right of way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
C. Pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk or an unmarked crosswalk at any intersection when appropriate signs prohibiting
crossing between intersections are erected.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway
and shall give warning by sounding a horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway. Every driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to a child or incapacitated person upon the roadway. (Ord. 0-
77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-3-4: BLIND PERSONS:
Any blind person who is carrying in a raised or extended position a cane or walking stick which is white in color or white tipped with red, or who is being
guided by a dog, shall have the right of way in crossing any street or highway, whether or not traffic on such street or highway is controlled by traffic
signals, anything in this Title to the contrary notwithstanding. The driver of every vehicle approaching the place where a blind person, so carrying such a
cane or walking stick or being so guided, is crossing a street or highway shall bring his vehicle to a full stop and before proceeding shall take such
precautions as may be necessary to avoid injury to the blind person. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to a blind person who is not so carrying
such a cane or walking stick and who is not guided by a dog, but the other provisions of this Title relating to pedestrians shall then be applicable to such
person. However, the failure of a blind person to so use or carry such a cane or walking stick or to be guided by a guide dog when walking on streets,
highways or sidewalks shall not be considered evidence of contributory negligence. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-3-5: RESTRICTIONS ON PEDESTRIANS:
A. Soliciting Rides: No persons shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle, and it shall be unlawful for
any driver to give such person a ride. Pedestrians are not to cling to, or ride on outside of any vehicle, such as on fenders, etc.
B. Walking On Streets Or Highways:
1. It is the duty of any person walking along and upon improved streets or highways to keep on the left of the paved portion, or on the left shoulder
thereof, and upon meeting a vehicle when walking on the said paved portion to step off to the left.
2. Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
Chapter 4
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
10-4-1: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 379/470
A. It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle to disobey the instructions of an official traffic device placed in accordance with the provisions of this Title
unless at the time otherwise directed by a police officer. Any driver violating the provisions of this Section shall be fined not less than seventy five
dollars ($75.00). Failure to pay this fine within ten (10) days shall result in an additional penalty of seventy five dollars ($75.00). (Ord. 0-97-85, 12-15-
1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
B. No provisions of this Title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an
official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state
that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-4-2: TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the words "go", "caution" or "stop" or exhibiting different colored lights successively, the
following colors shall be used in said terms and lights shall indicate as follows:
A. Green Alone Or "Go":
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular
traffic shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.
2. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
B. Yellow Or "Caution" When Shown With Or Following The Green Or "Go" Signal:
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall be allowed to proceed with caution through the intersection.
2. Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall
yield the right of way to all vehicles.
C. Red Alone Or "Stop":
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a
clearly visible line and shall remain standing until green or "go" is shown alone. Vehicular traffic facing the signal may turn right after stopping as
required by this subsection, unless posted signs prohibit such right turn, but said traffic shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within an
adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic using the intersection. Vehicular traffic on a one-way highway facing the signal may, after stopping as required
in this subsection cautiously enter the intersection and make a left turn onto an intersecting one-way highway on which traffic travels to the left,
unless posted signs prohibit such left turn, but shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic
lawfully using the intersection.
2. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway.
D. Red With Green Arrow:
1. Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall not interfere
with other traffic or endanger pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk.
2. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway.
E. Yellow When Shown With The Red Signal:
1. Vehicular traffic facing such signal shall not enter the nearest crosswalk at an intersection nor proceed beyond such other point as may be indicated
by the clearly visible line while this signal is displayed, but is advised that another signal indication which will permit the traffic movement is about to
be displayed.
2. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway,
F. Yellow When Shown Alone: Vehicular traffic facing the signal is warned that either a red or flashing red signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter,
and such traffic will be required to obey the ensuing red or flashing red signal, as the case may be.
G. Green Arrows Alone: Vehicular traffic facing the signal may enter the intersection only to make the movement or movements indicated by the arrows,
but shall not interfere with other traffic or endanger pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk. This signal will normally be used only in intersections where
one-way street operation is involved.
H. Other Traffic-Control Signals: In the event an official traffic-control signal or flashing red signal is erected at a place other than an intersection, the
provisions of this subsection or Section 10-4-5 of this Chapter shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can have no application.
Any stop required shall be at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of such sign or marking
the stop shall be made at the signal. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-4-3: PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS:
Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "walk" or "wait" or "don't walk" are in place, such signal shall indicate as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 380/470
A. Walk: Pedestrians facing such signals may proceed or cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, and shall be given the right of way by the drivers
of all vehicles.
B. Wait Or Don't Walk: No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his
crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the "wait" or "don't walk" signal is showing. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-4-4: LANE CONTROL SIGNALS:
Whenever lane control signals are used in conjunction with official signs, they shall have the following meanings:
A. Opaque Arrow On Green, Green Arrow On Opaque Background, Or Green Alone: Drivers of vehicles facing such signal are permitted to use the lane or
lanes over which the signal is displayed provided no intersection traffic-control signal gives a "stop" indication affecting the lane or lanes involved.
B. Opaque "X" On Red, Red "X" On Opaque Background, Or Red Alone: Drivers of vehicles facing such signal are prohibited from using the lane over
which the signal is displayed. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-4-5: FLASHING SIGNALS:
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
A. Flashing Red (Stop Signal): When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked or if none, then before entering the intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject to
the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
B. Flashing Yellow (Caution Signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-4-6: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR MARKINGS:
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street or highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, nor shall any
person place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street or highway any other sign which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic
or the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain any traffic sign or sign bearing thereon
any commercial advertising, and the Police Department may remove or cause to be removed any such sign or signal. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-4-7: INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES:
No persons shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any railroad
sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
Chapter 5
DRIVER REGULATIONS AND OFFENSES
10-5-1: ACCIDENTS:
10-5-1-1: ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURIES:
A. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such
accident, or as close thereto as possible, and shall then forthwith return to and in every event remain at the scene of the accident until he has notified
the Police Department and has fulfilled the requirements of Section 10-5-1-3 of this Chapter. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic
more than is necessary.
B. Any person who has failed to stop or to comply with said requirements shall, within forty eight (48) hours after such accident, or if hospitalized and
incapacitated from reporting, at any time during such period within forty eight (48) hours after being discharged from the hospital, report the place of
accident, the date, the approximate time, his name, address, the registration number of the vehicle driven, and the names of the occupants if any, of
such vehicle, with the Police Department serving the City. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-5-1-2: ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DAMAGE TO VEHICLE:
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop
such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible but shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 381/470
accident until he has notified the Police Department serving the City and has fulfilled the requirements of Section 10-5-1-3 of this Chapter. Every such stop
shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-5-1-3: DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION AND RENDER AID:
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any
person shall give his name and address, and the registration number of the vehicle he is driving and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit his
operator's or chauffeur's license to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with and shall render to any
person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying, or the making of arrangements for the carrying of such person to a
physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment, if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary, or if such carrying is requested by the
injured person. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-5-1-4: DUTY UPON DAMAGING PROPERTY:
A. Duty Upon Striking Unattended Vehicle: The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall
then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the
unattended vehicle, or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and of the
owner of the vehicle during the striking and a statement of the circumstances thereof. Such driver shall notify the Police Department serving the City of
the accident immediately or as soon thereafter as practical.
B. Duty Upon Striking Fixtures Or Other Property Upon A Highway: The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to fixtures or
other property legally upon or adjacent to a street or highway shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or persons in charge of such
property of such fact and of his name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle he is driving and shall, upon request and if available
exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license and shall make such report of such accident as required in subsection A of this Section. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-
1977)
10-5-2: AGE LIMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16) years to operate any motor vehicle upon any street in this City. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-5-3: DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE:
A. It is unlawful for any person who is an habitual user of narcotic drugs or any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs or
other drugs such as antihistamines, tranquilizers, ephedrine compounds or soporific medications which would impair the driver's ability to drive any
vehicle within this City.
B. Upon the trial of any action or proceeding arising out acts alleged to have been committed by any person while driving or in actual physical control of
the vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, evidence of the amount of alcohol in the person's blood at the time of the act alleged as
shown by a chemical analysis of his breath, blood, urine, saliva or other bodily substance is admissible, and the result of any such analysis shall give
rise to the following presumptions:
1. If there was 0.05% or less by weight of alcohol in the person's blood, it shall be presumed that such person was not under the influence of
intoxicating liquor.
2. If there was in excess of 0.05% but less than 0.10% by weight of alcohol in the person's blood, such fact shall not give rise to any presumption that
the person was or was not under the influence of intoxicating liquor, but such fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining
whether such person was under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
3. If there was 0.10% or more by weight of alcohol in the person's blood, it shall be presumed that such person was under the influence of intoxicating
liquor.
4. The foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not be construed as limiting the introduction of any other competent evidence bearing upon the
question whether or not the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
C. Every person who is convicted of a violation of this Section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-5-4: RECKLESS DRIVING:
A. Any person who drives any vehicle with a wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving. Any person who
shall operate any vehicle upon a public way negligently, heedlessly or without due caution in a manner to endanger or be likely to endanger any person
or property is guilty of reckless driving.
B. Every person convicted of reckless driving shall be punished upon a first conviction by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) and on a
second or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), and in no event shall the fine be in excess of five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-5-5: DRAG RACING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 382/470
Any person who, as an operator of a motor vehicle, is a participant in drag racing shall be fined, upon conviction, not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). For the purpose of this Section, "drag racing" means the act of two (2) or more individuals
competing or racing on any street or highway in this City in a situation in which one of the motor vehicles is beside or to the rear of a motor vehicle
operated by a competing driver and the one driver attempts to prevent the competing driver from passing or overtaking him. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-5-6: NEGLIGENT DRIVING:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon a public way, negligently, heedlessly and without due caution, in a manner so as to
endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property.
The word "negligent" as used herein shall mean without due care and caution, or without due regard to the width, grade, curves, corners, traffic and
other attendant conditions of streets, highways, roads or other ways used for vehicular traffic within the City limits. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
B. Any person convicted of negligent driving shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seventy five dollars ($75.00) for each
offense. Any person cited under the provisions of this Section not paying the fine within ten (10) days shall face an additional penalty of seventy five
dollars ($75.00). (Ord. 0-97-82, 12-15-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
Chapter 6
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
10-6-1: GENERAL SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
No person shall drive any vehicle upon any street or highway of this City at a speed which: a) is greater than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic
conditions and the use of the street or highway, or endangers the safety of any person or property; or b) is greater than the applicable maximum speed
limit established by this Chapter or by a regulation or ordinance made pursuant to the provisions of this Title. The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not
exceed the applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection,
when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when travelling upon any narrow or winding roadway, or when special hazard
exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions; and speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to
avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
(Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-6-2: RESIDENCE DISTRICTS:
Unless otherwise posted, no person shall drive any vehicle at a speed greater than twenty five (25) miles per hour in a residence district, except that in an
alley the maximum permissible speed is ten (10) miles per hour. (Ord. 0-96-43, 7-1-1996, eff. 7-11-1996)
10-6-3: URBAN DISTRICTS:
Unless otherwise posted, no person shall drive any vehicle at a speed greater than twenty five (25) miles per hour in an urban district, except that in an
alley the maximum permissible speed is ten (10) miles per hour. This Section shall not be effective unless appropriate signs are posted. (Ord. 0-96-43, 7-
1-1996, eff. 7-11-1996)
10-6-4: BUSINESS DISTRICTS:
Unless otherwise posted, no person shall drive any vehicle at a speed greater than twenty five (25) miles per hour in a business district, except that in an
alley the maximum permissible speed is ten (10) miles per our. This Section shall not be effective until appropriate signs are posted. (Ord. 0-96-43, 7-1-
1996, eff. 7-11-1996)
10-6-5: SOLID-TIRED VEHICLES:
No person shall drive any vehicle equipped with two (2) or more solid tires at a speed greater than ten (10) miles per hour in any district in the City. (Ord.
0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-6-6: SPEED LIMITS AT SCHOOLS:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed greater than twenty (20) miles per hour while passing a school zone or while travelling upon any public
thoroughfare on or across which children pass going to and from school during school days when school children are present.
This Section shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs are posted upon streets and highways wherein the school zone is located. Such signs shall
give proper due warning that a school zone is being approached and shall indicate the school zone and the maximum speed limit in effect during school
days when school children are present. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-6-7: PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF VIOLATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 383/470
If any person shall drive a vehicle in excess of the speed limits established in this Section, such excessive speed shall be deemed prima facie evidence
that such person is driving at a speed greater than is reasonable, proper and safe, having regard to traffic and the use of the way, so as to endanger the
life, limb and property of other persons. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-6-8: SPEED LIMITS ON STREETS UNDER OTHER JURISDICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on any street or highway within the City under the jurisdiction of the State or of the County at a speed exceeding
that lawfully set for such street or highway. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-6-9: MINIMUM SPEED REGULATIONS:
A. No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a low speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation of his vehicle or in compliance with law.
B. Whenever the City Council determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow vehicle speeds along any part or zone of
such highway or street consistently impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the City Council may declare by proper regulation or
ordinance a minimum speed limit below which no person shall drive except when necessary for safe operation of his vehicle or in compliance with law.
A limit so determined and declared becomes effective when appropriate signs giving notice of the limit are erected along such part or zone of the street
or highway. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-6-10: IMPLEMENTS AND TRACTORS:
When any implement of husbandry or road tractor is operated on the street or highway at a speed less than twenty (20) miles per hour, there shall be
displayed at all times during such operation a red flag at least fifteen inches (15") square carried on such vehicle at a height not less than ten feet (10') nor
more than twelve feet (12') above the ground or at least one flashing red signal lamp mounted as high as practicable, and of sufficient intensity to be
visible to the rear for a distance of at least five hundred feet (500') in normal sunlight; provided, however, that only the rear vehicle of a combination of
such vehicles coupled together need display such a flag or lamp. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-6-11: EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
The speed limits established by this Section or by regulation or ordinance made pursuant to the provisions of this Section do not apply to an authorized
emergency vehicle in motion when responding to an emergency call and when the driver thereof sounds an audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust
whistle, as may be reasonably necessary, provided that the vehicle is equipped and has in operation at least one lighted lamp displaying an oscillating,
rotating or flashing red beam visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front of such vehicle. An
authorized emergency Fire Department vehicle may be equipped and have in operation a triple eight moving white beam lights visible under normal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front of such vehicle, in lieu of or in addition to the rotating or flashing red beam, in
order to be exempt from the speed limits established by this Chapter or by regulation or ordinance made pursuant to the provisions of this Title. No other
authorized emergency vehicle shall use any oscillating triple eight moving white beam light other than Fire Department vehicles. However, this provision
does not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the street or
highway nor does it protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequence of a reckless disregard of the safety of others. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-6-12: VIOLATIONS; CHARGES, EFFECT ON CIVIL ACTIONS:
A. In every charge of violation of this Chapter by failure to observe an applicable speed limit, the complaint and also the summons or notice to appear shall
specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and the speed limit which is applicable at the place of the alleged violation.
B. The provisions of this Chapter concerning maximum speed limits do not relieve the plaintiff in any civil action from the burden of proving negligence on
the part of the defendant as a proximate cause of an accident. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
Chapter 7
RULES OF THE ROAD
10-7-1: DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway except as follows:
1. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement;
2. When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair;
3. Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
4. Upon a roadway designated by signs posted for one-way traffic;
5. Whenever there is a single track paved road on one side of the public highway and two (2) vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the
wider shoulder shall give the right of way on such pavement to the other vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 384/470
B. Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be
driven in the right hand lane available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and
passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. (Ord. 0-
80-46, 10-6-1980)
10-7-2: PASSING AND OVERTAKING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Passing Vehicles Proceeding In Opposite Directions: Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions, except as provided in Section 10-7-1 of this
Chapter, shall pass each other to the right and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give
to the other at least one-half (1/2) of the main traveled portion of the roadway, as nearly as possible.
B. Overtaking A Vehicle On The Left: The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to
those limitations, exceptions and special rules hereinafter stated:
1. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
2. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking
vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
C. Limitations On Overtaking On The Left:
1. No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction
unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be
completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every
event, the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the roadway before coming within one hundred feet (100') of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction.
2. No vehicle shall, in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at any other time, be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following
conditions:
a. When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a
hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction.
b. When approaching within one hundred feet (100') of or traversing any intersection or roadway grade crossing.
c. Where official signs are in place directing that traffic keep to the right, or a distinctive center line is marked, which distinctive center line also directs
traffic as declared in the sign manual adopted by the Department of Public Works and Buildings of the State.
d. The limitations in subsections C1 and C2 of this Section shall not apply upon a one-way roadway or upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement
of sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction, when such movement can be made with safety.
D. When Overtaking On The Right Is Permitted:
1. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making or about to make a left turn.
2. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and, allowing sufficient clearance, pass another vehicle preceding in the same direction either upon the left or
upon the right on a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width of four (4) or more lines of moving traffic when such movement can be
made in safety. No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the roadway in overtaking or passing on the right.
3. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving
vehicles. (Ord. 0-80-46, 10-6-1980)
10-7-3: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle in any direction other than that designated on any of the following streets:
COURT STREET: From a point fifteen feet (15') east of the east line of Elmhurst Road (approximately the westerly face of the exterior wall of the northern
portion of the existing commercial building) easterly to a point one hundred feet (100') east of the east line of Elmhurst Road (approximately the easterly
face of the exterior wall of said existing commercial building) is hereby declared an eastbound, one-way street.
MAPLE LANE: One-way northbound from the south edge of pavement of Marberry Drive to the north right of way of Marberry Drive.
MARBERRY DRIVE: One-way eastbound from the east curb line of Route 83/Elmhurst Road to the east curb line of Maple Lane.
ROBERT AVENUE: From a line ten feet (10') west of the City limits to the City limits (east 10 feet thereof), a one-way street for eastbound traffic;
or on any other street or alley designated by ordinance as a one-way street or alley. (Ord. 0-90-47, 9-11-1990; amd. Ord. 0-97-56, 9-15-1997, eff. 9-25-
1997)
10-7-4: DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 385/470
Whenever any roadway has been divided into three (3) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all others consistent,
herewith, shall apply:
A. A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical, entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained
that such movement can be made with safety.
B. Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another
vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where such
center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and a sign posted to give notice of such
allocation.
C. Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction.
Drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
D. Reversible lanes on streets and highways may be designated for all times or only during certain specified periods of time upon the erection of lane
control signals or official signs to effect the allocated lane usage. Drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign and signal. (Ord. 0-77-
17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-5: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY:
A. The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon the condition of the highway.
B. The driver of any motor vehicle of the second division, as defined in this Title, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle when traveling upon a roadway
in a caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so operated so as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or
combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter and occupy such space without danger. This provision shall not apply to funeral
processions. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-6: RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF CONTROLLED ACCESS ROADWAYS:
No person shall drive their vehicle onto or from any controlled access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
(Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-7: TURNING MOVEMENTS:
A. Required Position And Method Of Turning At Intersections: The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows:
1. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
2. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be
made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the
intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway
being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
3. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such
intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle
and entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered.
B. Turning On Curve Or Crest Of Grade: No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or
near the crest of the grade, where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction within five hundred
feet (500'). (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-8: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. (Ord. 0-77-17,
6-7-1977)
10-7-9: TRAFFIC MOVEMENTS; SIGNALS REQUIRED:
A. When Required:
1. No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a street or highway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety
and then only after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement or after giving
appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided in the event any other vehicle may be affected by such movement.
2. A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given during not less than the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by the vehicle before turning.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 386/470
3. No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal.
B. Signal By Hand And Arm Or Signal Device:
1. Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or lamps or mechanical signal
device, except as otherwise provided in the following subsection.
2. Any motor vehicle in use on the street or highway shall be equipped with, and required signal shall be given by, a signal lamp or lamps or
mechanical signal device when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such
motor vehicle exceeds twenty four inches (24") or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or
load thereof exceeds fourteen feet (14'). The latter measurement shall apply to any single vehicle, also to any combination of vehicles.
C. Method Of Giving Hand And Arm Signals: All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the
following manner and such signal indicates as follows:
Left turn Hand and arm extended horizontally
Right turn Hand and arm extended upward
Stop or decrease of speed Hand and arm extended downward
(Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-10: VEHICLES APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTIONS:
A. General:
1. The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right of way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different street
or highway.
2. When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left
shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right.
3. The right-of-way rules declared in subsections A1 and A2 of this Section are modified at through streets or highways and otherwise as stated in this
Title.
B. Vehicles Entering Yield Right-Of-Way Intersections:
1. The driver of a vehicle in obedience to a yield right-of-way sign shall reduce the speed of his vehicle to not more than twenty (20) miles per hour and
shall yield the right of way to other vehicles which have entered the intersecting street or highway either from the right or left or which are
approaching so closely on the intersecting highway as to constitute an immediate hazard; then said driver having so yielded may proceed at such
time as a safe interval occurs.
2. If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or interferes with the movement of other vehicles, after driving past the yield right-of-way sign,
such collision or interference shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right of way.
C. Vehicle Entering Street Or Highway From Private Road Or Driveway: The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a street or highway from a private
road or driveway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on said street or highway. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-11: VEHICLES TURNING LEFT:
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right of way to any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded, may proceed at such
time as a safe interval occurs. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-12: THROUGH STREETS:
The driver of a vehicle shall stop at the entrance to any street designated by ordinance as a through street and shall yield the right of way to other vehicles
which have entered the intersection or which are approaching so close on a through street as to constitute an immediate hazard unless directed otherwise
by a traffic officer or a traffic-control signal. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-13: OPERATION ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, when the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the driver of
every other vehicle shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to and as close as possible to the right-hand edge or curve
of the street or highway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except
when otherwise directed by a police officer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 387/470
This Section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the street or highway. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-14: TRAFFIC AT RAILROAD CROSSINGS:
A. Obedience To Signal Indicating Approach Of Train:
1. Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing and a clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning
of the immediate approach of a train, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty feet (50') but not less than ten feet (10') from the nearest track of
such railroad and shall not proceed until he can do so safely.
2. The driver of a vehicle shall stop and remain standing and not traverse such a grade crossing when a crossing gate is lowered or when a flagman
gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a train.
3. The driver of a vehicle shall stop within fifty feet (50') but not less than ten feet (10') from the nearest track when a train is approaching so closely
that an immediate hazard is created, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely.
B. Certain Vehicles Must Stop At All Railroad Grade Crossings:
1. The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire or of any school bus carrying any school child or any vehicle carrying liquid petroleum
and liquid petroleum products, explosives, flammable or oxidizing liquids and solids, flammable or poisonous compressed gases, volatile liquids and
solids which emit poisonous fumes, corrosive liquids and radioactive materials as a cargo or part of a cargo, before crossing at grade any track or
tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle within fifty feet (50') but not less than ten feet (10') from the nearest rail of such railroad and while so
stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, except as
hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely.
2. No stop need be made at any such crossing if a police officer or traffic control signal directs traffic to proceed. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-15: STOP INTERSECTIONS:
Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or in the event there is no
crosswalk shall stop at a clearly marked stop sign, but if none, then at a point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of the
approaching traffic on the intersecting street or highway before entering the intersection except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic
control signal.
The following entrances to intersections be and are hereby declared to be stop entrances and signs shall be posted accordingly:
A. Four-Way Stop Intersections:
Alderman Avenue and Mandel Lane
Burning Bush Lane and Piper Lane, eastbound, westbound, northbound and southbound
East Wildwood and Glenbrook Drive
Hillcrest and Owen, eastbound, westbound, northbound and southbound
Mandel Lane and Roberts School
Maple Lane and Hawthorne Place
Olive Street and Elm Street
Piper Lane and Pinecrest Drive
School Lane and Owen Place
Sherwood Drive and Glenbrook Drive
Sherwood Drive and South Wildwood Drive
Sherwood Drive and Wildwood N. Drive
B. Three-Way Stop Intersections:
Apple Drive and Burning Bush Lane, eastbound, westbound, and northbound
Brook Road, northwest bound, at Maple Lane
Burning Bush Lane and Piper Lane, westbound, eastbound and southbound
Claire and Brian Lane, eastbound, westbound and southbound entrances
Claire and Thierry Lane, eastbound, westbound and southbound entrances
Compton Lane, westbound, at Maple Lane
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 388/470
Drake Terrace and Oak, eastbound, westbound and northbound entrances
Elm Street and Olive Avenue, northbound, southbound and eastbound entrances
Hillcrest and Hill Court, northbound and southbound
Lancaster Avenue and Frankie Court, northbound, southbound and westbound
Mars Place, eastbound, at Maple Lane
Olive Street and Dale Street
Quaker Lane and Cove Drive
Robert Avenue and Maple Street, eastbound, westbound and northbound entrances
Robert Avenue and School Lane, eastbound, westbound and northbound entrances
Shawn and Brian Lane, eastbound, westbound and northbound entrances
Shawn and Thierry Lane, eastbound, westbound and northbound entrances
C. Two-Way Stop Intersections:
Lonsdale Avenue and Owen Place, eastbound and westbound entrances
West Kenilworth Avenue, eastbound and westbound at Elm Street
Wildwood Drive West, northbound and southbound
D. One-Way Stop Intersections:
Apple Drive and Piper Lane, southbound entrance (proposed renaming to Blossom Lane)
Clarendon Street and Dale Avenue, westbound entrance
Compton Lane, eastbound, at Marberry Drive
Cove Drive and Willow Road, southbound entrance
Dorsett Drive and Dale Avenue, westbound entrance
East Circle Avenue at Olive Avenue, southbound
Gail Court South and Olive Street, southbound entrance
Lancaster Avenue and Olive Avenue, southbound entrance
Mandel Lane and Willow Road, northbound entrance
Marion Street and Dale Avenue, westbound entrance
Milwaukee Avenue and Apple Drive, eastbound entrance
Oak Avenue and Drake Terrace, northbound entrance
Owen Place and Tully Drive, westbound entrance
Palwaukee Plaza Shopping Center and Apple Drive, southbound entrances of the two (2) southerly access drives
Pine Street and Olive Street, eastbound entrance
Robert Avenue, westbound at its intersection with the city limits
Royal Court and Olive Avenue, southbound entrance
Sherwood Drive and Wildwood S. Drive, southbound entrance
Waterman Avenue and Olive Street, westbound entrance
E. Other Stop Intersections:
Brook Road, Chester Lane and Hawthorne Place, all entrances
South School Lane, East School Lane and Marberry Drive, all three (3) entrances
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 389/470
F. Stop Intersection In Rob Roy Country Club Village Condominium Complex: The entrances on exhibit B entitled "Rob Roy Country Club Village Traffic
Regulations" on file at the city offices are hereby designated as stop entrances. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-78-09, 2-21-1978; Ord. 0-78-26,
7-3-1978; Ord. 0-80-44, 9-15-1980; Ord. 0-81-32, 11-2-1981; Ord. 0-82-29, 9-20-1982; Ord. 0-82-33, 12-20-1982; Ord. 0-83-25, 8-15-1983; Ord. 0-84-
28, 10-15-1984; Ord. 0-86-24, 8-18-1986; Ord. 0-86-33, 9-15-1986; Ord. 0-86-34, 9-15-1986; Ord. 0-87-43, 8-17-1987; Ord. 0-87-44, 8-17-1987; Ord.
0-87-52, 9-21-1987; Ord. 0-94-42, 9-19-1994; Ord. 0-95-31, 8-7-1995; Ord. 0-95-40, 10-16-1995; Ord. 0-95-41, 10-2-1995; Ord. 0-97-16, 4-7-1997, eff.
4-17-1997; Ord. 0-99-15, 6-21-1999, eff. 7-1-1999; Ord. 0-01-14, 6-4-2001, eff. 6-14-2001; Ord. 0-04-65, 12-20-2004, eff. 12-30-2004; Ord. 0-10-29, 9-
13-2010, eff. 9-24-2010; Ord. 0-10-34, 10-25-2010, eff. 11-5-2010)
10-7-16: STOP BEFORE EMERGING FROM ALLEY, PRIVATE DRIVE:
A. The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway and shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and
upon entering the roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
B. No driver shall drive any vehicle within any sidewalk area except at permanent or temporary driveways or alleys nor upon any portion of the roadway
marked as a safety zone. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-17: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING MOVEMENTS:
A. Upon any street or highway, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled
part of the street or highway when it is practical to stop, park or so leave such vehicle off such part of said street or highway, but in every event a clear
and unobstructed width of the street or highway opposite such standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a clear view of
such stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of two hundred feet (200') in each direction upon such street or highway.
B. This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or main traveled portion of a street or highway in such
manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-
1977)
C. At any time, it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stop, stand or park any vehicle in any of the following locations:
Prospect Court from Olive Street southerly to the end of the street. (Ord. 0-03-31, 8-18-2003, eff. 8-28-2003)
10-7-18: ILLEGALLY STOPPED VEHICLES; REMOVAL:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-7-19: ABANDONED VEHICLES:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-7-20: INOPERABLE VEHICLES:
It is hereby declared that all inoperable motor vehicles, whether on public or private property, are a public nuisance. Any person who shall fail to dispose of
any inoperable motor vehicle under his control, upon receipt of a notice from the city, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense.
However, nothing in this section shall apply to any motor vehicle that is kept within a building when not in use, to historical vehicles over twenty five (25)
years of age, or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
As used in this section, "inoperable motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least six (6) months, the engine, wheels or other
parts have been removed, or upon which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is
incapable of being driven under its own motor power. "Inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily
incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-21: LIMITATIONS ON BACKING, U-TURNS:
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. No
vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety without backing into traffic or
interfering with traffic. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn at places where posted signs indicate that such turns are
prohibited. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-22: MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC CONTROL:
A. The driver of any vehicle other than public safety vehicles shall not exit from Court Alley to southbound Elmhurst Road (Route 83).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 390/470
B. There shall be placed a "Local Traffic Only" sign on the east side of School Street immediately north of its intersection with Palatine Road. The sign
shall be placed in such exact location as to allow visibility for motorists driving north on School Street from Palatine Road in the determination of the
city engineer. (Ord. 0-08-21, 6-2-2008)
10-7-23: RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES AND BICYCLES:
A person operating a motorcycle or bicycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operators shall not carry any
other person nor shall any other person ride on a bicycle or motorcycle unless such bicycle or motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in
which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two (2) persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or
side of the operator. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-24: OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER'S VIEW OR OPERATION:
A. No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such number of persons, exceeding three (3), as to obstruct the
view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
B. No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with his control over the
driving mechanism of the vehicle. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-25: COASTING PROHIBITED:
A. The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a downgrade shall not coast with the gears of such vehicle in neutral.
B. The driver of a motor vehicle of the second division as defined in this title, when traveling upon a downgrade, shall not coast with the clutch disengaged.
(Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-26: FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS; CROSSING FIRE HOSE:
A. The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five
hundred feet (500') or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus is stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
B. No vehicle shall be driven over an unprotected hose of a Fire Department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official in command. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-27: DEPOSITS OF INJURIOUS MATERIALS:
No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or highway any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, or any other substance likely to injure any
person, animal or vehicle upon such street or highway.
Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any street or highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same or cause it to be removed.
Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street or highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street
or highway from such vehicle. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-28: APPROACHING, OVERTAKING AND PASSING SCHOOL BUS:
A. The driver of a vehicle upon any street or highway in this City upon meeting or overtaking from either direction, any school bus which has stopped on
the street or highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children, shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus, when
there is in operation on said school bus a visual signal as required by law, and said driver shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion or is
signaled by the school bus driver to proceed, or the visual signals are no longer actuated.
B. Every bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear upon the front and rear thereof plainly visible signs containing the words "school bus"
in letters not less than eight inches (8") in height, and in addition shall be equipped with visual signals which shall be actuated by the driver of said
school bus whenever the brakes are applied.
C. The driver of a vehicle upon a street or highway of which the roadways for traffic moving in opposite directions are separated by a strip of ground which
is not surfaced or suitable for vehicular traffic, need not stop his vehicle upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on the opposite roadway; and
need not stop his vehicle when driving upon a controlled access highway when a school bus is stopped in a loading zone adjacent to the surface or
improved part of a controlled access highway where pedestrians are not permitted to cross such controlled access highway. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-29: TRAVEL ON CERTAIN ROADS RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle, to travel or be upon that part of Robert Avenue from a line ten feet (10') west of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 391/470
City limits to the City limits (east 10 feet thereof) except during the hours of four o'clock (4:00) P.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on Monday through
Saturday. (Ord. 0-78-40, 10-16-1978)
It shall also be unlawful for any truck to travel eastbound on that portion of Old Willow Road extending from Wolf Road to Mandel Lane; provided, however,
that this prohibition shall not apply to delivery or emergency vehicles. (Ord. 0-93-66, 11-15-1993)
10-7-30: OBSTRUCTING PERSON ON STREETS OR HIGHWAYS:
Any person who shall wilfully and unnecessarily hinder, obstruct or delay, or who shall wilfully and unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder or obstruct any
other person in lawfully driving or traveling along or upon any street or highway or who shall offer for barter or sale merchandise on said street or highway
so as to interfere with the effective movement of traffic shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-31: FARM VEHICLES REGULATED:
No person shall operate a farm tractor on a street or highway unless such tractor is being used as an implement of husbandry in connection with farming
operations.
For the purpose of this Section, use of a farm tractor as an implement of husbandry in connection with farming operations shall be deemed to include use
of such tractor in connection with the transportation of agricultural products and of farm machinery, equipment and supplies as well as transportation of
such tractors in connection with the obtaining of repairs thereto. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-32: UNATTENDED ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to leave any horse or other draft animal unattended in any street or highway without having such animal securely fastened. (Ord. 0-77-
17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-33: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person on any street riding a bicycle, motorcycle or toy vehicle to cling to or to attach himself or his vehicle to any moving
vehicle, or any person operating a moving motor vehicle to permit any other person to make such attachment. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-34: TOY VEHICLES IN ROADWAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person upon ice or roller skates, coasters, sleds or other toy vehicles to go upon any roadway other than at a crosswalk. (Ord.
0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-35: RIDING ON RUNNING BOARDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, running boards or outside steps of any vehicle. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-36: PROCESSIONS; FUNERALS:
A. No person shall drive any vehicle between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such
vehicles are conspicuously designated, as required in this section. This provision shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles when responding to
emergency calls.
B. Each driver in a funeral or other authorized procession shall drive as near to the right edge of the roadway as is practical and shall follow the vehicle
ahead as close as is safe and practical.
C. Each vehicle comprising a funeral or other authorized procession shall be identified by the display of a pennant outside the vehicle or by a suitable
decalcomania sticker or card placed upon the right hand windshield in a prominent place, but not so as to obstruct the driver's view. The headlights of
each vehicle comprising a funeral or other authorized procession shall be lighted, in addition to the foregoing. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-37: QUIET ZONES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sound a horn or warning device of any vehicle, except in case of emergency or to race a motor or to make any
unnecessary noise in areas designated as quiet zones. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-7-38: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY INTERSECTIONS:
The driver of a vehicle in obedience to a yield right of way sign shall reduce the speed of his vehicle to not more than twenty (20) miles per hour and shall
yield the right of way to other vehicles which have entered the intersecting street, either from the right or left, or which are approaching so closely to such
intersection as to constitute a hazard; but said driver having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 392/470
If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield right of way sign, such
collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield right of way.
The following entrances to intersections are hereby designated as yield right of way entrances:
Brook Road, southeast entrance at the intersection of Compton Lane, Maple Lane, and Brook Road.
Clarendon Street, eastbound and westbound at Maple Street.
Clarendon Street, eastbound and westbound at Owen Street.
Clarendon Street, eastbound and westbound at School Street.
Kenilworth Avenue, eastbound and westbound at the intersection of Elm Street.
North Parkway, eastbound and westbound at Elm Street.
Ridge Avenue, eastbound and westbound at the intersection of Elm Street.
Rob Roy Country Club Village Condominium Complex: The entrances to intersections depicted as yield entrances on exhibit B entitled "Rob Roy Country
Club Village Traffic Regulations" on file at the city offices.
South Parkway, eastbound and westbound at Elm Street. (Ord. 0-12-41, 11-13-2012)
10-7-39: NO RIGHT TURN INTERSECTIONS:
A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop sign, but
if there is no such stop sign, before entering the crosswalk on the nearest side of the intersection, or if there is no such crosswalk, then before entering
the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown.
B. Except where a sign is in place prohibiting a turn and the city council by ordinance or the state by rule or regulation prohibits any such turn, vehicular
traffic facing any steady red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street, after
stopping as required in subsection A of this section. After stopping, the driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicle in the intersection or
approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection
or junction or roadways. Such driver shall yield the right of way to pedestrians within the intersection or an adjacent sidewalk.
C. The following entrances to intersections be and are hereby declared to be no right turn entrances and signs shall be posted accordingly; provided,
however, that this provision shall apply only during the hours of three o'clock (3:00) P.M. through seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. as stipulated on the posted
signs:
Euclid Avenue, westbound entrance to northbound Chester Lane
Euclid Avenue, westbound entrance to northbound Maple Lane
Euclid Avenue, westbound entrance to northbound School Lane
D. Prohibit right turn off of Burning Bush Lane onto Piper Lane except for emergency vehicle use only.
E. No right turn from southbound Wheeling Road to westbound Clarendon Street from the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
and from three o'clock (3:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. (Ord. 0-13-21, 10-28-2013)
10-7-40: NO LEFT TURN INTERSECTIONS:
Prohibit left turns from the following:
Burning Bush Lane onto eastbound Piper Lane except for emergency vehicle use only.
Elmhurst Road (Route 83) southbound to eastbound Court Street.
Euclid eastbound to northbound Chester.
Marberry Lane westbound to southbound Elmhurst Road (Route 83).
Oak Avenue onto Drake Terrace, causing all vehicles exiting Oak Avenue to turn right on Drake Terrace. (Ord. 0-96-21, 5-20-1996, eff. 5-30-1996; amd.
Ord. 0-96-51, 7-15-1996, eff. 7-25-1996; Ord. 0-97-26, 5-19-1997, eff. 5-29-1997; Ord. 0-99-01, 2-1-1999, eff. 2-11-1999; Ord. 0-99-02, 2-1-1999, eff. 2-11-
1999)
10-7-41: RESTRICTED ENTRANCES TO INTERSECTIONS:
Right turn only from southbound Chester Lane to westbound Euclid Avenue. (Ord. 0-97-27, 5-19-1997, eff. 5-29-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 393/470
10-7-42: SKATEBOARDS PROHIBITED:
A. Definition: For the purpose of this section a "skateboard" is defined as a board or other horizontal surface having attached thereto wheels and which is
operated or steered by the use of an individual's limbs.
B. Prohibited: No person shall operate a skateboard upon any private street, parking lot or other area open to the public within any area zoned as a
business district under the zoning ordinance of the city or upon any street, sidewalk or other open space within any area owned by the city and
designated as a "no skateboard area". (Ord. 0-98-01, 1-20-1998, eff. 1-30-1998)
C. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined no less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Any
person cited under the provisions of this section not paying the fine within ten (10) days shall face an additional penalty of not less than seventy five
dollars ($75.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 0-16-19, 6-13-2016)
10-7-43: LOITERING:
A. Streets, Public Areas: It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or encumber any street corner or other public place in the city by lounging in or
about the same, after being directed to move on by any police officer and/or community service officer.
B. Commuter Stations, Parking Lots: It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or lounge about at any time at the commuter station located at 55 South
Wolf Road or to loiter at any time in the commuter parking lot located adjacent to 55 South Wolf Road. (Ord. 0-98-02, 1-20-1998, eff. 1-30-1998)
C. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Any
person cited under the provisions of this section not paying the fine within ten (10) days shall face an additional penalty of not less than seventy five
dollars ($75.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 0-16-19, 6-13-2016)
10-7-44: STREETS DESIGNATED AS "NO THROUGH TRAFFIC" OR LOCAL TRAFFIC ONLY:
The following streets shall be designated as "no through traffic" and signs shall be posted accordingly:
Dale Avenue.
Lancaster Avenue.
The entrance to the intersection of Piper Lane and Burning Bush Lane eastbound into the County Pines Apartment Complex.
The following entrance to the intersection of Chester and Euclid. (Ord. 0-13-21, 10-28-2013)
Chapter 8
PARKING REGULATIONS
10-8-1: NO PARKING PLACES:
At any time, it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device: (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
A. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to stand in an intersection, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or traffic control device. Any person violating the provision of this subsection shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars
($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Failure to pay this fine within ten (10) days shall result in an additional penalty
of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
B. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to stand in a crosswalk, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions
of a police officer or traffic control device. Any person violating the provision of this subsection shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Failure to pay this fine within ten (10) days shall result in an additional penalty of not
less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 0-16-19, 6-13-2016)
C. Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or tunnel or the approach thereto.
D. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or edge of street immediately opposite the end of a safety zone. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
E. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to stand within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal on the approaching side, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device. Any person violating the provision of this subsection shall be
fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Failure to pay this fine within ten (10)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 394/470
days shall result in an additional penalty of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 0-16-19,
6-13-2016)
F. Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection or crosswalk.
G. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
H. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing.
I. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy five
feet (75') of said entrance when properly signed posted. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
J. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to stand either alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such parking would obstruct traffic,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device. Any person
violating the provision of this subsection shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. Failure to pay this fine within ten (10) days shall result in an additional penalty of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) and not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 0-16-19, 6-13-2016)
K. On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a street.
L. At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
M. At any place where official signs prohibit parking. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
N. In any of the following places:
Apple Drive, from Milwaukee Avenue westerly to Burning Bush Drive at any time except on the south side between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. on Saturdays and Sundays during the months of April through October.
Country Club Drive, east side of street from Euclid Avenue to Greenbridge Lane including east side of center island.
Country Club Drive, west side, between Thistle Lane and Rob Roy Drive.
Country Club Drive, west side of street from Greenbridge Lane to Euclid Avenue including west side of center island.
Cove Drive between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on Thursdays.
Elm Street, both sides, from Olive Avenue north to end north of Viola Lane.
Elm Street, east side, northerly two hundred feet (200') and southerly seventy feet (70') from the northern service drive of the Gary Morava Recreation
Center.
Elmhurst Road, both sides, from Euclid Road to Hintz Road.
Gail Court North, no parking on school days between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
Highland Drive, no parking on school days between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
Hill Court, east and west side from Hillcrest Drive to cul-de-sac (Hillcrest Lake).
Hillcrest Drive, east side (lake side) from Willow Road to Owen Court.
Hillcrest Drive, north and south side from Willow Road to Owen Street (Hillcrest Lake).
Hillside Avenue, east and west side from Willow Road to Marion Avenue (Hillside Slough).
Lancaster Drive, both sides, south of Willow Road to the dead end as no parking on school days between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and four o'clock
(4:00) P.M.
Linden Road North, no parking on school days between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
Maple Avenue, east side, south of Camp McDonald Road, no parking from here to corner.
Milwaukee Avenue, from Palatine Road to Winkelman Road.
Oak Avenue, east and west side, from Drake Terrace to a point one hundred eighty two feet (182') south of the intersection of Drake Terrace and Oak
Avenue.
Old Willow Road between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
Olive Street, north side, between Dale Avenue and Waterman Avenue.
Owen Court, north and south side from Owen Street to cul-de-sac (Hillcrest Lake).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 395/470
Owen Street, west and east side from Hillcrest Drive to Owen Court (Hillcrest Lake).
Palatine Road, including the express and local (a.k.a. frontage) lanes, from Sanders Road to Schoenbeck Road.
Pinecrest Drive, east side, from Piper Lane to Palatine Frontage Road except between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
Piper Lane, both sides, and Pinecrest Drive, west side, from Piper Lane to Palatine Frontage Road.
Prospect Court from Olive Street southerly to end of street.
Quaker Lane between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on Thursdays.
Quaker Lane, outside of curve, from Cove Drive to Willow Road.
Riley Avenue, both sides, from Grego to the end of the street.
Sherwood Drive, no parking on school days between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
Tomah Avenue cul-de-sac from the intersection of Minnaqua Drive and Tomah Avenue north to the city limits.
U.S. 45 within the city.
Waterman Avenue, no parking on school days between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
Willow Road, both sides, from one hundred feet (100') west of its intersection with Elmhurst Road to one hundred feet (100') east of its intersection with
Elmhurst Road.
Willow Road, both sides, from Wolf Road east to city limits.
Willow Road, north and south side from Maple Street to Owen Street between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 0-
05-04, 3-21-2005, eff. 4-22-2005; amd. Ord. 0-05-28, 7-18-2005, eff. 7-31-2005; Ord. 0-06-26, 7-10-2006; Ord. 0-06-42, 10-30-2006; Ord. 0-08-30, 7-
21-2008; Ord. 0-08-46, 12-15-2008, eff. 12-26-2008; Ord. 0-10-35, 10-25-2010, eff. 11-5-2010)
10-8-1-1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-15-06, 2-9-2015)
10-8-2: PARKING AT CURB OR EDGE OF ROAD:
No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb edge of pavement, except on one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to stand
or park any vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb or edge of pavement and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches
(12") of the regularly established curb line or edge of pavement, except that upon those streets that have been marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be
parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-8-3: PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any business street from which
vehicle merchandise is peddled. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-8-4: LOADING ZONES; CAB AND BUS STANDS:
A. Loading Zones: During the time specified herein, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer
than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers, not to exceed three (3) minutes, and for the driver to stand any freight carrying vehicle for
a period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, in any of the following places:
1. In any public alley, during any hour of the day or night.
2. At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb or edge of pavement before the entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time.
3. At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb or edge of roadway before the entrance to a public building between eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. except on Sunday.
B. Cab Stands, Bus Stands: No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as taxicab stands; and no
vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place designated as a bus loading zone. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-8-5: ALL NIGHT PARKING:
In the single-family residential districts, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. of any day on any street, except for emergency purposes. In all of the districts, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle weighing in
excess of eight thousand (8,000) pounds on any street for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day, except for emergency purposes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 396/470
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Any person cited under the provisions of this section not paying the fine within ten (10) days shall face an additional penalty of not less than seventy five
dollars ($75.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 0-16-19, 6-13-2016)
10-8-6: PARKING IN ALLEYS:
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-8-7: ABANDONED, LOST, STOLEN, HAZARDOUS UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
10-8-7-1: STORING, PARKING OR LEAVING ABANDONED, DISMANTLED OR OTHER SUCH MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED;
DECLARED NUISANCE; EXCEPTIONS:
No person shall park, store, leave, or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any motor vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled, inoperative, junked, or partially dismantled condition whether attended or not, upon any public or private property within the City for a period of
time in excess of twenty four (24) hours. The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or parts
thereof, on private or public property is declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. This
Section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise, lawfully
licensed by the City and properly operated in the appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of the City. (Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-8-7-2: NOTICE TO REMOVE:
A. Whenever it comes to the attention of the City that any nuisance as defined in Section 10-8-7-1 of this Chapter exists with in the City, a notice in writing
shall be served upon the owner of the vehicle, notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal in the time specified in this
Chapter. (Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
B. Written notice required under this Section shall be given at least seven (7) days prior to the time of compliance. It shall constitute sufficient notice, when
a copy of same is posted in a conspicuous place upon the vehicle and a copy is sent by registered mail to the registered owner of the vehicle. (Ord. 0-
85-05, 3-4-1985)
C. The notice shall contain the request for removal within the time specified in this Section, and the notice shall advise that upon failure to comply with the
notice to remove, the City or its designee shall undertake such removal with the cost of removal to be levied against the owner of the vehicle. The
notice shall also advise that the recipient has a right to a hearing and it shall advise the recipient of the manner and of the requirements to be met for
securing a hearing. (Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-8-7-3: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL:
Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperable vehicle shall be responsible for its
removal within seven (7) days of posting the notice on the vehicle or the date of mailing a copy of such notice, whichever is later. In the event of removal
and disposition by the City, the owner of said vehicle shall be liable for the expenses incurred. (Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-8-7-4: REQUEST FOR HEARING:
The persons to whom the notices are directed, or their duly authorized agents may file a written request for hearing before the person in charge of the
Police Department serving the City within the seven (7) day period of compliance prescribed in Section 10-8-7-3 of this Chapter, for the purpose of
defending the charges by the City. Failure to file a request within the specified time shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. A timely request for
a hearing shall cause the removal of the subject vehicle to be delayed pending the decision of the hearing official. (Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-8-7-5: PROCEDURE FOR HEARING:
The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of the request and the persons to whom the notices are directed shall be advised of the
time and place of said hearing at least two (2) days in advance thereof. At any such hearing, the persons to whom the notices have been directed may
introduce witnesses and evidence. The City Administrator shall appoint a representative of the City to serve as hearing official. In no case shall the hearing
official be an individual who was involved in the initial decision to tow the vehicle. The duties and responsibilities of the hearing official shall be set by
resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-8-7-6: REMOVAL OF MOTOR VEHICLE FROM PROPERTY:
If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within the seven (7) day period of compliance, or in the event that after a hearing is duly
held, the violation is affirmed, the Police Department shall have the right to remove the vehicle from the premises. It is unlawful for any person to interfere
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 397/470
with, hinder, or refuse to allow such person or persons to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this
Chapter. (Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-8-7-7: TOWING HAZARDOUS OR UNLAWFUL VEHICLES; OTHER EMERGENCIES:
The Police Department is authorized to immediately remove and tow away or have removed and towed away by commercial towing service, any
hazardous or unlawful vehicle illegally parked in any place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire
hydrant, is determined by the Police Department to be a stolen vehicle, or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle, or show
removal equipment or other equipment performing emergency service. Vehicles so towed away shall be stored on any City property or in a public garage
or parking lot and shall be returned to the owner or operator thereof after payment for applicable expenses incurred by the City in removing and storing
such vehicles. (Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-8-7-8: NOTICE OF REMOVAL:
Within forty eight (48) hours of the removal of a hazardous vehicle, under the provisions of this Chapter, the City shall give notice to the registered owner
of the vehicle, if known, and if the vehicle was removed from private property, also to the current or last known registered owner of the said private
property. The notice shall give the location of where the vehicle or vehicles are stored and the costs incurred by the City for removal. (Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-
1984)
10-8-7-9: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
A. When an abandoned, hazardous, lost, stolen, unlawful or unclaimed vehicle seven (7) years of age or newer remains unclaimed by the registered
owner, lien holder, or the person legally entitled to its possession for a period of thirty (30) days after removal has been effected as provided in Section
10-8-7-8 of this Chapter, the City shall cause it to be sold at public sale to the highest bidder. Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in
a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At least ten (10) days prior to
the sale, the Police Department, where the vehicle is impounded, shall cause a notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by certified mail to
the registered owner, lien holder and other persons known by the Police Department or towing service to be legally entitled to the possession of the
vehicle. Such notice shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled person to
reclaim the vehicle.
B. In those instances where the certified notification specified in Section 10-8-7-8 of this Chapter has been returned by the postal authorities to the law
enforcement agency due to the addressee having moved, or being unknown at the address obtained from the appropriate state vehicle registration
records, the sending of a second certificate notice will not be required. (Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-8-7-10: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES WITHOUT NOTICE:
A. When the identity of the registered owner, lien holder and other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, hazardous, lost or unclaimed
vehicle of seven (7) years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for in this Chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided in
Section 10-8-7-9 of this Chapter without notice when the owner identity cannot be determined.
B. When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age is impounded as specified by this Chapter, it will be kept in custody a minimum of ten
(10) days for the purpose of determining the identity of the registered owner, title holder or lien holder by the U.S. mail, public service or in person for a
determination of disposition; and an examination of the State Police stolen vehicle files for theft and wanted information. At the expiration of the ten (10)
day period, without the benefit of disposition information being received from the registered owner, title holder or the lien holder, the Police Department
may authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk. An exception to the above is provided for, if in the opinion of the police officer processing the vehicle,
it has value of two hundred dollars ($200.00) or more and can be restored to safe operating condition. In this event, the Police Department may
authorize its purchase as salvage and the Secretary of State may issue a salvage certificate if the vehicle is bonded in the manner as provided for
certificates or title, under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-100.
C. A vehicle classified as an antique vehicle may however be sold to a person desiring to restore it. (Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-8-7-11: POLICE REPORTS AFTER VEHICLE IS RECLAIMED OR DISPOSED OF:
When a vehicle in the custody of the Police Department is reclaimed by the registered owner, lien holder or other legally entitled person, or when the
vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this Chapter, a report of the transaction will be maintained by the Police Department
for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal. (Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-8-7-12: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the City is authorized to be towed and disposed of as set forth in this Chapter, the proceeds of the
public sale or disposition after deduction of towing, storage and processing charges, shall be deposited in the Treasury. (Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-8-7-13: TITLING VEHICLES AFTER PUBLIC SALE; REMOVAL OF LIENS:
When an applicant for a certificate of title under this Chapter presents to the Secretary of State proof that he has purchased or acquired a vehicle at a
public sale as authorized by this Chapter and such fact is certified to by the Police Department, the Secretary of State shall issue a certificate of title for the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 398/470
vehicle upon receipt of the statutory fee and a properly executed application for a certificate of title. The title issued by the Secretary of State under 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-212, shall be free of any lien that existed against the vehicle prior to the time the vehicle was acquired by the applicant under
this Chapter. (Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-8-7-14: RECLAIMING TOWED VEHICLES:
Any time before a vehicle at public sale is disposed of as provided for in this Chapter, the owner, lien holder, or other person legally entitled to its
possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the City proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the vehicle. No vehicle shall be
released under this Section until all towing, storage and administrative charges have been paid. (Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-8-7-15: HAZARDOUS AND UNLAWFUL TOW HEARING:
A. Any person whose vehicle has been towed pursuant to Section 10-8-7-7 of this Chapter shall have the right to request a hearing to contest disposition
of the vehicle or any towing charges or fees incurred.
B. Request for a hearing under this Section shall be made in writing to the City within seven (7) days after receipt of a notice of towing. Failure to file a
request within the time specified shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing.
C. All hearings held pursuant to this Section shall be held on a date convenient to both parties but in no event shall any hearing be scheduled later than
thirty (30) days after the date the request for hearing was filed. No action regarding the disposition of any vehicle or vehicles shall be taken pending the
decision reached in the hearing.
D. All notices sent pursuant to Section 10-8-7-8 of this Chapter, to owners of vehicles towed pursuant to Section 10-8-7-7 of this Chapter, shall advise of
the availability of the hearing process. (Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-8-7-16: FEES FOR TOWING AND STORAGE:
Fees for towing and storage of vehicles covered by this Chapter shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-8-7-17: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day a violation of
any at the provisions of this Title exists shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 0-84-27, 11-5-1984)
10-8-8: WILLOW WOODS CONDOMINIUM COMPLEX PARKING REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or park on that part of the condominium complex parking area depicted on Exhibit B, on file in the City
offices and hereby designated as a fire lane. As used in this Section, the term "fire lane" shall mean a travel lane for firefighting equipment. There shall be
no standing or parking of any motor vehicle at any time upon the fire lane so that firefighting equipment can move freely thereon. Any person violating any
provision of this section shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. The vehicles of violators may be towed by or at the
direction of the city. (Ord. 0-91-06, 4-20-1981)
10-8-9: WILLOW HEIGHTS CONDOMINIUM COMPLEX PARKING REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or park on that part at the condominium complex parking area depicted on exhibit B, on file in the city
offices and hereby designated as a fire lane. As used in this section, the term "fire lane" shall mean a travel lane for firefighting equipment. There shall be
no standing or parking of any motor vehicle at any time upon the fire lane so that firefighting equipment can move freely thereon. Any person violating any
provision of this section shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues The vehicles of violators may be towed by or at the
direction of the city. (Ord. 0-81-37, 11-16-1981)
10-8-10: ROB ROY COUNTRY CLUB VILLAGE CONDOMINIUM COMPLEX PARKING REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or park on that part of the condominium complex parking areas depicted on exhibit B entitled "Rob Roy
Country Club Village Traffic Regulations" on file in the city offices and hereby designated as a fire lane. As used in this section, the term "fire lane" shall
mean a travel lane for firefighting equipment. There shall be no standing or parking of any motor vehicle at any time upon the fire lane so that firefighting
equipment can move freely thereon. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00), nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. The vehicles of violators may be towed by or at the direction of the city. (Ord. 0-86-33, 9-15-1986)
10-8-11: WIMBLEDON LAKE ESTATES RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PARKING REGULATIONS:
A. The city council hereby finds that the facts and statements contained in the preamble to ordinance 0-90-221 are true and correct.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 399/470
B. The city council hereby agrees to enter into an agreement with the Wimbledon Lakes Estates Homeowners' Association for enforcing the city codes and
ordinances on the complex, a copy of said agreement being attached to ordinance 0-90-222 as exhibit B.
C. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-90-22, 5-21-1990)
10-8-12: METRA COMMUTER STATION REGULATIONS:
A. Fees For Daily Parking:
1. Daily parking zones have a parking time of twelve (12) hours, the fee for each twelve (12) hour period, or part thereof, shall be one dollar seventy
five cents ($1.75). (Ord. 0-10-15, 6-28-2010)
2. No parking will be allowed between twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M., except for overnight permits as described in
subsection F of this section.
3. The city administrator shall cause to be erected parking fee collection equipment or coin boxes for deposit of the fee for parking in such zone.
B. Deposit Of Slugs Or Foreign Coins: It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any slug or substitute for United States coins or cent pieces in parking
meters or coin boxes.
C. Tampering: It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, tamper with, open, wilfully break or destroy any parking fee collection equipment, coin box,
regulatory sign or to damage the post to which it is attached.
D. Responsibility Of Registered Owner:
1. The registration of a motor vehicle with the secretary of state in the name of the alleged violator, or the issuance of a vehicle sticker by a municipality
to the alleged violator, shall constitute prima facie proof that the alleged violator was in control of, or was the operator of, the motor vehicle at the time
of such alleged violation.
2. Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered pursuant to law and who leases such vehicles to others, after receiving written notice of a
violation of this section involving such vehicles, shall provide the police with a written statement of the name and address of the lessee at the time of
such offense and the identifying number on the registration plates of the vehicle. (Ord. 0-96-62, 8-19-1996, eff. 8-19-1996)
E. Fines And Penalties: It shall be the duty of police officers of this city to report to the police department:
1. The state license number of any vehicle that has been parked in violation to the contrary of any of the provisions of this section;
2. The time such vehicle parked in violation of any of the provisions of this section;
3. Such other information as may be necessary for a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation; and
4. Penalty for failures to pay required fee will be seventy five dollars ($75.00) if paid within ten (10) days from the date of violation, and one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) if more than ten (10) days from the date of the violation. (Ord. 0-16-19, 6-13-2016)
F. Permits For Parking In City Parking Facilities:
1. The city administrator shall cause suitable permit stickers to be prepared and made available for issuance and sale to persons desiring to park in
those portions of the city parking facilities in which parking is restricted to holders of such permits. The number of permits issued shall not exceed the
number of parking spaces actually available for parking, unless the city administrator determines, on the basis of surveys of parking space vacancy
rates and other relevant criteria, that the sale of an additional number of permits is justified, in which event, an additional number of permits may be
sold at the direction of the city administrator. Permit stickers shall designate the city parking facility for which issued, and shall be issued and sold for
monthly periods.
2. Under the direction of the city administrator, permit stickers shall be sold during regular business hours at the city offices, and shall be sold in
accordance with chronological priority of application for such permits, except that the city administrator may establish a schedule for sale only to
persons residing within the corporate limits of the city or persons who own or are employed by businesses within the corporate limits of the city, prior
to any offer of such permits for sale to the general public. (Ord. 0-96-62, 8-19-1996, eff. 8-19-1996)
3. The fee for a monthly "daily" permit purchased from the city shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) for a permit that allows parking every business day for a
designated month. A one dollar fifty cent ($1.50) fee applies for each business day period. (Ord. 0-97-10, 2-18-1997, eff. 2-28-1997)
4. The fee for a daily "overnight" permit purchased from the city shall be three dollars fifty cents ($3.50) for a permit that allows twenty four (24) hour
parking. A three dollar fifty cent ($3.50) fee applies for each twenty four (24) hour period. (Ord. 0-10-15, 6-28-2010)
Chapter 9
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT, SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD
10-9-1: LIGHTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 400/470
A. It shall be unlawful to operate or park on any street any vehicle not equipped with adequate lights conforming to the requirements of State law1,
provided that vehicles may be parked at nighttime without lights on any street or portion thereof where parking is permitted.
B. Use Of Headlamps: On approaching another vehicle proceeding in the opposite direction or on overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction and, in either case, when a vehicle is within three hundred fifty feet (350') or less of same, any person in charge of a motorcycle or motor
vehicle equipped with electric headlight or headlights shall dim or drop such headlight or headlights. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-9-2: SIGNAL LAMPS AND DEVICES:
A. Every motor vehicle and trailer shall be equipped with a signal lamp or signal device which is so constructed and located on the vehicle as to give a
signal of intention to stop which shall be red in color and signals of intention to turn to the right or left, all of which signals shall be plainly visible and
understandable in normal sunlight and at night from a distance of one hundred feet (100') to the front and rear, but shall not project a glaring or dazzling
light; except that a stop signal need be visible only from the rear. Any trailer, having a gross weight of three thousand (3,000) pounds or less including
the weight of the trailer and maximum load, need not be equipped with such turn signal device unless the distance from the center of the steering
wheel of the towing vehicle to the left hand outside limits of such trailer body exceeds twenty four inches (24")2.
B. All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminated when in actual use. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-9-3: BRAKES:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle upon a street or highway in the City unless such vehicle is equipped with good and sufficient brakes in good
working condition, as required by the State Traffic Law3 or to operate any vehicle which is so loaded that the operator does not have ready access to the
mechanics operating the brakes of such vehicle. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-9-4: HORNS AND WARNING DEVICES:
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a good and sufficient audible signaling device in efficient working condition. Such signaling device shall be
sounded when necessary to give timely warning of the approach of a vehicle, but such horn or other signaling device shall not be sounded for any purpose
than as a warning of impending danger.
No motor vehicle other than an emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a siren or gong signaling device4. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-9-5: MUFFLERS; PREVENTION OF NOISE, GAS AND SMOKE:
A. Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise
and annoying smoke, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a street or highway.
B. It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits such an amount of smoke or fumes as to be dangerous to the health of any person5. (Ord. 0-77-
17, 6-7-1977)
10-9-6: MIRRORS:
Motor vehicles of either division which are so constructed or loaded as to obstruct the driver's view to the rear thereof from the driver's position, shall be
equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the street or highway for a distance of at least two hundred feet (200') to the rear of
such vehicle6. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-9-7: WINDSHIELD REQUIREMENTS; WIPERS7:
A. No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield, side wings, side or rear
windows of such vehicle which obstructs the driver's clear view of the street or highway.
B. No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any objects placed or suspended between the driver and the front windshield or between the driver and the
rear window which obstructs the driver's clear view of the street or highway.
C. The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield, which device shall
be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the vehicle. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-9-8: TIRE EQUIPMENT8:
A. Improved Roads:
1. No metal-tired vehicle including tractors, motor vehicles of the second division, traction engines and other similar vehicles, shall be operated over
any improved street or highway of the City if such vehicle has on the periphery of any of the road wheels any blocks, stud, flange, cleat, ridge, lug or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 401/470
any projection of metal or wood which projects radially between the tread or traffic surface of the tire; except that this prohibition shall not apply to
track type motor vehicles when that part of the vehicle coming on contact with the road surface does not contain any projections of any kind likely to
injure the surface of the road; provided however, that tractors, traction engines and similar vehicles may be operated which have upon their road
wheels V-shaped diagonal or other cleats arranged in such a manner as to be continuously in contact with the road surface provided that the gross
weight upon such wheels per inch of width of such cleats in contact with the road surface, when measured in the direction of the axle of the vehicle,
does not exceed eight hundred (800) pounds.
2. No motor vehicle shall be operated upon the improved streets or highways of the City which shall be equipped with any anti-skid or nonslick device
so constructed that any rigid or nonflexible portion of same comes in contact with the pavement; provided, that this subsection shall not apply to
agricultural tractors or traction engines or similar metal tired vehicles which have anti-skid devices upon the road wheels and which are otherwise
permitted to be used under the provisions of this Title.
3. All motor vehicles and all trailers or other vehicles in tow thereof, or thereunto attached, operating upon any roadway, shall have tires of rubber or
some material of equal resiliency; provided that solid tires shall be considered defective and shall not be permitted to be used if the rubber or other
material has been worn or otherwise reduced to a thickness of less than three-fourths inch (3/4") or if such tires have been so worn or otherwise
damaged as to cause undue vibration when the vehicle is in motion or to cause undue concentration of the wheel load on the surface of the road;
and provided further, that the requirements of this Section shall not apply to agricultural tractors or traction engines or to agricultural machinery,
including wagons being used for agricultural purposes in tow thereof, or to road rollers or road building machinery. All motor vehicles of the second
division, as defined herein, which are designed and used for the carrying of more than seven (7) persons operating upon any roadway shall have
pneumatic tires, and all other motor vehicles of the second division operating upon any roadway at a speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour shall
be equipped with pneumatic tires.
B. Oil Treated Roads: No tractor, traction engine, motor truck or other similar vehicle shall be operated across, over or along any street or highway of the
City which has been oil treated, if any such vehicle has on the periphery of any of the road wheels any block, stud, flange, cleat, ridge, lug or any
projection of metal or wood which projects radially beyond the tread or traffic surface of the tire; except that this prohibition shall not apply to tractors or
traction engines equipped with what is known as crawler type tractors when the same does not contain any projections of any kind likely to injure the
surface of the road, nor to tractors, traction engines and similar vehicles which have upon their road wheels V-shaped, diagonal or other cleats
arranged in such a manner as to be continuously in contact with the road surface. In no event shall the oil mat surface of any oil treated public road be
used as an area or space for turning any tractor or other farm machinery and carrying on or performing any farming operations upon the adjacent land.
Provided, that nothing in this Section contained shall prohibit the operation of tractors, traction engines or motor trucks across any oil treated road in
order to reach adjacent lands, or the operation of any such vehicles upon the treated portion thereof over which they may be operated or the operation
of any such vehicle on oil treated roads if in passing along said road they travel over the portion of said road which does not constitute the oil mat
surface created by said oil treatment. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-9-9: SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD9:
A. Weight: It shall be unlawful to drive on any street or highway in the City any motor vehicle with a weight, including load, in excess of that permitted by
the State Traffic Law for driving on improved highways, or with weight distributed in a manner not conforming to such law.
B. Height, Width And Length Of Vehicles: It shall be unlawful to drive on any street or highway in the City any motor vehicle with a height, width or length in
excess of that permitted by the State Traffic Law for driving on improved highways.
C. Spilling Loads On Streets Or Highways Prohibited:
1. No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street or highway unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction or water or other
substance may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining such roadway.
2. No person shall operate on any street or highway any vehicle with any load unless said load or any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to
prevent said covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the street or highway.
3. Drivers or operators of vehicles depositing mud or other debris on Municipal streets shall be responsible for immediate removal of the mud or debris.
D. Liability If Street, Highway Or Structure Is Damaged:
1. Any person driving any vehicle, object or contrivance upon any street or highway or highway structure is liable for all damage which the street or
highway or highway structure may sustain as a result of any illegal operation, driving or moving of such vehicle, object or contrivance, or as a result
of operating, driving or moving any vehicle, object or contrivance, weighing in excess of the maximum weight specified in the State statutes, but
authorized by a special State permit issued as provided by the State statutes. The measure of liability is the cost of repairing a facility partially
damaged or the depreciated replacement costs of a facility damaged beyond repair, together with all other expenses incurred in providing a
temporary detour, including a temporary structure, to serve the needs of traffic during the period of repair or replacement of the damaged street,
highway or highway structure.
2. Whenever such driver is not the owner of such vehicle, object or contrivance, but is so operating, driving or moving the same with the express or
implied permission of said owner, then the owner and driver are jointly and severally liable to the extent provided in subsection D1 of this Section.
3. Recovery may be sought in a civil action by the City.
E. Projecting Loads; Width, Length And Height: The maximum width, length and height of any vehicle and its load shall not exceed the limits expressed in
the State Traffic Law. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-9-10: LIMITED LOAD STREETS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 402/470
Whenever the weight of vehicles permitted on a street is limited by ordinance and signs indicating such limitations are posted, it shall be unlawful to
operate a vehicle in excess of such weight on such street, except for the purpose of making delivery or picking up a load, in which case such vehicle may
be driven on such street for not more than the minimum distance necessary for the purpose.
The following streets are hereby declared to be limited load streets, and vehicles of a weight in excess of five thousand (5,000) pounds are hereby
prohibited from using such streets except as provided in this Section:
Clarendon Street from Elmhurst Road to Wheeling Road.
Edward Drive from Alton Avenue to Wolf Road.
Glenbrook Drive from Schoenbeck Road to Elmhurst Road.
Glendale Drive from Palatine Road to end of Glendale Drive.
Highland Avenue, all.
Hillside Avenue from Elmhurst Road to Willow Road.
Mandel Lane from Camp McDonald Road to Willow Road.
Maple Avenue from Palatine Road to Willow Road.
Marion Avenue from Elmhurst Road to Maple Street.
Owen Drive from Camp McDonald Road to Kennilworth Avenue.
Pine Street from Willow Road to Clarendon Street.
Prospect Drive from Elmhurst Road to Drake Terrace.
School Lane from Euclid Avenue to Wheeling Road.
Sherwood Drive from Wildwood Drive to Hintz Road.
Stonegate West Drive, all.
Viola Lane from Schoenbeck Road to Elm Street.
(Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
Chapter 10
BICYCLES
10-10-1: BICYCLE EQUIPMENT:
A. Headlamp: Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at
least five hundred feet (500') to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from all distances from fifty feet (50') to
three hundred feet (300') to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlights on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible
from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
B. Signaling Bell: No person shall operate a bicycle not equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least one
hundred feet (100'), except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
C. Brakes: Each bicycle shall be equipped with adequate brakes. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
10-10-2: RIDING REGULATIONS:
A. Abreast, Single File: When two (2) or more persons in a group are operating bicycles, they shall not ride abreast but in single file.
B. Clinging To Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle in the City to cling to or attach himself or his bicycle to any other moving
vehicle.
C. Emerging From Alleys, Driveways Or Garages: The operator of any bicycle emerging from any alley, driveway or garage shall stop immediately prior to
driving onto or across a sidewalk or onto a sidewalk line projected across an alley, and shall exercise extreme care in those cases.
D. Intoxication, Drugs: It shall be unlawful for any person under the influence of drugs to operate a bicycle in the City.
E. Lights: No bicycle shall be operated within the City between thirty (30) minutes after sunset or thirty (30) minutes before sunrise, without a clear, white,
properly lighted headlight, visible under normal atmospheric conditions from the front thereof, for not less than five hundred feet (500') and firmly
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 403/470
attached to the bicycle, and without a red reflector, firmly attached to the rear of the bicycle, which is clearly visible in the headlights of an automobile
for a distance of at least one hundred feet (100').
F. Parking Bicycles; Interference: Bicycles shall not, at any time and in any place, be indiscriminately parked by anyone along buildings in such a manner
as to interfere with pedestrians or along roadways or sidewalks where they may interfere with traffic, or with persons getting into or out of automobiles.
No person shall move or in any manner interfere with any bicycle which is properly parked, nor shall any person interfere or in any manner hinder any
person from properly parking a bicycle, except that the members of the Police or Fire Departments may move or in proper cases prevent the parking of
a bicycle when, in the judgment of the police or fire officers, such action is necessary in order to properly safeguard persons or property.
G. Keeping To The Right: All bicycles when operated on roadways shall be kept to the right and shall be operated as nearly as practicable at the righthand
edge of the roadway.
H. Speed: No bicycle shall be operated faster than is reasonable and proper, and each bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of
the rider or other persons and property.
I. Traffic Regulations: Any person operating a bicycle in the City shall obey all traffic signs and signals, and shall obey all other traffic rules and regulations
applicable thereto.
J. Turns: Turns in traffic shall be in accordance with the provisions relating to turns in traffic in this Title. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977)
Chapter 11
IMMOBILIZATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES1
(Rep. by Ord. 0-07-05, 1-22-2007)
Chapter 12
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
10-12-1: TRAFFIC VIOLATION TICKETS:
Except where otherwise provided in this title, police officers may issue traffic violation tickets, setting forth the date, time and place of the offense, the
nature of the offense, the make, year, registration and license numbers of the vehicle involved, the name and address of the driver where possible, and
notifying the offender to appear in court on a specific time and date, as is designated for hearing such cases. In the event that the offender does not
appear at the time, date and place specified, the arresting officer may sign a complaint for the issuance of a warrant for the offender's arrest. (Ord. 0-77-
17, 6-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-98-29, 7-20-1998, eff. 7-30-1998)
10-12-2: ARRESTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-13-20, 10-28-2013)
10-12-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this title shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. This penalty provision shall apply to all provisions of this title except such provisions and sections wherein specific penalties provided. (Ord. 0-77-
17, 6-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-98-29, 7-20-1998, eff. 7-30-1998)
10-12-4: PARKING VIOLATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-16-19, 6-13-2016)
10-12-5: DISPOSITION OF FINES:
For offenses committed upon the streets or highways of this city or within the limits or jurisdiction of the city, fines and penalties recovered under the
provisions of this title shall be paid over to the treasurer of the city. (Ord. 0-77-17, 6-7-1977; amd. Ord. 0-98-29, 7-20-1998, eff. 7-30-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 404/470
Chapter 13
MOTORIZED SKATEBOARDS
10-13-1: DEFINITION:
For the purposes of this chapter "motorized skateboard" means any device that has a deck or platform on which a person may stand or sit, with two (2) or
more wheels, and that is self-propelled by any type of motor or engine; provided, however, that the term "motorized skateboard" shall not include the
following: a) a motor vehicle1; b) a motorcycle2; c) a motor driven cycle3; d) a motorized pedalcycle4; or e) a motorized wheelchair5 or other device
designed and used to transport a person with a disability. (Ord. 0-03-36, 9-15-2003, eff. 9-25-2003)
10-13-2: LIMITATION ON USE:
With the exception of authorized employees and officers of the city of Prospect Heights, United States postal service employees, and other authorized
governmental employees, no person shall operate or ride a motorized skateboard on or within any of the following places within the city: public streets and
rights of way, public sidewalks, public parking lots or areas, public parks and any other public property. (Ord. 0-03-36, 9-15-2003, eff. 9-25-2003)
10-13-3: FINE; IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION:
Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to a citation and imposition of a fine pursuant to the general penalty provisions set forth in section 10-12-
3 of this title, as may be amended from time to time. Additionally, any person who has been issued three (3) or more citations for violations of this chapter
within any twelve (12) month period shall be required to surrender, at the time of issuance of the third citation, the motorized skateboard to the police
officer or other authorized official who issues the citation. The surrendered motorized skateboard shall be impounded and held by the city of Prospect
Heights police department and shall be returned to its owner only after one of the following sets of conditions have been met:
A. The person against whom the citation was issued shall have paid: 1) all outstanding fines and 2) the fees and costs of the city in the amount of one
hundred dollars ($100.00); or
B. The person against whom the citation was issued shall have: 1) paid or caused to be paid all outstanding fines, and 2) presented to the city proof that a
determination of not guilty was made for the cited offense. (Ord. 0-03-36, 9-15-2003, eff. 9-25-2003)
10-13-4: PAYMENTS TO AVOID PROSECUTION:
A person charged with a violation of this chapter may avoid prosecution by paying to the city the following amounts for each violation within the time
specified:
Time Period Amount Of Fine
0-10 days $25.00
After 10 days 50.00
After thirty (30) days the fine must be paid in full or a court appearance will be required. This section shall not affect the redemption fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) set forth in section 10-3-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 0-03-36, 9-15-2003, eff. 9-25-2003)
Chapter 14
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM
10-14-1: IMPLEMENTATION; DEFINITIONS:
A. Implementation: There is hereby implemented an automated traffic law enforcement system of the city of Prospect Heights.
B. Definitions:
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM: Either a device with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red
light signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a red signal indication in violation of section 11-306 of the
Illinois vehicle code or a similar provision of this city code, or a device with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with the visual
signals on a school bus, as specified in sections 12-803 and 12-805 of the Illinois vehicle code1, to produce recorded images of motor vehicles that fail
to stop before meeting or overtaking, from either direction, any school bus stopped at any location for the purpose of receiving or discharging pupils in
violation of section 11-1414 of the Illinois vehicle code2 or a similar provision of this code.
ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATOR: The ordinance enforcement administrator provided for in title 9, chapter 4 of this code.
RECORDED IMAGES: Images recorded by an automated traffic law enforcement system, on either two (2) or more photographs, two (2) or more
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 405/470
micrographs, two (2) or more electronic images or a video recording showing the motor vehicle, capturing and displaying images of the vehicle violating
traffic control signals, or being operated with expired registration, together with at least one clearly recorded image identifying the vehicle's license
plate. The recorded image shall also display the time, date and location of the violation. (Ord. 0-13-24, 11-25-2013)
10-14-2: SIGNAGE:
A. Any intersection equipped with an automated traffic law enforcement system shall have a sign posted which is clearly visible to approaching traffic
indicating that the intersection is being monitored by an automated traffic law enforcement system. The city shall provide notice to drivers by posting
the location of any intersection equipped with an automated traffic law enforcement system on the city website.
B. A school bus equipped with an automated traffic law enforcement system shall be posted with a sign indicating that the school bus is being monitored
by an automated traffic law enforcement system. (Ord. 0-13-24, 11-25-2013)
10-14-3: SCOPE:
A. The automated traffic law enforcement system shall be used to detect and enforce violations of section 11-306 (traffic control devices), 11-1414
(approaching, overtaking and passing a school bus) or 3-413 (vehicle registration) of the Illinois vehicle code, as amended from time to time.
B. The city administrator shall post on the city's website a list of the: 1) intersections equipped with an automated traffic law enforcement system and 2)
school districts using school buses equipped with an automated traffic law enforcement system. (Ord. 0-13-24, 11-25-2013)
10-14-4: VIOLATIONS, REVIEW, NOTICE, SERVICE:
A. Adjudication Of Violations: Adjudication of violations detected under this chapter shall be performed by the ordinance enforcement department.
B. Preliminary Review Of Recorded Images: Prior to service of a notice of violation, the associated recorded image shall be reviewed by a law
enforcement officer or retired law enforcement officer of the city, who shall inspect the image and determine whether the motor vehicle violated section
11-306, 11-1414 or 3-413 of the Illinois vehicle code, and whether one of the defenses enumerated hereinafter is visibly applicable upon inspection of
the recorded image.
C. Notice: Upon determination that the recorded image captures a violation of one of the foregoing provisions and that no defense applies, the ordinance
enforcement administrator shall serve a notice of violation upon the registered vehicle owner in the manner herein provided.
D. Method Of Service: The notice shall be delivered by first class mail, postage prepaid, within thirty (30) days after the Illinois secretary of state notifies
the city of the identity of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, but in no event later than ninety (90) days after the violation.
E. Prima Facie Evidence: Each notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding alleging
a violation of the above noted statutory and local ordinance provisions and shall establish prima facie evidence of a violation.
F. Records: The chief of police or his designee shall retain a copy of all violation notices, recorded images and other correspondence mailed to the alleged
violator. (Ord. 0-13-24, 11-25-2013)
10-14-5: CONTENTS OF VIOLATION NOTICE:
A. Each notice of violation shall include the following:
1. The name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, as indicated by the records of the secretary of state, or, if such information is
outdated or unattainable, then the last known address recorded in a United States post office approved database;
2. The registration number of the motor vehicle involved in the violation;
3. The violation charged, with specific reference to that section of this code, or Illinois motor vehicle code, allegedly violated;
4. The location where the violation occurred;
5. The date and time of the violation;
6. A copy of the recorded images;
7. A website address, accessible through the internet, where the person may view the recorded images of the violation;
8. The amount of the civil penalty imposed under section 10-14-7 of this chapter and the date by which the civil penalty shall be paid if liability for the
violation is not going to be contested;
9. A statement that the recorded images are evidence of a violation of: a) a red light signal violation, b) approaching, overtaking and passing a school
bus or c) expired registration;
10. A warning that failure to either pay the civil penalty or to contest liability within twenty one (21) days of the mailing of the notice of violation is an
admission of liability and may result in a suspension of the driving privileges of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle in addition to other
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 406/470
specified penalties for failing to appear at the hearing or pay the fine in advance of the hearing;
11. A statement that the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle may elect to proceed either by paying the fine stated in the notice of violation or by
challenging the charge in an administrative hearing;
12. The date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the charge may be contested on its merits, a date that shall be no less than fifteen
(15) nor more than thirty (30) days from the mailing or other service of the notice of violation; and
13. The signature of the technician reviewing the recorded images and confirming that a violation took place. (Ord. 0-13-24, 11-25-2013)
10-14-6: DEFENSES:
A. The hearing officer may consider the following defenses to an alleged violation of either section 11-306 or 3-413 of the Illinois vehicle code detected
under this chapter:
1. The motor vehicle and/or registration plates were stolen before the violation occurred and were not under the exclusive control of or in the
possession of the owner at the time of the red light signal violation, which defense may be demonstrated through the submission of a certified copy
of a report concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates filed with a law enforcement agency prior to the time of the alleged violation;
2. The driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection when the light was red either: a) to yield the right of way to an emergency vehicle, or b) as
part of a funeral procession;
3. The driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection when the light was red at the direction of a police officer acting within the scope of his
duties;
4. The motor vehicle was being operated by someone other than the registered vehicle owner or lessee at the time of the red light signal violation,
which defense shall require written notification to the city and shall only be deemed a valid defense insofar as the registered vehicle owner or lessee
provides the name and address of the person operating the vehicle at the time of the alleged offense. Failure to notify the city in writing of the name
and address of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged offense in advance of the hearing date or date on which the civil penalty is due
will result in a presumption that the registered owner or lessee was the operator of the vehicle at the time of the offense and will result in a finding of
liability unless one of the other defenses is proved; and
5. The motor vehicle came to a complete stop and did not enter the intersection during the cycle of the red light indication even if the motor vehicle
stopped at a point past the stop line or crosswalk where a driver is required to stop and no pedestrians or bicyclists were present.
B. The hearing officer may consider the following defenses to an alleged violation of section 11-1414 of the Illinois vehicle code detected under this
chapter:
1. The motor vehicle or registration plates of the motor vehicle were stolen before the violation occurred and not under the control of or in the
possession of the owner at the time of the violation;
2. The driver of the motor vehicle received a uniform traffic citation from a police officer for a violation of section 11-1414 of the Illinois vehicle code
within one-eighth (1/8) of a mile and fifteen (15) minutes of the violation that was recorded by the system; and
3. The visual signals required by sections 12-803 and 12-805 of the Illinois vehicle code were damaged, not activated, not present in violation of
sections 12-803 and 12-805 of the Illinois vehicle code, or inoperable. (Ord. 0-13-24, 11-25-2013)
10-14-7: PENALTY:
A. For violations of section 11-306 (traffic control devices) or 3-413 (vehicle registration) of the Illinois vehicle code, unless the driver of the motor vehicle in
question received a uniform traffic citation from a police officer at the time of the alleged violation, a motor vehicle owner is subject to a civil penalty not
exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a proved violation of this chapter, plus an additional penalty of not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) for failure to pay the original penalty or contest the violation at an administrative hearing in a timely manner, if the motor vehicle is recorded
by an automated traffic law enforcement system.
B. For violations of section 11-1414 (approaching, overtaking and passing a school bus) of the Illinois vehicle code, unless the driver of the motor vehicle
received a uniform traffic citation from a police officer at the time of the violation, the motor vehicle owner is subject to a civil penalty not exceeding one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a first time violation or five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second or subsequent violation, plus an additional penalty
of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for failure to pay the original penalty in a timely manner, if the motor vehicle is recorded by an
automated traffic law enforcement system.
C. Any penalty imposed for a violation of this chapter is a civil penalty and is not a violation of a traffic regulation governing the movement of motor
vehicles and shall not be transmitted to the Illinois secretary of state to be recorded on a driving record of the vehicle owner.
D. All violations detected under this chapter and processed by the city's ordinance enforcement department under title 9, chapter 4 of this code shall be
deemed vehicle compliance violations related to the condition and use of vehicle equipment.
E. Any civil penalty imposed for a violation of this chapter shall be paid within forty nine (49) days following the administrative hearing at which the civil
penalty was imposed.
F. Subject to subsection A of this section, no additional fee shall be charged to the alleged violator for exercising his or her right to an administrative
hearing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 407/470
G. Whenever a registered owner of a vehicle has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing the city as a result of five (5) offenses for automated
traffic law violations, the city shall make a certified report to the secretary of state pursuant to section 6-306.5 of the Illinois motor vehicle code. (Ord. 0-
13-24, 11-25-2013)
10-14-8: CONFIDENTIALITY:
Recorded images made by the automated traffic law enforcement system shall be confidential and shall be made available only to the alleged violator,
governmental agencies and city departments for purposes of adjudicating violations, statistical or other governmental purposes. (Ord. 0-13-24, 11-25-
2013)
10-14-9: STATISTICAL ANALYSIS:
A. The chief of police shall conduct a statistical analysis to assess the safety impact: 1) in each school district using school buses equipped with an
automated traffic law enforcement system following installation of the system, and 2) at each intersection equipped with an automated traffic law
enforcement system following installation of the system.
B. The statistical analysis shall be based upon the best available crash, traffic, and other data, and shall cover a period of time before and after installation
of the system sufficient to provide a statistically valid comparison of safety impact.
C. The statistical analysis shall be consistent with professional judgment and acceptable industry practice.
D. The statistical analysis also shall be consistent with the data required for valid comparisons of before and after conditions and shall be conducted within
a reasonable period following the installation of the automated traffic law enforcement system.
E. The statistical analysis shall be made available to the public and shall be published on the website of the city.
F. If the statistical analysis for the thirty six (36) month period following installation of the system indicates that there has been an increase in the rate of
accidents at either: 1) the approach to school buses monitored by the system, or 2) the approach to the intersection monitored by the system, the chief
of police shall undertake additional studies to determine the cause and severity of the accidents, and may take any action that he determines is
necessary or appropriate to reduce the number or severity of the accidents either involving school buses or intersections equipped with an automated
traffic law enforcement system, as the case may be. (Ord. 0-13-24, 11-25-2013)
Chapter 15
IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
10-15-1: VIOLATIONS AUTHORIZING IMPOUNDMENT:
A. A motor vehicle that is used in connection with the following violations shall be subject to tow and impoundment by the city, and the owner of said
vehicle, or the agents of that owner, shall be liable to the city for an administrative fee in addition to any towing and storage fees:
1. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit any offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to section 36-1 of the Illinois criminal code (720 ILCS 5/36-1) shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
2. Driving under the influence of alcohol or other drug, or intoxicating compounds shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
3. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit a felony or in violation of the provisions of the Illinois cannabis
control act (720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.) shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
4. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit an offense in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1,
5/24-1.5, or 5/24-3.1 shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
5. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit an offense in violation of the Illinois controlled substances act
(720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.) shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
6. Driving without a state issued driver's license, or driving while driver's license, permit or privileges to operate a motor vehicle are suspended or
revoked pursuant to section 6-303 of the Illinois vehicle code (625 ILCS 5/6-303) shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred
dollars ($500.00); except that vehicles shall not be subject to seizure impoundment if suspension is for an unpaid citation (moving or parking) or due
to failure to comply with emission testing.
7. Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possession, or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance as defined by
the Illinois cannabis control act (720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.) or the Illinois controlled substances act (720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.) shall subject the owner
to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
8. Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license, in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois vehicle code (625 ILCS 5/6-101),
where the period of expiration is greater than one year shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 408/470
9. Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit, in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois vehicle
code (625 ILCS 5/6-101), or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit due to a person's age shall
subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
10. Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer charges
that the driver violated section 6-101 of the Illinois vehicle code (625 ILCS 5/6-101), section 6-303 of the Illinois vehicle code (625 ILCS 5/6-303), or
section 11-501 of the Illinois vehicle code (625 ILCS 5/11-501) shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
11. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of section 16-25 of the Illinois criminal
code (720 ILCS 5/16-25) shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
12. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, any misdemeanor or felony offense in violation of the Illinois
criminal code (720 ILCS 5/1 et seq.) shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
B. The administrative fee under this section shall be waived upon verifiable proof that the vehicle was stolen at the time the vehicle was impounded. (Ord.
0-12-11, 4-9-2012)
10-15-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing state or federal laws, and the owner shall be subject to these penalties in addition to any
penalties that may be assessed by a court for any criminal charges. (Ord. 0-12-11, 4-9-2012)
10-15-3: NOTICE:
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to tow and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the police officer shall
provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility authorized by the city. Before or at the time the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify or make a
reasonable attempt to notify the person identifying himself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle
at the time for the alleged violation, of the fact of the seizure, and of the vehicle and of the owner's right to request a preliminary vehicle impoundment
hearing to be conducted in accordance with section 10-15-4 of this chapter. Said vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of the hearing
provided in section 10-15-4 of this chapter, unless the owner of the vehicle posts with the city a cash bond at the rates in section 10-15-1 of this chapter
and pays the accrued towing and storage charges. (Ord. 0-12-11, 4-9-2012)
10-15-4: PRELIMINARY HEARING PROCEDURE:
A. Written Request: If the owner of record of a vehicle seized pursuant to this section desires to appeal the seizure, said owner must make a request for
hearing within twenty four (24) hours of the seizure. Said request shall be in writing and filed with the chief of police, or his designee who shall conduct
such preliminary hearing within twenty four (24) hours after receipt of the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
B. Rules Of Evidence Relaxed: All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing.
The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by
reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
C. When Probable Cause Exists: If after the hearing, the chief of police or his designee determines there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle is
subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, he shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle as provided in this chapter
unless the owner of the vehicle posts with the city a cash bond at the rates in section 10-15-1 of this chapter and pays the tower any applicable towing
and storage fees.
D. Vehicle To Be Returned When Probable Cause Nonexistent: If the chief of police or his designee determines that there is no such probable cause, the
vehicle will be returned without penalty or other fees. (Ord. 0-12-11, 4-9-2012)
10-15-5: PLEA HEARING:
A. Notice; Procedure; Evidence: Within ten (10) days after a vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter, the city shall notify by certified mail,
return receipt requested, the owner, lessee, and any lienholder of record, to the interested party's address as registered with the secretary of state of
the date, time, and location of a plea hearing that will be conducted, pursuant to this section. The owner will appear at a plea hearing and enter a plea
of liable or not liable. If a plea of liable is entered, the cause will be disposed of at that time. If the owner pleads not liable, a hearing shall be scheduled
and held, unless continued by a hearing officer, designated by the city administrator, no later than forty five (45) days after the date of the mailing of the
notice of hearing. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. At any time prior to the hearing date, the
hearing officer may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not
apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the
conduct of their affairs.
B. Liability; Costs; Default Judgment; Vehicle Returned Where No Violation: If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of
evidence that the vehicle was used in connection with a violation set forth in this chapter, the hearing officer shall enter a written order finding the owner
of record of the vehicle civilly liable to the city for an administrative fee at the rates in section 10-15-1 of this chapter and requiring the vehicle to
continue to be impounded until the owner pays the administrative fee to the city plus fees to the tower for the towing and storage of the vehicle. If the
owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer shall enter a written default order in favor of the city. If the hearing officer finds no such
violation occurred, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision ordering the immediate return of the owner's vehicle or cash bond without fees.
(Ord. 0-12-11, 4-9-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 409/470
10-15-6: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
A. Imposed; Cash Bond Used To Offset Debt: If an administrative fee is imposed pursuant to this chapter, such fee shall constitute a debt due and owing
the city. If a cash bond has been posted pursuant to this chapter the bond shall be applied to the fee.
B. Authority To Initiate Collection Procedure: If a vehicle has been impounded when such a fee is imposed, the city may seek to obtain a judgment on the
debt and enforce such judgment against the vehicles as provided by law. Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, a vehicle shall continue to be
impounded until the fee is paid to the city and any applicable towing fees are paid to the tower, in which case possession of the vehicle shall be given
to the person who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle or the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment to enforce a lien as
provided by law.
C. Nonpayment; Failure To Appear: If the administrative fee and other applicable fees are not paid within thirty (30) days after an administrative fee is
imposed against an owner, lessee, and any lienholder of record, who defaults by failing to appear at the hearing, the vehicle shall be deemed
unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
D. When Vehicle Deemed Unclaimed: In all other cases, if the administrative fee and other applicable fees are not paid within thirty five (35) days after the
expiration of time at which administrative review of the hearing officer's determination may be sought, or within thirty five (35) days after an action
seeking administrative review has been resolved in favor of the city, whichever is applicable, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be
disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles under the Illinois vehicle code1. (Ord. 0-12-11, 4-9-2012)
10-15-7: VEHICLE POSSESSION:
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lienholder, or other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a vehicle
impounded under this chapter until the administrative fee and other fees applicable under this chapter have been paid. However, whenever a person
with a lien of record against an impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be given to that person if
he or she agrees in writing to refund the city the amount of the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts required to pay all lienholders of
record, not to exceed the administrative fee, plus any other applicable fees.
B. For purposes of this section, the term "owner of record" of a vehicle means the record titleholder as registered with the secretary of state. (Ord. 0-12-11,
4-9-2012)
10-15-8: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW; RIGHT TO APPEAL:
Any owner, lessee, lienholder or other person with a legal interest in the vehicle, who is not satisfied with the decision of the hearing officer, shall have the
right to appeal the decision to the circuit court, pursuant to the administrative review act, as set forth fully in 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq.
(Ord. 0-12-11, 4-9-2012)
Chapter 16
ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE
10-16-1: ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; PENALTIES:
A. Adopted By Reference: In lieu of using any section, or in addition to any section of this title, the officer issuing a citation may issue it by using any of the
sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code1, except any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the
movement of vehicles other than for any reportable offense under section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code2, which sections of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, and all amendments made from time to time, are adopted and incorporated by reference as part of this title.
B. Penalties: The penalty for violation of any provision of the Illinois Vehicle Code adopted by reference in subsection A of this section shall be the penalty
specified for the violation by the Illinois Vehicle Code. Where the Illinois Vehicle Code does not provide a specific penalty for the violation, the penalty
shall be a fine of not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 0-17-33, 12-11-2017)
Title 11
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL
11-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose and intent of this Title is to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 410/470
A. Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and service;
B. Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of telecommunications
providers and service;
C. Promote competition in telecommunications;
D. Minimize unnecessary local regulation of the telecommunications providers and service;
E. Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications service;
F. Permit and manage reasonable access to the public right of ways of the City for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral and
nondiscriminatory basis;
G. Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public right of ways held in public trust by the City;
H. Protect the integrity and appearance of the public right of ways;
I. Assure that the City's current and ongoing costs of granting private access to and use of the public right of ways are fully paid by the persons seeking
such access and causing such costs;
J. Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the City and the residents of the City for permitting the private use of the public right of ways;
K. Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or service within the City comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City;
L. Assure that the City can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare;
M. Enable the City to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving Federal and State regulatory policies, industry competition and technological
development. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-1-2: WORD USE:
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" or "will" are always mandatory and not merely directory, and the word "may" is
permissive. The words "he", "his", and "him" shall be gender neutral. The failure to designate a defined term by using the upper case for the first letter of
said term shall have no effect on the meaning of such defined term. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-1-3: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
The headings and captions contained in this Title are to facilitate reference only, and shall not in any way affect the construction or interpretations hereof.
(Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Title, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless
the context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate otherwise:
AFFILIATE: A person that directly or indirectly owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person.
CABLE ACT: The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 USC section 522 et seq., as now and hereafter amended.
CABLE OPERATOR: A telecommunications carrier providing or offering to provide "cable service" within the City as that term is defined in the Cable Act.
CABLE SERVICE: Those services as defined in the Cable Act of 1984, 47 USC 522, and any amendments thereto.
CABLE SYSTEM: The system to be constructed and installed by the provider pursuant to and in accordance with this Title, including, but not limited to, all
cables, conduits, access manholes, pedestals, boxes, equipment, devices and appurtenances to be used by the provider to make the network fully
operational, for the purposes of transmitting, receiving and distributing cable television.
CITY: The City of Prospect Heights.
CITY PROPERTY: Means and includes all real property owned by the City, other than public streets and utility easements as those terms are defined
herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the City, which are not subject to right-of-way licensing and franchising as provided in this Title.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The Mayor and City Council of the City of Prospect Heights.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 411/470
EMERGENCY: An unexpected situation or sudden occurrence of a serious and urgent nature that demands immediate action, affecting the health, safety
or welfare of the public or any person.
EXCESS CAPACITY: The volume or capacity in any existing duct, conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within the public right of way available
for use for additional telecommunications facilities.
FCC OR FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION: The Federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, service and providers on a national level.
FACILITIES: The individual parts that together make the telecommunications system fully operational for the purposes set forth herein, including, but not
limited to, all cables, conduits, access manholes, pedestals, boxes, equipment, devices and other appurtenances.
GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY: The United States of America, the State of Illinois and any political subdivision thereof, including, but not limited to, the
City, and any agency, department, commission, board, bureau or other instrumentality of any of them that has jurisdiction over the telecommunications
system or any property over, under, above or along which the telecommunications system shall be installed.
GROSS REVENUE: All of the revenue, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, that is derived from or in conjunction
with the operation of the telecommunications or cable system in the City, including, but not limited to, all revenue received for the provision of service,
installation, reconnection, sale of products and the value of all goods and service received by the service provider in exchange for the service; provided,
however, that no billings shall be imputed related to the service provided to the City.
ICC OR ILLINOIS COMMERCE COMMISSION: The State administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, service and providers in the State of Illinois.
INDEX: The "Consumer Price Index-U.S. City Average; For Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers, All Items 1982-84-100", prepared by the U.S.
Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, or, if said Index is not then being published, the successor or the most nearly comparable successor
index thereto.
OTHER WAYS: The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other rights of way within the City, but under the jurisdiction and control of a
governmental entity other than the City.
OVERHEAD FACILITIES: Utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities above the surface of the ground, including the underground
supports and foundations for such facilities.
PEG: Public, educational and governmental access.
PERMITS: All approvals, consents, permits, licenses, easements and franchises required to be obtained from all governmental authorities and persons, in
connection with the telecommunications or cable systems, including those needed to obtain access to or use of any real property.
PERSON: Means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, and individuals and
includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
PRODUCTS: All equipment, instruments, parts, accessories and other goods offered in connection with or otherwise relating to the service.
PROVIDERS: Any person providing telecommunications service within the City, whether located in the public right of way or not.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHT OF WAY: Means and includes all public streets and utility easements, as those terms are defined herein, now or
hereafter controlled by the City.
PUBLIC STREET: Any highway, street, alley or other public right of way for vehicular travel under the jurisdiction and control of the City which has been
acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway purposes, not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
SERVICE: The provision or offering of telecommunications service, either directly or as a carrier for others, to persons by means of the
telecommunications system.
STATE: The State of Illinois.
SURPLUS SPACE: That portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders
and regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission, to allow its use by a telecommunications carrier for pole attachment.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER: Means and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates, or manages plant, equipment
or property within the City, used or to be used for the purpose of offering any telecommunications service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including, but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals,
antennas, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to provide or offer telecommunications service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Means and includes every person who provides telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities
whether owned or leased.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice,
data, image, graphic and video signals, including cable television, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or
similar facilities, with or without the benefit of any closed transmission medium.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: The telecommunications network to be constructed and installed by the provider pursuant to and in
accordance with this Title, including, but not limited to, all cables, conduits, access manholes, pedestals, boxes, equipment, devices and appurtenance to
be used by the provider to make the network fully operational, for the purposes of transmitting, receiving and distributing telecommunications and other
information, including, without limitation, voice, data, video, including cable television, facsimile, alarm and meter reading signals and other forms of
communications.
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES: Utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 412/470
supports for overhead facilities.
USABLE SPACE: The total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical
clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission.
UTILITY EASEMENT: Any easement granted to or owned by the City and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes, not
inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
UTILITY FACILITIES: The plant, equipment, and property including, but not limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and
equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the public right of ways of the City for the purpose of providing utility or
telecommunications service. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-1-5: REGISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, all telecommunications carriers and providers engaged in the business of transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications originating or terminating in the City shall register with the City pursuant to Chapter 2 of this Title. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-
31-1996)
11-1-6: TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE:
Except as otherwise provided therein, any telecommunications carriers or cable operators who desire to construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise
locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public right of way of the City for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications
service to persons and areas outside the City, shall first obtain a license granting the use of such public right of ways from the City pursuant to Chapter 3
of this Title. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-1-7: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE:
Except as otherwise provided therein, any telecommunications providers who desire to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over, or across any public right of way of the City, and to also provide telecommunications service to persons or
areas within the City, shall first obtain a franchise granting the use of such public right of ways from the City pursuant to Chapter 4 of this Title. (Ord. 0-96-
78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-1-8: CABLE FRANCHISE:
Except as otherwise provided therein, any telecommunications providers who desire to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate cable
facilities in, under, over, or across any public right of way of the City, and to also provide cable service to persons or areas within the City, shall first obtain
a franchise granting the use of such public right of ways from the City pursuant to Chapter 5 of this Title. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-1-9: COMPLIANCE WITH LAW:
Grantee shall, at all times, comply with laws, rules, codes, and regulations of all governmental authorities, regardless of whether such law, code, rule or
regulation is expressly referenced in this Title.
A. Grantee shall at all times comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, codes, rules, and regulations of the City and all applicable
memoranda and other directives of the City, as such laws, ordinances, resolutions, codes, rules, regulations, memoranda and directives may be
modified or amended, provided that such modification or amendment does not impair, conflict with, or diminish the rights granted under this Title.
B. This Title shall not take the place of any license, permit or approval that is, or may in the future, be required to be secured by a telecommunications
provider from any governmental authority or person.
C. Franchises for the provision of cable service shall be in accordance with the Cable Act, the Illinois Municipal Code, and this Code.
D. All Federal, State, and local laws as well as rules and regulations of the FCC the ICC and any other governmental authority charged with the regulation
of telecommunications shall be in full force and effect.
E. All door-to-door salespersons will be registered with the City. Door-to-door sales will be conducted in compliance with all Federal, State and local laws,
including solicitation ordinances. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-1-10: APPLICATION TO EXISTING FRANCHISE ORDINANCES AND AGREEMENTS:
This Title shall become effective upon the date of its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. Specific provisions agreed to
in existing franchise agreements or contained in ordinances which conflict with this Title shall be deemed to be "grandfathered" until:
A. The expiration of said franchise, ordinance or agreement;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 413/470
B. An amendment to an unrepealed franchise ordinance or unexpired franchise agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific
date not later than the present expiration date. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-1-11: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT:
No license or franchise granted under this Title shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public right of ways of
the City for the delivery of telecommunications or cable service or any other purposes. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-1-12: AGREEMENT:
No license or franchise granted hereunder shall be effective until:
A. The applicant and the City have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and provisions under which the license to occupy and
use the public right of ways of the City will be granted; and
B. All applicable fees have been paid; and
C. All bond and insurance requirements as outlined in Chapter 9 of this Title have been satisfied. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
Chapter 2
REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND PROVIDERS
11-2-1: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
All telecommunications carriers and providers that offer or provide any telecommunications service, including cable television, within the City for a fee
directly to the public, but not using rights of way, shall register with the City annually, pursuant to this Chapter on forms to be provided by the City, which
shall include the following:
A. The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates.
B. The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration.
C. A description of the registrant's existing or proposed telecommunications facilities within the City.
D. A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms,
businesses or institutions within the City.
E. Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to the rights-of-way licensing or franchising provisions in this Title.
F. Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the telecommunications service provided or to be provided by the
registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any telecommunications tax, utility message tax or other occupation tax imposed by the City.
G. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any certificate of authority required by the Illinois Commerce
Commission to provide telecommunications service or facilities within the City.
H. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals required
by the Federal Communications Commission to provide telecommunications service or facilities within the City.
I. Such other information as the City may reasonably require. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-2-2: REGISTRATION FEE:
Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier or provider shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 0-96-
78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-2-3: PURPOSE OF REGISTRATION:
The purpose of registration under this Chapter is to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 414/470
A. Provide the City with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide
telecommunications service within the City, or that own or operate telecommunications facilities within the City and the location of such facilities;
B. Assist the City in the collection and enforcement of any Municipal taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due the City;
C. Assist the City in enforcement of this Title.
D. Assist the City in monitoring compliance with local, State, and Federal laws. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
Chapter 3
TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE
11-3-1: TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE:
A license shall be required of any telecommunications carrier or cable operator who desires to occupy specific public right of ways of the City for the sole
purpose of providing telecommunications or cable service to persons or areas outside the City. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-3-2: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Any person that desires a telecommunications license pursuant to this Chapter, shall file an application with the City which shall include the following
information:
A. The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant which will make use of such public right of ways.
B. A description of the telecommunications service that are or will be offered or provided by the licensee over its telecommunications facilities.
C. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the licensee to offer or provide such telecommunications service.
D. A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
E. Point-to-point providers will provide preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map, in a scale and format approved by the City, of the
facilities to be located within the City, all in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the City that the applicant intends to use or lease, if applicable.
2. The location and route requested for applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities.
3. The location of all applicable overhead and/or underground public utility, telecommunication, including cable, water, sewer drainage and other
facilities when determinable, in the public right of way along the proposed route.
4. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers, if applicable.
5. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate.
F. If a point-to-point applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities
on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
G. If a point-to-point applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public right of ways, information in sufficient
detail to identify:
1. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities;
2. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
H. If a point-to-point applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public right of ways,
information in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
2. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
I. Universal providers will be required to provide the above listed construction information pursuant to their license, or franchise agreements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 415/470
J. Financial statements prepared by a certified public accountant in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the
applicant's financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
K. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications facilities
and service described in the application.
L. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer
or provide such telecommunications service.
M. All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to Chapter 6 of this Title.
N. Such other and further information as may be required by the City. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-3-3: DETERMINATION BY THE CITY:
Within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving a complete application under Section 11-3-2 of this Chapter, the corporate authorities shall issue a
written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, with specific reasons stated, applying the following standards:
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal ability of the applicant.
C. The capacity of the public right of ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities.
D. The capacity of the public right of ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the license would be granted.
E. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private property, facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is granted.
F. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public right of ways.
G. The service that the applicant will provide to the community and region.
H. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare should the license be granted.
I. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.
J. Applicable Federal and State telecommunications laws, regulations and policies.
K. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public right of way will serve the community interest.
L. An applicant shall have the option of reapplying with a revised application without incurring additional application fees as long as the original application
fees have not been refunded.
M. An applicant who has been denied may request a meeting with the City to discuss the reasons for denial of the application. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996,
eff. 10-31-1996)
11-3-4: TERM OF GRANT:
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a telecommunications license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five (5) years. (Ord. 0-
96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-3-5: LICENSE ROUTE:
A telecommunications license granted under this Chapter shall be limited to a grant of specific public right of ways and defined portions thereof. A new
license application and grant shall be required of any licensee that desires to extend or locate its telecommunications facilities in public right of ways not
included in a previously granted license to the same licensee. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-3-6: PROVISION OF SERVICES WITHIN THE CITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 416/470
A licensee may be permitted to offer or provide telecommunications or cable service to persons or areas within the City upon submitting an application for
approval pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
Chapter 4
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE
11-4-1: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE:
A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy public right of ways of the City and to provide
telecommunications service to any person or area within the City. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-4-2: FRANCHISE APPLICATION:
Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise pursuant to this Chapter shall file an application with the City which shall include all of the
information required in Section 11-3-2 of this Title as well as the following additional information:
A. A complete description of the system design, capabilities and technical standards that the system is expected to achieve.
B. A description of the service or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to its subscribers and the corresponding rates for said service and
customer service standards and policies.
C. A description of the proposed service or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the City and other public, educational and
governmental institutions.
D. The area(s) of the City the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.
E. All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to Chapter 6 of this Title.
F. Such other and further information as may be reasonably required by the City. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-4-3: DETERMINATION BY THE CITY:
Within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving a complete application under Section 11-4-2 of this Chapter, the corporate authorities shall issue a
written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the standards listed in Section 11-3-3 of this Title. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-
21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-4-4: TERM OF GRANT:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of ten (10) years.
(Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-4-5: AUTHORIZED TERRITORY:
A telecommunications franchise granted under this Title shall be limited to the specific geographic area in the corporate boundaries of the City to be
served by the franchise and the specific public right of ways necessary to serve such areas. The grantee's service shall be accessible to all residences,
businesses and institutions within twenty four (24) months of the effective date of a franchise agreement.
A. Limited Franchise: A provider who is only providing wide-area-network, local-area-network, or satellite master antenna services to a specific set of
buildings may apply for a limited franchise.
B. A limited franchise granted under this Section shall be limited to a grant of specific public right of ways and defined portions thereof. A new franchise
application and grant shall be required of any grantee that desires to extend or locate its telecommunications facilities in right of ways not included in a
previously granted franchise to the same grantee. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-4-6: NONDISCRIMINATION:
A grantee shall make its telecommunications service available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request such service, without
discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for grantee's service; provided, however, that nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit a grantee
from making any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 417/470
11-4-7: SERVICE TO THE CITY:
A grantee shall make its telecommunications service available to the City at its most favorable rate for similarly situated users, unless otherwise provided
in a license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-4-8: AREAWIDE INTERCONNECT:
The telecommunications system shall be interconnected with all providers within the City as well as all contiguous communities allowing for seamless
delivery of all voice, video, and data signals as soon as practicable.
A. The grantee shall make a good faith effort to obtain agreements for the sharing of interconnection costs among all interconnecting companies. Upon
finding that the grantee has made a good faith effort and has not been able to obtain a reasonable agreement, or that the cost of the interconnection
would cause an unreasonable increase in subscriber rates, the City may postpone the deadline for interconnection to that particular area, or, upon
finding that the grantee is unreasonable, the City may request further study, or may enforce the interconnection deadline.
B. The provisions above shall not be construed so as to preclude cooperative effort, joint ownership of facilities, or cost-sharing arrangements; provided
however, that each and every aspect of construction and operation of the interconnect shall be clearly designated in written agreement(s) between the
parties and be operating and maintained as provided for in this agreement and by all applicable State and Federal regulations.
C. If the particular application for which a grantee's system is being used has no practical reason for interconnection, they may be exempted from the
provisions in this Section. Such exemption shall be specifically stated in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-4-9: EMERGENCY SERVICES:
In the case of any emergency or disaster, the grantee shall, upon request of the City, make available its facilities to the City without cost, for emergency
use during the emergency or disaster period. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-4-10: ANNUAL MEETING:
The grantee shall meet annually with the City to discuss construction plans for the next year as prescribed in Section 11-7-4 of this Title and the
performance of the grantee over the previous year. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-4-11: RIGHT TO REGULATE RESERVED:
The City reserves the right to prescribe regulations for the performance of telecommunications providers other than cable providers currently covered in
Chapter 5 of this Title, subject to Federal and State law, should the appropriate governmental authority abandon such regulation. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-
1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
Chapter 5
CABLE FRANCHISE
11-5-1: GENERAL:
In addition to the provisions outlined in Chapter 4 of this Title regarding franchise application, grant and authority, cable franchises are subject to the
provisions and requirements outlined in this Chapter.
A. Cable grantees are subject to this Title in its entirety and the Cable Act.
B. If a conflict arises between the language in this Chapter and the rest of this Title, this Chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-2: CHANNEL ALLOCATION:
The grantee shall, to the maximum extent possible, assign as dial locations for local broadcast stations carried on the system, numbers available by either
a cable-ready television or a converter, which correspond to their respective FCC-assigned TV station call numbers unless the station has negotiated a
more favorable position in the channel line-up. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-3: ACCESS CHANNELS:
The grantee shall provide access channels on the subscriber network for the exclusive use of designated institutions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 418/470
A. The number and use of said channels will be prescribed in the franchise agreements.
B. The City shall determine the channel allocations for such designated institutions.
C. Such channels shall be available on the lowest tier of basic services.
D. The grantee shall make every reasonable effort to assign PEG channels to the same channels assigned by other providers within each city, and in
contiguous municipalities.
E. The grantee shall list the specific assigned user on each channel in every channel line-up. A new channel chart shall be issued to subscribers in the
billing to be received prior to any changes.
F. PEG channels may not be reassigned without forty five (45) days' notice to, and approval of, the City. The grantee shall notify subscribers of any PEG
channel reassignments by mail in the billing to be received prior to the change. PEG channels may not be reassigned more than once in any twelve
(12) month period.
G. Grantee shall be responsible for any reasonable established costs incurred by any PEG user due to a change in channel assignment for any PEG
channel which was not requested by the user. These costs may include, stationary, business cards and public notices. Grantee will incur these costs
for no more than a one month period. The grantee shall discuss reimbursement of special promotional items, such as T-shirts or other special items,
with the affected user on a case-by-case basis. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-4: EXTENSION OF SERVICE:
Following the initial construction of the grantee's system, the grantee shall extend its system and make services available as follows:
A. Unless otherwise specified in a license or franchise agreement, within forty five (45) days after notification by the City of an annexation having a
minimum density of twenty five (25) units per street mile, begin construction of its telecommunications system within such annexed area to provide
service to each person requesting such service. Weather permitting, construction and activation to the annexed area shall be completed within forty
five (45) days.
B. The City shall notify the grantee of the construction of any new development within the City by delivering to the grantee a final plat of survey, to include
final design for all utilities for that development. For developments having a minimum density of twenty five (25) units per street mile, the grantee shall
deliver to the City its construction design plan and have applied for all necessary permits and licenses within thirty (30) days of said notification.
Weather permitting, construction shall begin within thirty (30) days after the receipt of all necessary permits and licenses. Construction, including
restoration, shall be completed within forty five (45) days.
C. Within thirty (30) days after signing a contract and approved design with any multiple dwelling unit for the provision of service, the grantee shall begin
construction and installation of its system in such multiple dwelling unit. Construction and installation shall be completed within thirty (30) days.
D. Grantee shall provide service to areas not meeting the minimum density of twenty five (25) units per street mile within six (6) months after notification by
the City. If the grantee determines that a line extension is not economically feasible, it may request relief from this provision. Approval of such request
shall not be unreasonably withheld. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit a cost-sharing arrangement in less dense areas.
E. Grantee further agrees that any litigation instituted by a third party shall not suspend grantee's obligation to construct and install the cable system in
accordance with the construction time schedule unless otherwise ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-
1996)
11-5-5: TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
The distribution of all signals throughout the system, including the combined degradation effects of both upstream and downstream carriage, no matter
where the signals originate or are terminated, shall meet the applicable industry standards set for the delivery method being used.
A. All applicable regulatory standards shall be observed as if each and every one were stated herein. In the event that enforcement of said regulatory
standards is discontinued or the regulatory agency charged with enforcement is dissolved, the standards shall remain in full force and effect until the
City exercises its right hereunder to amend this agreement to require such standards as it shall deem necessary.
B. In the areas where standards have not been developed, the system shall operate at the equipment manufacturers' specifications until quantifiable
standards have been developed. The grantee shall be obligated to ensure that the signal quality is of the highest practicable level achievable for the
components in question. For the first year that newer equipment for which no standards have been developed is in use, the grantee will report monthly
on the reliability and performance of said equipment. Thereafter, if the equipment is functioning within the levels anticipated, the grantee may test and
report on the same scheduled as the rest of the system. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-6: TESTING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 419/470
The grantee shall conduct appropriate monitoring and measurements utilizing appropriate measuring devices, including devices capable of measuring
signal leakage in micro-volts/meters, to ensure that the system is performing within the applicable standards. When such monitoring or measurements
indicate that performance has fallen below these standards, corrective action shall be taken to restore proper performance. All channels on the system
shall be monitored daily by a visual inspection of the picture and listening to the audio for general performance and audio level balance.
A. At a minimum, measurements shall be made monthly at the headend, and quarterly at two (2) randomly selected, longest cascades in each community
to ensure that all channels on the system are operating properly. Measurement of all operational parameters shall be made semiannually at the
headend and four (4) geographically divided locations, at the ends of the longest cascades in each community, on all channels.
B. If the City suspects an area is not performing in accordance with the applicable standards, they may order the grantee to test in that location within forty
eight (48) hours' notice from the City.
C. Newly constructed sections shall be tested within one week of activation, and results reported to the City.
D. The grantee shall submit copies of its federally required proof-of-performance testing within thirty (30) days of its completion. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-
1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-7: RELIABILITY:
The grantee shall employ a professional engineer or equivalent, and a service and repair force of competent technicians, capable of maintaining the
system in accordance with the technical performance and service requirements in this Chapter.
A. The grantee shall install and maintain a standby power system that provides a minimum of three (3) hours' duration throughout the distribution
networks.
B. System headends and distribution system as well as standby power will have remote status monitoring. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-8: MAINTENANCE:
The grantee shall perform routine maintenance within the following parameters:
A. The grantee shall interrupt system service after seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and before one o'clock (1:00) A.M. only with good cause and for the shortest
time possible, and, except in emergency situations, only after cable-casting notice of services interruptions at least twenty four (24) hours in advance.
B. Service may be interrupted between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. for routine testing, maintenance and repair with notification
to the City, on any day except Saturday, Sunday, or legal holidays.
C. Routine maintenance may be performed during the daylight hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on any day except Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holidays, upon notification to the City. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-9: CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS, GENERAL:
A. The grantee shall initiate prompt corrective action to satisfy unresolved complaints. If a person is not satisfied with the resolution of a complaint, that
person shall be automatically referred to a management personnel. Local management will work with the person to resolve the problem within forty
eight (48) hours. In the event that local management does not satisfy the customer complaint, the complaint shall be referred to the district manager.
B. Customer service representatives and service technicians, including contracted help, shall identify themselves by name. When performing work in the
field, a company identification badge shall be displayed on the outer clothing of the technician or contractor.
C. Any vehicle used for the installation, construction, maintenance or repair of the telecommunications system shall bear the identification of the contractor
or the grantee in a conspicuous place and manner.
D. Customers shall receive a copy of the service report and a phone number to call to resolve any additional problems, at the time service is completed.
E. The grantee shall make available to every subscriber the equipment or devices necessary for the receipt of all services for which they wish to subscribe.
The lowest tier of basic service which includes all off-air and PEG channels shall be available without a converter for customer equipment capable of
receiving a direct transmission.
F. Upon request from the subscriber, the grantee shall provide a "parental control" mechanism or device that permits the subscriber to "lock out" audible
and visual reception of certain programming. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-10: CUSTOMER SERVICE, TELEPHONE RESPONSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 420/470
A. The grantee shall maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers twenty four (24) hours per day,
seven (7) days per week. Trained representatives of grantee will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries, twenty four (24) hours per
day, seven (7) days per week.
B. Calls must be answered within four (4) rings or thirty (30) seconds by a representative or mechanical device. Under normal operating conditions, the
customer will receive a busy signal less than one percent (1%) of the time.
C. Telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If
the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds.
D. The abandonment rate for calls shall be no more than ten percent (10%) of the calls reported incoming during any monthly reporting period.
E. The above standards shall be met ninety five percent (95%) of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a monthly basis from the hours
of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. The City shall consider unique or one-time occurrences in the evaluation of the average
standards in any one monthly reporting period. The grantee shall submit a monthly report accurately showing the telephone response performance
covering all areas listed in this Section. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-11: OUTAGE RESPONSE:
A. The grantee shall submit a monthly report accurately showing the time, the duration, probable cause, number of homes affected, and action taken on all
failures or outages on the main distribution system.
B. An outage affecting three (3) customers in the same geographic area, off the same line or feeder, reported to the grantee before nine o'clock (9:00)
P.M., every day, including weekends and holidays, shall be corrected the same day, except in cases of severe damage.
C. An outage affecting three (3) customers in the same geographic area, off the same line or feeder, received by the grantee after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
may be postponed until the following morning, provided repairs are completed by nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
D. In the event of extensive system failure of any trunk or feeder cable causing a service outage to ten (10) or more customers in any geographic area, or
the failure of modulator equipment, satellite reception equipment, or other system functions that result in the interruption of service throughout the
franchise area, corrective action shall be taken immediately.
E. Total outages, with the exception of those caused by the cutting of properly buried and marked cables or the accidental downing of an aerial cable,
throughout the City shall not exceed ten (10) hours in any one month.
F. The grantee shall notify the City of all major outages, locations of the outage, and the homes affected at the time of occurrence to aid the City in
handling phone calls regarding the problem. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-12: SERVICE CALL RESPONSE:
A. All requests for installation, change of service or disconnection shall be completed within five (5) days.
B. All customer service calls regarding repairs and or service problems which are not outage related shall be completed within twenty four (24) hours
unless grantee can sufficiently document why said repairs will take longer as in the case of equipment or cable replacement. At no time should repairs
take longer than one week to complete.
C. The appointment window alternatives for any call requiring the subscriber to be at the premises shall be either a specific time, or at a maximum, a four
(4) hour block within extended business hours, including weekends.
D. Grantee will not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment.
E. If the grantee's representative is running late for an appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the
subscriber will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-
1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-13: BILLING:
A. All charges to subscribers and users shall be consistent throughout the franchise area with a written schedule of fees for all service offered available
upon request. The grantee shall apprise each new subscriber of all applicable fees and charges for providing any cable service, in writing.
B. The grantee shall not, in regard to fees, discriminate or grant any preference or advantage to any person; provided, however, that the grantee may
establish different rates for different classes of subscribers or users, provided that the grantee not discriminate between any subscribers or users of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 421/470
same class.
C. Except as may be otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, the grantee may offer service which requires advance payment of periodic service
charges for no more than one year in advance subject to the conditions contained in this Section.
D. Subscribers shall receive a monthly statement with a payment due date to arrive not less than ten (10) days prior to the due date.
E. Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized and clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including, dates of
service being billed, optional charges, rebates, and credits.
F. All statements shall clearly denote a postmark or initiated date of bill.
G. A phone number for bill adjustment shall be printed on the statement, along with instructions to call for any billing problems. Adjustments will be made
for any verifiable loss of service. Adjustments shall appear on the next available subscriber statement. Any adjustments requested by the subscriber
which are not automatic under the terms of the franchise agreement, must be requested within thirty (30) days.
H. No bill, or portion thereof, may be considered delinquent or be the basis for termination, if said amount is in dispute resolution.
I. Customer requested disconnection shall be made as soon as practicable and in no case shall billing continue longer than five (5) days following the
request. The grantee shall not enter into any agreement with a subscriber which imposes any charge other than past due balances and unreturned
equipment charges following disconnection of service, except for the reconnection, any applicable deposits, and subsequent monthly or periodic
charges, and those charges shall be no greater than charges for new subscribers. This Section shall not prevent the grantee from refusing service to
any person because the grantee's prior accounts with that person remain due and owing.
J. The subscriber shall have the right, at any time, to have their service, or any portion thereof, disconnected with a refund for unused service charges.
K. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either, the customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request, or thirty (30) days,
whichever is earlier, or the return of the equipment supplied by the grantee.
L. The grantee may hold promotions or otherwise accept payments for up to one year in advance; provided, however, that the service for which payment
has been accepted is not subject to an increase in cost until such payment has been expended. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-14: RATES:
The City will regulate rates pursuant to Federal and State laws. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-15: NOTIFICATIONS TO CUSTOMERS:
The grantee shall at the time service is initiated, either for the first time or by reconnection, and at least annually thereafter, provide the customer with
written information covering the following:
A. Instructions for using all equipment, including instructions for use in conjunction with customer-owned equipment.
B. The fact that A/B switches are available.
C. The procedures and charges to change service(s)
D. What to do in case of a problem, trouble shooting, and where to call for service.
E. A channel chart and price list.
F. Billing policy.
G. The fact that customer service representatives and service technicians are to identify themselves by name.
H. The fact that customers have the right to speak to a supervisor.
I. The appropriate regulatory authority with whom to register a complaint and a listed phone number. Members of the Cable Council shall have the Cable
Council listed as their representative.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 422/470
J. A customer may request a copy of the above listed information at any time for no charge. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-16: AGREEMENTS; PROMOTIONS:
The City and the Cable Council shall be placed on the mailing list for all local, national, and co-op promotions. All promotions must clearly state the cost of
service to the subscriber, restrictions of the promotion, and the date the promotion expires. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-17: COMPLIANCE REPORTS:
The grantee shall provide a monthly report outlining specific performance in the following areas:
A. Telephone response performance in all areas listed in Section 11-5-10 of this Chapter.
B. An outage report shall include the number of outages, their location, duration, number of homes affected, and cause.
C. A service call report listing the number of service calls by city and by category.
D. A construction report listing the progress made over the last month, and the status of pending projects.
E. The franchise fee report shall include a statement of revenues by category, including infomercial revenues, leased access, advertising and production.
F. The grantee shall notify the City and the Cable Council of the resolution of all complaints received by the City or Cable Council within ten (10) days of
receipt of such complaint. This provision does not nullify other deadlines within the franchise agreement. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-18: PERFORMANCE EVALUATION:
The City and the grantee shall hold performance evaluation meetings in the month of February of each calendar year to discuss the performance of the
grantee during the previous year.
A. The City may periodically do a more extensive evaluation of the grantee's performance which may include a financial or technical audit. The grantee
shall fully cooperate with the City during all reviews and evaluations.
B. If at any time the City determines that reasonable evidence exists of inadequate performance, it may require the grantee to perform tests directed
toward the suspected inadequacies. The grantee shall prepare results and a report within thirty (30) days after notice.
C. Within thirty (30) to thirty six (36) months prior to the expiration of the franchise agreement, the City shall begin an evaluation of the grantee's
performance over the life of the franchise.
D. All evaluation meetings shall be open to the public and announced by the City in a newspaper of general circulation ten (10) days prior to such meeting.
Grantee shall place an announcement of the highest use origination channel on the cable system no less than three (3) times during the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. for five (5) consecutive days preceding the meeting. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-19: RENEWAL:
To the extent applicable, renewal shall be governed by the Cable Act. To the extent that the Cable Act is not applicable, renewal shall be governed by
Section 11-10-7 of this Title. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-20: SERVICE TO THE CITY:
Applications for franchises shall include proposals for the provision of public, educational and governmental access to the telecommunications system.
(Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-5-21: EMERGENCY OVERRIDE:
The grantee shall provide the equipment required to automatically interrupt programming on all channels of the subscriber network by means of an audio
message to present emergency information by public and law enforcement officials of the City. Such equipment shall be accessible at any Municipal facility
at no charge for the equipment, installation or maintenance. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 423/470
Chapter 6
FEES AND COMPENSATION
11-6-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide for the payment and recovery of all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the City related to the enforcement
and administration of this Title. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-6-2: APPLICATION AND REVIEW FEE:
A. Any applicant for a license or franchise pursuant to Chapters 3 and 4 of this Title shall pay a fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or two
percent (2%) of the estimated cost of the applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities, as certified by a professional engineer, whichever is
greater.
B. The application and review fee shall be deposited with the City as part of the application filed pursuant to this Chapter.
C. An applicant whose license or franchise application has been finally withdrawn, abandoned or denied shall, within sixty (60) days of its written request,
be refunded the balance of its deposit under this Section, less:
1. One thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00); and
2. All ascertainable costs and expenses incurred by the City in connection with the application. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-6-3: OTHER CITY COSTS:
All license or franchise grantees shall, within thirty (30) days after written demand therefor, reimburse the City for all direct and indirect costs and expenses
incurred by the City in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996,
eff. 10-31-1996)
11-6-4: COMPENSATION FOR USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAYS:
Licensees shall pay compensation for use of the public right of ways according to the following scale:
A. Fifty cents ($0.50) per linear foot for each inch in diameter of aerial transmission lines.
B. Sixty one cents ($0.61) per linear foot for underground transmission lines or conduit of four inches (4") or less in diameter.
C. One dollar ($1.00) per linear foot for underground transmission lines or conduit over four inches (4"), but less than eight inches (8") in diameter.
D. One dollar fifty cents ($1.50) per linear foot for underground transmission lines or conduits over eight inches (8") in diameter.
This fee will be adjusted in five (5) year intervals, based upon the cumulative changes in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners in the
Chicago region. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-6-5: COMPENSATION FOR CITY PROPERTY:
If the right is granted, by lease, license, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy City property for the installation of telecommunications facilities, the
compensation to be paid shall be fixed by the City. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-6-6: CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE:
Prior to the issuance of a construction permit, the person seeking a permit shall pay a permit fee equal to one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the estimated
cost of constructing the telecommunications facilities, as certified by the applicant's professional engineer and approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 0-96-
78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-6-7: ACCESS LINE FEE:
Unless otherwise agreed in an agreement, each telecommunications grantee shall pay an access line fee of thirty eight cents ($0.38) per access line to the
City as reimbursement for the City's costs in connection with reviewing, inspecting and supervising the use and occupancy of the public right of ways on
behalf of the public and existing and future uses. This fee will be adjusted in five (5) year intervals, based upon the cumulative change in the Consumer
Price Index for Urban Wage Earners in the Chicago region. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 424/470
11-6-8: FRANCHISE FEES:
Each cable television grantee shall pay a franchise fee to the City of five percent (5%) of gross revenues as reimbursement for the City's costs in
connection with reviewing, inspecting and supervising the use and occupancy of the public right of ways on behalf of the public and future users, and to
support public, educational and governmental access.
A. The application for franchise may include proposals for the provision of public, educational and governmental access and service in lieu of this
requirement. If such proposal is accepted by the City, it shall be incorporated into the franchise granted.
B. The City expressly reserves the right to increase franchise fees to the amount allowed by Federal law. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-6-9: PAYMENT:
A. Franchise Fees shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the close of the grantee's monthly reporting period and accompanied by a report prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, in sufficient detail to show the gross revenues, by service category, for the month just
concluded, and the basis for the computation and other relevant facts.
B. All annual fees will be paid within sixty (60) days following the close of the grantee's fiscal year.
C. Within one hundred twenty (120) days following the close of the grantee's fiscal year, a statement shall be provided, prepared by an independent
certified public accountant, certifying the accuracy of the reported information.
D. Any overpayment or under-recovery of said franchise fee shall be credited against, or added to, future payments due to the City (as the case may be),
or due on demand to the City (as the case may be) in the event that said franchisee discontinues its franchise. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-
1996)
11-6-10: AUDIT:
The City shall have the right to inspect the grantee's income records, the right to audit, and recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this
Title. Any additional amount found due as a result of the audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days following written notice to the grantee. The cost of the
audit shall be borne by the grantee if it is properly determined that the grantee's annual payment for the preceding year would have increased by two
percent (2%), otherwise, the cost of the audit shall be borne by the City. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-6-11: INTEREST:
In the event that any fees or recomputed amount is not made on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest shall be charged from such
date at an annual rate of two percent (2%) over prime. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-6-12: REGULATORY FEES AND COMPENSATION NOT A TAX:
The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this Chapter, and any compensation charged and paid for the public right of ways and provided for in this
Chapter, are separate from, and in addition to, any and all Federal, State, local and City taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a
telecommunications carrier or provider, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of telecommunications
service. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
Chapter 7
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN RIGHTS OF WAY
11-7-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the city's jurisdiction, which
will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city rights of way and the city as a
whole.
B. Intent: In enacting this chapter, the city intends to exercise its authority over the rights of way in the city and, in particular, the use of the public ways and
property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
1. Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;
2. Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
3. Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the city's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or public property;
4. Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 425/470
5. Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
6. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
7. Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that characterize the city's residential neighborhoods;
8. Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights of way; and
9. Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.
C. Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way within the
jurisdiction of the city. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by
the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
D. Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The city, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or
similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the city rights of way. Utilities that are
not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the city enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the city may
provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
E. Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
1. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the city, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
2. Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the city and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
F. Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent
of such conflict.
G. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the
utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
H. Sound Engineering Judgment: The city shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards, conditions,
and requirements expressed in this chapter when the city so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the city to regulate its
rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association Of State Highway And Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society For Testing And Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CITY: The city of Prospect Heights.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 426/470
CODE: The municipal code of the city of Prospect Heights.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a right of way.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The city director of public works or his or her designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use
of the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary
or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the
parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The city engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or
operated by the city.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by
the city engineer to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video
competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 11-7-4 and 11-7-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 427/470
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the city. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other
similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the city has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than
those of the city. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include any real or personal city property that is not specifically described in the previous two (2)
sentences and shall not include city buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section 11-7-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular
mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way
communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more
other specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the
form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a
cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the city through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined in this chapter.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-
201(v).
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 0-10-20,
7-12-2010)
11-7-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the city shall register on January 1 of each year with the engineer, providing the utility's name, address and
regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with
emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of
insurance as required in section 11-7-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
A. Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any city right of
way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter), or 4) materially
increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first filing an
application with the city engineer and obtaining a permit from the city therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No permit shall be required
for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right of way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 428/470
B. Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the city and shall be filed in such number of
duplicate copies as the city may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain
proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
C. Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
1. The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2. The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
3. The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
4. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and
detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely
to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
5. Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city:
a. A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and
vehicular traffic; and
b. An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous
materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the city and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance
with this section unless the city finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
6. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
7. Evidence of insurance as required in section 11-7-8 of this chapter;
8. Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 11-7-10 of this chapter;
9. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this chapter (see section 11-7-21 of this chapter); and
10. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the city.
D. Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities: In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
1. In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas
distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required
by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
2. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;
3. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies, have been
satisfied;
4. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division
of water pollution control and the metropolitan water reclamation district or such other local or state entities with jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or
5. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
E. Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the city within thirty (30) days after the
change necessitating the amendment.
F. Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be
accompanied by a fee in an amount established by the city. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal
electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
A. City Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the city engineer within
a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the
city engineer shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the city engineer is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the city engineer shall issue a permit therefor as soon as
practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the city engineer, that the construction proposed
under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. Additional City Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 429/470
1. Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the city that it
intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the city not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty
(30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The city engineer shall specify the portion of the right of way upon which the
facility may be placed, used and constructed.
2. In the event that the city engineer fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a) ten (10) days after
service of notice to the city by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or b) twenty five (25)
days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications
retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
3. Upon the provision of such specification by the city, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section 11-7-4 of this chapter the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the city an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this section.
C. Additional City Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications by a utility
that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days after
submission to the city, unless otherwise acted upon by the city, provided the holder has complied with applicable city codes, ordinances, and
regulations. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
A. Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in
accordance with this chapter on city rights of way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of
others who may have an interest in the rights of way.
B. Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
C. Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall
be held at a date, time and place designated by the city with such city representatives in attendance as the city deems necessary. The meeting shall be
for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including,
without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of
rights of way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners.
D. Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the city does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the
city and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications
submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the city within ninety (90) days after the completion of
the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved
in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a request for variance in
accordance with section 11-7-21 of this chapter. If the city denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the
right of way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-8: INSURANCE:
A. Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and
naming the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections A1
and A2 of this section:
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X",
"C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
a. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
b. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
c. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
2. Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;
3. Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
4. Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 430/470
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
B. Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary
policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
C. Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the city within ten (10) days following receipt of a
written request therefor from the city.
D. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by
the City, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the City Administrator of such intent to cancel or
not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and
furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
E. Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this section. A
utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under
subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection A of this
section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
F. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the utility to the city and any person for any of the matters that are the
subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the
recovery of any amounts thereunder.
G. Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally
able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and of a
class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents,
contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities,
whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however,
that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-
12-2010)
11-7-10: SECURITY:
A. Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall serve as security for:
1. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this chapter;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant to this chapter; and
3. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee
is required by this chapter to perform that the city must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform
or complete, and all other payments due the city from the permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable law.
B. Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the city in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the
city, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the city. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection shall, at a
minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the city and the permittee;
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the city of any amounts covered by it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the city and within the state of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 431/470
C. Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at least as
good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the city engineer, and may also include reasonable,
directly related costs that the city estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities
proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the city, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one
location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in
the previous phase or phases, the city engineer may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which
shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the
greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection for any single phase.
D. Withdrawals: The city, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under
this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the city for such amount within the
fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3. Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by the permittee; or
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the city determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
E. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the city that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the
permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection C of this section.
F. Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the city, upon
written request for said withdrawal to the city, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance
required in subsection C of this section.
G. Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the
security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the
city for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the
security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the city to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss
or damage incurred by the city as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
H. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this
chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other right the
city may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be
infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. City Right To Revoke Permit: The city may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
2. Noncompliance with this chapter;
3. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way presents a
direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
B. Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The city shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter stating
the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.
C. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the city,
the permittee shall have the following options:
1. Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the city
within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the rights of way to the
satisfaction of the city providing written proof of such removal to the city within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection.
D. Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the city may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery
of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 432/470
E. Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the city or its
designee may, at the option of the city: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject
facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and
property of the city. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the city for all costs of removal. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
A. Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the city no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right of way or
change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under
the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in the right of
way.
B. Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the city's right of way.
C. Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 0-10-
20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and
standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
1. "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
2. "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
3. "Highway Design Manual";
4. "Highway Standards Manual";
5. "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
6. "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. adm. code section 545);
7. "Flagger's Handbook"; and
8. "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
B. Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the city engineer shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final. If
requested, the city engineer shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future.
(Ord. 0-10-20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
A. Minimum Requirements: The city's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this code.
B. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers,
when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any
work on the rights of way.
C. Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
D. Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided,
however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 11-7-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.
E. Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention
by the city. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be
subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 433/470
1. No Interference With City Facilities: No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the city engineer determines that the proposed location will
require the relocation or displacement of any of the city's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the
city's utility facilities.
2. Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said
right of way.
3. No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
4. No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
5. Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
B. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment will
permit;
b. Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
c. Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
d. No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
e. Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way line.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. The facility is located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right of way line;
b. A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering
judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
c. In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more
than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line and any above grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right
of way line or as near as practicable.
C. Facilities Crossing Highways:
1. No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city highways may require
the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting
from the installation of such crossing facilities.
2. Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3. Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree (90) angle to the centerline as practicable.
4. Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83 Ill. adm.
code 305);
b. Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
c. Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5. Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance free service life; and
b. Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
6. Markers: The city may require the utility to provide a marker at each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may
also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707 [1989]).
D. Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The city may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
E. Freestanding Facilities:
1. The city may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right of way.
2. The city may require any freestanding facility located within a right of way to be screened from view.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 434/470
F. Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be installed only if:
1. No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic
qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single
pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the
installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged.
G. Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable
supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.
2. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based
upon the following considerations:
a. The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the
event of damage to or failure of the facility;
b. The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;
c. The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
d. The proposed method of attachment;
e. The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
f. The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g. The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
h. The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved.
H. Appearance Standards:
1. The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
2. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right of
way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-
12-2010)
11-7-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
A. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
1. Boring Or Jacking:
a. Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the city
engineer from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or
jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be
clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all
vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
b. Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
c. Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
d. Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
e. Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved or protected shall be bored under or
around the root system.
2. Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of section
603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
a. Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe/line testing. Only one-half (1/2) of
any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the city engineer.
b. Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 435/470
added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow
for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off road location.
c. Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved.
3. Backfilling:
a. Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and
materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
b. For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any
backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the engineer, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any
pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement,
sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the engineer.
4. Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic.
If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is permitted under section 11-7-21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
a. Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the engineer.
b. Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the city.
c. All saw cuts shall be full depth.
d. For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3)
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen
before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate.
5. Encasement:
a. Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by
one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the city.
b. The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be located
in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
c. In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or city approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the city. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
d. In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
e. In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
f. If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt
the right of way.
6. Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
Electric lines 30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service lines 18 to 24 inches (0.46 m to 0.6 m, as determined by city)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
B. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
1. Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
a. Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within city rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305 (formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled
"rules for construction of electric power and communication lines", and the national electrical safety code.
b. Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall
be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
c. Underground Facilities:
(1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 436/470
(2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only
if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening
for cable installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.
(3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national electrical safety code.
d. Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snow
drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the city. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days after placement.
2. Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
a. The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
b. Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
c. Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
d. Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a city approved
manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 - transportation of
natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code for
pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5. Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage
lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction
In Illinois".
6. Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area
may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the engineer. With the approval of the
engineer, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances
shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
C. Materials:
1. General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the Illinois
commerce commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
2. Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the right of way without the prior written approval of the city engineer. When such
storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior to and during
installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way and other
property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be obtained from the city.
3. Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the city shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of
the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions:
1. Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of the city, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are
such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the engineer when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of construction are those set forth in section 3-5-2 of this code.
E. Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the city shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and location of
existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city will make its permit records
available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the city or by JULIE, a utility
shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois
underground facilities damage prevention act1. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
A. Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control activities in the
right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the city as
permitted by law.
B. Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right of way and that is not performed
pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall
require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 437/470
1. Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration
date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
2. Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the
tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The city will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society Of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation
for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The city may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would
leave them in an unacceptable condition.
C. Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The city may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special
significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
D. Chemical Use:
1. Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the
city for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease.
2. Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the engineer
that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
A. Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the city, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the rights of way.
B. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the city, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
C. Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of way of
the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit,
the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or
removing a facility.
D. Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights of way of the city, the utility shall notify the city within ninety (90) days.
Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the city engineer determines that such removal
will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the city does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to
remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the city, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any
portion of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights of way are
disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the city. This includes restoration of entrances
and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the city engineer. Such cleanup and repair may
be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right of way to a condition substantially
equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the city engineer
for good cause shown. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
A. General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory
to the city and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection
for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the
traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 438/470
signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the city engineer or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or
her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature of
the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the city police shall be notified immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling
public.
C. Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the city a description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight (48) hours
after an emergency repair. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-21: VARIANCES:
A. Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the city engineer as a
part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a
variance should be granted.
B. Authority To Grant Variances: The city engineer shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified in the variance
request on an individual basis.
C. Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The city engineer may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
1. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship that
would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
2. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
D. Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for authorizing a variance, the city engineer may require the utility requesting the
variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the purposes
of this chapter.
E. Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the city engineer
under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the city council, or such other board or commission as it may designate. The
application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or
determination. The city council shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the city council's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least
seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The city council shall timely decide the appeal. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the city will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will
not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested
action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the city's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility
that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the city.
Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 0-10-20, 7-12-2010)
11-7-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 0-10-
20, 7-12-2010)
Chapter 8
ADMINISTRATIVE
11-8-1: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The grantee shall maintain books and records of its operation within the city to show total revenues by service category in sufficient detail, consistent with
generally accepted accounting principles.
A. Grantee shall maintain all books and records required for regulation of rate by the appropriate governmental authority.
B. Grantee shall maintain such books and records for the city separate from any other operation; provided, however, that any expenses, expenditures or
revenues which apply to both the system in the city and any other operation shall be reasonably allocated between all such operations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 439/470
C. Grantee shall keep appropriate records of all requests for installation of service, service calls, and outages, showing the date completed and any
corrective action taken. A summary of the above listed information shall be submitted to the city prior to the annual performance evaluation meeting.
D. The required books and records shall be made available in the grantee's local office during normal business hours, for inspection and audit by the city
within thirty (30) days after such request has been made. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-8-2: DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION:
The grantee shall submit to the city copies of all decisions, correspondence and actions by any federal, state and local courts, regulatory agencies and
other governmental bodies relating to its telecommunications operations within the city.
A. Copies of the grantee's schedule of charges, contract or application forms, subscriber user service, policies regarding the processing of subscriber
complaints, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted as the grantee's policy in
connection with subscriber or user services within the city shall be filed with the city and updated as necessary, and shall be made available for public
inspection in the grantee's local office.
B. Copies of all correspondence, petitions, reports, applications and other documents filed by the grantee with federal or state agencies having jurisdiction
over telecommunications, or the same received from said agencies, which apply to the grantee's operations within the city, shall be furnished
simultaneously to the city by the grantee.
C. Within ten (10) days of a written request from the city, each grantee shall furnish the city with information sufficient to demonstrate:
1. That the grantee has complied with all requirements of this title.
2. That all municipal sales, message and/or telecommunications taxes or applicable franchise fees due the city in connection with the
telecommunications service and facilities provided by the grantee have been properly collected and paid by the grantee.
3. All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the grantee with respect to its facilities within the public rights of way shall be made
available for inspection by the city at reasonable times and intervals. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
Chapter 9
LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION
11-9-1: LIABILITY:
The grantee shall be responsible for:
A. Any damage or loss to any real or personal property of the City or any person, and for any injury to or death of any person, or officer, employee or agent
of the City arising out of or in connection with grantee's negligence or misconduct in the construction, installation, use, operation, maintenance, repair,
and/or removal of the telecommunications system, or its failure to act in connection therewith.
B. The negligence, acts or omissions of any entity used by the grantee, including an affiliate, when such entity is involved directly or indirectly in the
construction, installations, use, operation, maintenance, repair, and/or removal of the telecommunications system, as if the acts or omissions of such
entity were the acts or omissions of the grantee. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-9-2: INDEMNIFICATION:
Each license or franchise agreement shall include the following:
A. Grantee shall, and does hereby agree to, save, indemnify and hold the City, its corporate authorities, elected and appointed officials, officers, boards,
commissions, legal counsel, employees and agents harmless from any injury, claim, demand, suit, judgment, execution, liability, debt, damages or
penalty (the "claims") arising out of, resulting from, or alleged to arise out of or result from, grantee's negligence, including, but not limited to, its failure
to act, or misconduct in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of the telecommunications system, or the distribution of any service
over the telecommunications system, whether such acts or omissions are those of the grantee or its officers, employees, agent or contractors and
whether or not any such act or omission is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Title.
B. Grantee shall, and does hereby agree to, pay all expenses incurred by the City in defending itself with regard to any and all of the claims. These
expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses, such as attorney and expert fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services
rendered by any employee of the City. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-9-3: RELEASE AND WAIVER OF CLAIMS:
Grantee shall have no recourse against the City for any loss, expense or damage resulting from the terms and conditions of this Title or because of the
City's enforcement thereof. Grantee hall be deemed to expressly agree that it accepts this Title relying solely upon its own investigation and understanding
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 440/470
of the power and authority of the City to grant the rights contained herein and that, in partial consideration of the grant of such rights, grantee waives and
releases the City from any and all claims of damages of any kind whatsoever, either known or unknown, existing or future, which it may have in connection
with any matter specified in this Title, unless such damage is directly caused by the malicious or intentional acts of the City. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff.
10-31-1996)
11-9-4: GRANTEE INSURANCE:
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following liability
insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the City, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as coinsureds:
A. Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:
1. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
2. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting for any one accident; and
3. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability.
B. Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a limit of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for each person and three million dollars
($3,000,000.00) for each accident.
C. Workers' compensation within statutory limits and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
D. Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard and products complete hazard with limits of not less
than three million dollars ($3,000,000.00).
E. The liability insurance policies required by this Section shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the telecommunications license,
authorization or franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is operating without a license, authorization or franchise, or engaged
in the removal of its telecommunications facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled, nor the intention not to renew be stated until ninety (90) days after receipt
by the City, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the City of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
F. Within sixty (60) days after receipt by the City of said notice, and in no event later than thirty (30) days prior to said cancellation, the grantee shall obtain
and furnish to the City replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Section. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-9-5: PERFORMANCE AND CONSTRUCTION SURETY:
Before a license or franchise granted pursuant to this Title is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the grantee shall provide and deposit monies, bonds,
letters of credit or other instruments in form and substance acceptable to the City to unconditionally guarantee full and complete performance of the
requirements imposed by this Title or by an applicable license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-9-6: SECURITY FUND:
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, each grantee shall establish a permanent security fund (the "Security Fund") with the City
by depositing the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) with the City in cash, an unconditional letter of credit, or other instrument acceptable to the
City, which shall at a minimum:
A. Provide that it shall not be canceled without the prior written consent of the City: and
B. Not require the consent of the grantee prior to the collection by the City of any amount covered by said instrument; and
C. Shall be maintained at the sole expense of the grantee so long as any of the grantee's telecommunications facilities are located within the public right of
ways of the City. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-9-7: PURPOSE:
The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
A. The full and complete performance of this Chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the City pays or incurs because of any failure
attributable to the grantee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the City.
B. The payment by grantee of all liens and taxes, and all damages, claims, costs or expenses that the City has paid or incurred by reason of any act or
default of the grantee, including, but not limited to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 441/470
1. Any restoration work that the City must perform itself or have completed as a consequence of grantee's failure to so perform or complete; or
2. All other payments due to the City pursuant to this Title. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-9-8: WITHDRAWALS:
The City may withdraw from the Security Fund under the following circumstances:
A. Grantee fails to make any payment required to be made by the grantee under this Title; or
B. Grantee fails to pay any taxes or liens relating to the telecommunications system that are due and unpaid; or
C. Grantee fails to pay the City any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the City has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any act or default
of the grantee; or
D. Grantee fails to comply with the provisions of this Title that the City determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
(Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-9-9: NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL:
Before any sums are withdrawn from the Security Fund, the City shall give written notice to the grantee:
A. Describing the act, default or failure to be remedied, or the damages, cost or expenses which the City has incurred by reason of grantee's act or default;
B. Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to first remedy the existing or ongoing default or failure, if applicable;
C. Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to pay any monies due the City before the City withdraws the amount thereof from the Security Fund, if
applicable;
D. That the grantee will be given an opportunity to review the act, default or failure described in the notice with the City designee. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-
1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-9-10: REPLENISHMENT:
Grantee shall replenish the Security Fund within fourteen (14) days after written notice from the City that there is a deficiency in the amount of the Fund.
(Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-9-11: INTEREST:
Any and all interest accrued on the amount in the Security Fund may be withdrawn by the grantee. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-9-12: CLOSING AND RETURN OF SECURITY FUND:
Upon any termination of the rights granted herein, other than a revocation, grantee shall be entitled to the return of the Security Fund, or portion thereof as
remains on deposit at such termination, and after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the City for the failure by grantee to comply with
any provision of this Title. In the event of any revocation of the rights granted herein, the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall
become the property of the City to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the City as a result of said revocation,
provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the grantee. (Ord. 0-96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
11-9-13: CONSTRUCTION AND COMPLETION BOND:
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, a performance bond written by a corporate surety acceptable to the City equal to at least
one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of constructing grantee's telecommunications facilities within the public right of ways of the City shall be
deposited before construction is commenced.
A. The construction bond shall remain in force until one year after substantial completion of the work, as determined by the City Engineer, including
restoration of public right of ways and other property affected by the construction.
B. The construction bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the City:
1. Timely completion of construction;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 442/470
2. Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes and standards;
3. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the City;
4. Restoration of the public right of ways and other property affected by the construction;
5. The submission of as-built drawings after completion of the work as required by this Title;
6. Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work. (Ord. 0-96-78,
10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
Chapter 10
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
11-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the city.
A. Gross revenues shall include the following:
1. Recurring charges for cable or video service.
2. Event based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
4. Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair charges.
5. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service termination
charges.
6. Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments.
7. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or
exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the city.
The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the city divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional
or national compensation arrangement.
8. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with
respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's
network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this definition.
9. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion
of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder can
reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
10. The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b).
B. Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
1. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
2. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued authorization
to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 443/470
3. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received
from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services,
information services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic
publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
4. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the city and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
5. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
6. Security deposits collected from subscribers.
7. Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of
the cable service or video service.
C. Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the
affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the city for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a city for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and
which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or
any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 0-10-22, 7-12-2010)
11-10-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
A. Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the city.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
C. Notice To The City: The holder shall notify the city at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video
service in the city.
D. Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the city. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the first
day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-401(b)(6) to the city.
E. Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the
fee.
F. Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with
the city in which a fee is paid.
G. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 0-10-22, 7-12-2010)
11-10-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 444/470
A. PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the city in addition to the fee
imposed pursuant to section 11-10-2 of this chapter.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the
percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the city or its designee for PEG access support in the city.
C. Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the city or to the entity designated by the city to manage PEG access. The holder's
liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth in subsection 11-10-2D of this chapter.
D. Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the
fee.
E. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-
301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous
sentence may be credited against the fees that that operator owes under subsection B of this section. (Ord. 0-10-22, 7-12-2010)
11-10-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 0-10-22, 7-12-2010)
11-10-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the city, including any tax that is or
may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect any
requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the city's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone
service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of
government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 0-10-22, 7-12-2010)
11-10-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
A. Audit Requirement: The city will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit
of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the city imposes on other cable service or video service providers in its
jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the city. If all
local franchises between the city and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the city pursuant to the local
government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an
accord that the amounts are correct.
B. Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the city's submission of an invoice for the sum.
(Ord. 0-10-22, 7-12-2010)
11-10-7: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by this city pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of
rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 0-10-22, 7-12-2010)
Chapter 11
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
11-11-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
A. Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the city's boundaries.
B. Amendments: Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be
incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference
without formal action by the corporate authorities of the city. (Ord. 0-10-21, 7-12-2010)
11-11-2: ENFORCEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 445/470
The city does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the city. (Ord. 0-10-21, 7-12-2010)
11-11-3: PENALTIES:
The city, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the cable and
video protection law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively
neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed twenty five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
A. "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any provision
of the law.
B. The city shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least thirty (30) days
from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
C. A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the
cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 0-10-21, 7-12-2010)
11-11-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The city hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the
violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. (Ord. 0-10-21, 7-
12-2010)
Title 12
FINE AND FEE SCHEDULE
Chapter 1
SCHEDULE OF FINES AND FEES
12-1-1: FINES AND FEES SCHEDULE:
Fine Less than or equal to $500.00 1-4-1 Fine for any prohibited act or violation in this Code
unless other fine is otherwise noted in this Code
Code
Enforcement
Fine Less than or equal to $50.00 1-5-27 Fine for any elected official acting or appearing in a
lewd or disgraceful manner or who uses
opprobrious, obscene or insulting language to or
about any member of the Council or who does not
obey the order of the Chair
Code
Enforcement
Fee $26.62 1-7-
15I1
Monthly customer delivery charge Water
Fee 11.47 1-7-
15I1
Monthly infrastructure reserve charge Water
Fee 5.99 1-7-
15I1
Monthly debt service charge Water
Fee 6.51 1-7-
15I1
Water supply charge per 1,000 gallons Water
Fee $35.00 (first 1,000 gallons; $6.00/1,000 thereafter) 1-7-
15I2
Daily bulk water usage Water
Fee $175.00 (first 2,000 gallons; $6.00/1,000 thereafter) 1-7-
15I2
Weekly bulk water usage Water
Fee $756.00 (first 9,000 gallons; $6.00/1,000 thereafter) 1-7-
15I2
Monthly bulk water usage Water
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 446/470
Late fee
10% 1-7-15J
Late water payments (all water payments are due
30 days after the billing date as it appears on the
bill) will incur a penalty
Water
Late fee
1% 1-7-15J
Payments overdue for more than 30 days past the
deadline will incur a monthly interest charge,
compounded monthly
Water
Late fee
$15.00 1-11-7A
In the event that payment is not made within 90
days of the original issue date, an additional cost of
$15.00 shall be assessed to defray the cost of
collection
Admin
Fee 20.00 1-11-10
Administrative bail processing fee Police
Fine Less than or equal to $500.00 1-14-22
Any person convicted of violating title 1, chapter 14
of this Code relating to emergency services and
disaster agency
Code
Enforcement
Fee $0.15/page 1-18-1F
FOIA copying fee for black and white copies for
each page after the first 50 pages
Admin
Fee $1.00/document 1-18-1F
FOIA certified copies Admin
Fee Actual cost to city 1-18-1F
FOIA large format audiotapes or digital copies Admin
Fine Not < $10.00 nor > $500.00 2-1-10 Fine for any person violating any provision of title 2,
chapter 1 of this code
Code
enforcement
Tax 1% 2-2-1A Municipal retailers' occupation tax Admin
Tax 1% 2-2-2A Municipal service occupation tax Admin
Tax 1% 2-2-3A Municipal use tax (for items purchased outside of
Illinois and titled or registered with an agency of
Illinois government)
Admin
Tax 1% 2-2-4A Municipal automobile renting use tax Admin
Tax 1% 2-2-5A Municipal automobile renting occupation tax Admin
Tax 5% 2-2-6A1
Municipal utility tax for persons engaged in the
business of transmitting messages by means of
electricity (internet)
Admin
Tax 5% 2-2-6A2
Municipal utility tax for persons engaged in the
business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or
selling gas for consumption within the corporate
limits of Prospect Heights (natural gas)
Admin
Tax 5% 2-2-6A3
Municipal utility tax for persons engaged in the
business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or
selling electricity for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of Prospect Heights (electricity)
Admin
Tax 5% 2-2-7A1
Hotel operators' occupation tax imposed upon all
persons engaged in the business of renting,
leasing, or letting rooms in a hotel; excluding gross
receipts from renting, leasing or letting to
permanent residents of a hotel
Admin
Fine 1% 2-2-7H Interest on late payment Admin
Tax 6% 2-2-
8B1a
Telecommunications tax for the act or privilege of
originating or receiving in the city intrastate
telecommunications for such telecommunications
purchased at retail from a retailer by such person
Admin
Tax 0.5% 2-2-9A Non-home rule municipal retailers' and service
occupation taxes
Admin
Tax 1.5% 2-2-10C
Places for eating tax Admin
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 447/470
Fine Not < $200.00 nor > $750.00 for first offense 2-2-
10G4
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying,
omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with or
unlawfully resisting or opposing the enforcement of
any of the provisions of section 2-2-10 of this code
relating to places for eating tax
Code
enforcement
Fine Not < $500.00 nor > $750.00 for second and each
subsequent offense in any 180 day period
2-2-
10G4
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying,
omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with or
unlawfully resisting or opposing the enforcement of
any of the provisions of section 2-2-10 of this code
relating to places for eating tax
Code
enforcement
Fee $ 100.00 2-3-4 Application fee for liquor license (1 time,
nonrefundable)
Admin
Fee 3,300.00 2-3-9 Annual fee Class A liquor license Admin
Fee 1,650.00 2-3-9 Annual fee Class A-1 liquor license Admin
Fee 4,400.00 2-3-9 Annual fee Class A-2 liquor license Admin
Fee 4,000.00 2-3-9 Annual fee Class A-3 liquor license Admin
Fee 2,200.00 2-3-9 Annual fee Class B liquor license Admin
Fee 1,925.00 2-3-9 Annual fee Class B-1 liquor license Admin
Fee 2,200.00 2-3-9 Annual fee Class B-2 liquor license Admin
Fee 2,200.00 2-3-9 Annual fee Class B-3 liquor license Admin
Fee 3,300.00 2-3-9 Annual fee Class C liquor license Admin
Fee 1,650.00 2-3-9 Annual fee Class C-1 liquor license Admin
Fee 3,300.00 2-3-9 Annual fee Class C-2 liquor license Admin
Fee 1,650.00 2-3-9 Annual fee Class C-3 liquor license Admin
Fee 0.00 2-3-9 Annual fee Class D liquor license Admin
Fee $55.00 plus $100.00 to $1,000.00 deposit 2-3-9 Daily liquor license Admin
Fee $440.00 2-3-9 Annual fee Sunday brunch liquor license Admin
Fee 25.00 2-3-9-1
Annual fee for video gaming terminal per terminal Admin
Warning
Fine up to $500.00 2-3-18 Alcohol sales to persons under 21 years of age and
persons in need of mental treatment
Police
Fine Less than or equal to $1,000.00 2-3-26 Fine for violation of the social host provisions of
title 2, chapter 3 of this Code
Code
Enforcement
Fee $25.00 2-4-3 Daily fee for amusement license to hold
menageries
Admin
Fee 25.00 2-4-3 Daily fee for amusement license to hold carnivals Admin
Fee 25.00 2-4-3 Daily fee for amusement license to hold exhibitions
of inanimate objects
Admin
Fee 25.00 2-4-3 Daily fee for amusement license for other
amusements
Admin
Fee 25.00 2-4-3 Daily fee for amusement license for circuses Admin
Fee $15.00 for first table, $10.00 for each additional table 2-4-6B Billiard and pool table annual license Admin
Fee $100.00 for indoor performances; $200.00 for outdoor
motion picture establishments
2-4-8C Motion picture and theatrical annual license Admin
Fee $10.00 2-4-8D Daily license for motion pictures and theatricals on
unlicensed premises which are to be presented in
premises which are not covered by such license
fees
Admin
Fee 55.00 2-4-9 Annual license to operate a coin operated device,
machine or mechanism, to procure or reproduce
music (jukebox)
Admin
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 448/470
Fee $50.00 or $0.05 for each person, whichever is greater 2-4-10 Athletic exhibition tax on the number of people
attending a race, baseball game, boxing or
wrestling match, or any other athletic contest or
exhibition with an admission fee charged
Admin
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 2-4-11E
Fine for violation of any of the provisions of title 2,
chapter 4, "Amusements", of this code
Code
enforcement
Tax 3% 2-4A-
1A
Amusement tax on admission fees, participation
fees, viewing or other charges paid for the privilege
to participate in the amusements or to gain
admittance or access for viewing or witnessing the
amusements
Admin
Fine Not < $200.00 nor > $500.00 2-4A-7 Fine for violation of any provisions of title 2, chapter
4, article A of this code regarding amusement tax
Code
enforcement
Fee $495.00 2-5-4 Annual coin operator license Admin
Fee $66.00 per machine 2-5-6 Annual coin op proprietor license Admin
Fine Not < $50.00 nor > $500.00 2-5-10 Fine for violating any provisions of title 2, chapter 5,
"Coin Operated Amusement Devices", of this code
Code
enforcement
Fee $10.00 2-6A-2 1 day auctioneer's license Admin
Fee 50.00 2-6A-2 Annual auctioneer's license Admin
Fee $66.00 up to 2,000 square feet 2-6C-2 Annual paint and oil dealer license Admin
Fee $44.00 per 1,000 square feet above 2,000 square feet but
not greater than $300.00
2-6C-2 Annual paint and oil dealer license with more than
2,000 square feet
Admin
Fee $165.00 2-6D-
1C
Annual tobacco dealer license Admin
Fine $200.00 first offense, $500.00 each subsequent offense 2-6D-
5A
Fine for violation of title 2, chapter 6, article D of
this code regarding tobacco dealers
Code
enforcement
Fee $ 250.00 2-6E-
3B
Fee for application for a license to do business as a
pawnbroker within the city
Admin
Fee 1,500.00 2-6E-5 Fee for annual pawnbroker license Admin
Fine Not > $750.00 2-6E-
17C
Fine for any pawnbroker licensee violating any of
the provisions of title 2, chapter 6, article E,
"Pawnbrokers", of this code
Police
Fee $132.00 2-7A-3 Annual barbershop/beauty salon/nails license Admin
Fee 49.50 2-7A-3 Annual barbershop/beauty salon/nails license
public washroom add on license
Admin
Fee 66.00 2-7B-3 Annual dry cleaning license Admin
Fee 66.00 2-7C-
1B
Annual laundry license Admin
Fee 115.50 2-7C-
1B
Annual laundry public restroom add on license Admin
Fee 100.00 2-8A-
2C
Annual contractor registration Building and
zoning
Fee 25.00 2-8B-2 Annual electrical contractor registration Building and
zoning
Fee 50.00 2-8C-2 Annual heating, air conditioning and refrigeration
contractor registration
Building and
zoning
Fee $25.00 per cart or vehicle 2-9A-
2A
Annual hawker or peddler license using a cart,
wagon, auto or any other vehicle
Admin
Fee $5.00 per cart or vehicle 2-9A-
2A
Monthly hawker or peddler license using a cart,
wagon, auto or any other vehicle
Admin
Fee $2.00 per cart or vehicle 2-9A-
2A
Daily hawker or peddler license using a cart,
wagon, auto or any other vehicle
Admin
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 449/470
Fee $50.00 2-9A-
2B
Annual hawker or peddler license not using any
vehicle
Admin
Fee 10.00 2-9A-
2B
Monthly hawker or peddler license not using any
vehicle
Admin
Fee 5.00 2-9A-
2B
Daily hawker or peddler license not using any
vehicle
Admin
Fine Not < $50.00 nor > $50.00 2-9A-3 Fine for violating section 2-9A-1 of this code Code
enforcement
Fine $ 25.00 2-9A-3 Fine for not paying citation issued for violation of
section 2-9A-1 of this code within 10 days of
issuance
Code
enforcement
Fee 100.00 2-9B-4 Application fee for certificate of registration to be a
solicitor in the city of Prospect Heights
Admin
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 2-9B-
9C
Fine for violation of any provisions of section 2-9B-
9 of this code
Code
enforcement
Fee $100.00 for 1 month 2-9C-2 Monthly license to be an itinerant merchant Admin
Fee $10.00 per day 2-9C-2 Daily license to be an itinerant merchant Admin
Fee $25.00 plus $10.00/vehicle 2-10-3 Annual livery license to operate livery vehicle(s) Admin
Fee $5.00 2-10-3 Annual license to drive a livery vehicle Admin
Fee $66.00 plus $66.00 per pedestal 2-11-3 Annual filling station license Admin
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $100.00 for each offense 2-12-5 Fine for violating any provisions of title 2, chapter
12, "Garage Sales", of this code
Code
enforcement
Fine Not < $50.00 nor > $750.00 for each offense 3-1-
14D2
Fine to owner of food establishment for failure to
provide necessary TB exams and immunizations
information
Code
enforcement
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 3-1-16 Fine for violating any provisions of title 3, chapter 1,
"Food Dealers And Establishments", of this code
Code
enforcement
Fee $132.00 3-1A-
3A
Annual food service establishment license, 1 - 2
employees
Admin
Fee 198.00 3-1A-
3A
Annual food service establishment license, 3 - 4
employees
Admin
Fee 297.00 3-1A-
3A
Annual food service establishment license, 5 - 7
employees
Admin
Fee 495.00 3-1A-
3A
Annual food service establishment license, 8 - 10
employees
Admin
Fee 660.00 3-1A-
3A
Annual food service establishment license, 11 or
more
Admin
Fee 120.00 3-1A-
3A
Annual food service establishment license, no
employees or where the help is donated
Admin
Fee 132.00 3-1A-
3B
Annual food dealer's license Admin
Fee 132.00 3-1A-
3C
Annual milk dealer's license Admin
Fee 132.00 3-1A-
3D
Annual food service vehicle license Admin
Fee 132.00 3-1A-
3E
Annual frozen dessert establishment license Admin
Fee 132.00 3-1A-3F
Annual food refrigeration plan license Admin
Fee 132.00 3-1A-
3G
Annual food processing establishment license Admin
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 450/470
Fee 88.00 3-1A-
3H
Annual food vending machine license Admin
Fee 132.00 3-1A-3I
Annual ice machine license Admin
Fee 132.00 3-1A-3J
Annual self-service cooler (walk-in) license Admin
Fee 22.00 3-1A-
3K
Annual gumball vending machine $0.01 - $0.49 per
machine license
Admin
Fee 38.50 3-1A-
3K
Annual gumball vending machine $50.00 and up
license
Admin
Fee 35.00 3-1A-3L
4 health and sanitation inspections per year
(included in business license fee for those
businesses which require business licenses)
Admin
Fee 35.00 3-1A-3L
Each additional health and sanitation inspection
required
Admin
Fine Not < $200.00 3-2-2E Fine for violating any provision of section 3-2-2,
"Prohibited Accumulations", of this code
Admin
Fine $200.00 3-2-2E Additional fine for failing to pay fine as denoted by
section 3-2-2 within 10 days
Admin
Fine Not < $100.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 3-2-7 Fine for violating any provision of title 3, chapter 2,
"Garbage And Refuse", of this code
Code
enforcement
Fine Not < $10.00 for a first offense; not < $25.00 for a second
offense; and not < $50.00 for each offense thereafter; in
no event shall the fine be > $500.00
3-3-14 Fine for violating any provisions of title 3, chapter 3,
"Nuisances", of this code
Code
enforcement
Fine Not < $50.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 3-4-7 Fine for violating any provision of title 3, chapter 4,
"Rat Control", of this code
Code
enforcement
Fine Not < $10.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 3-5-3 Fine for violating any provision of title 3, chapter 5,
"Noise Control", of this code
Code
enforcement
Fee $25.00 3-7-1 Annual property rental license for commercial
space
Admin
Fee $100.00 first inspection, $175.00 first reinspection,
$175.00 all subsequent reinspections in a calendar year
3-7-6 Property rental inspection fee Admin
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 3-8-6 Fine for violating any provision of title 3, chapter 8,
"Weed Control", of this code
Code
enforcement
Fee $2,559.00 3-9-9E Annual scavenger services (refuse) license Admin
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 3-9-10 Fine for violating any provision of title 3, chapter 9,
"Waste Disposal", of this Code
Code
Enforcement
Fee $25.00 3-10-4E
Fee for inspection of pool located at private
residence
Admin
Fee 99.00 3-10-6 Annual health inspection for swimming pools Admin
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 3-10-10
Fine for violating any provision of title 3, chapter
10, "Swimming Pools", of this Code
Code
Enforcement
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 3-11-10
Fine for violating any provision of title 3, chapter 11,
of this Code, Dutch elm disease
Code
Enforcement
Fine Not < $100.00 nor > $250.00 3-12-8B
Fine for a person who smokes in an area where
smoking is prohibited under section 3-12-2 of this
Code
Code
Enforcement
Fine Not < $250.00 for first violation; not < $500.00 for the
second violation within 1 year of the first violation; and not
< $2,500.00 for each additional violation after the first
violation
3-12-8B
Fine for a person who owns, operates, or otherwise
controls a public place or place of employment that
violates section 3-12-2 of this Code (smoking in
prohibited area)
Code
Enforcement
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 451/470
Fee 50% of original permit fee 4-1-2A4
If building is not completed within allotted time and
building permit expires requiring an extension of up
to 180 days
Building and
Zoning
Fine $100.00 per day 4-1-2A4
Fine for each day after 180 days after the issuance
of a building permit extension
Code
Enforcement
Fine $50.00 plus $100.00 for each subsequent inspection 4-1-2A4
Fine for failure to pass an inspection Code
Enforcement
Fine $100.00 first day; $200.00 for second day; $500.00 for
third and subsequent days
4-1-2B
(114.3)
Fine for any person who shall continue to work
after having been served a stop work order
Code
Enforcement
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $750.00 for each offense 4-1-4 Fine for violating any provisions of section 4-1-4,
"Minimum Heating Standards For Residential
Buildings", of this Code
Code
Enforcement
Fine Not < $50.00 nor > $750.00 for each offense 4-1-6 Fine for violating any provisions of title 4, chapter 1,
"Building Code", of this Code
Code
Enforcement
Fine 50% of original permit fee 4-2-2A4
If building is not completed within allotted time and
building permit expires requiring an extension of up
to 30 days
Code
Enforcement
Fine $100.00 per day 4-2-2A4
Fine for each day after 30 days after the issuance
of a building permit extension
Code
Enforcement
Fine $50.00 plus $100.00 for each subsequent inspection 4-2-2A4
Fine for failure to pass an inspection Code
Enforcement
Fine $100.00 4-2-2A9
Fine for not using a wet saw Code
Enforcement
Fine $100.00 per day 4-2-2B
(R-
113.4)
Fine for failure to comply with orders Code
Enforcement
Fine $100.00 first day; $200.00 for second day; $500.00 for
third and subsequent days
4-2-2B
(R-
114.2)
Fine for any person who shall continue to work
after having been served a stop work order
Code
Enforcement
Fine $100.00 4-2-2B
(R-
115g)
Fine for failure to use City waste hauler Code
Enforcement
Fine 100.00 4-2-2B
(R-
115h)
Fine for failure to clean up street Code
Enforcement
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $750.00 for each offense 4-2-3 Fine for violating any provisions of title 4, chapter 2,
"Residential Code", of this Code
Code
Enforcement
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $750.00 for each offense 4-2-5 Fine for violating any provisions of section 4-2-5
"Minimum Heating Standards For Residential
Buildings", of this Code
Code
Enforcement
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $750.00 for each offense 4-3-3 Fine for violating any provisions of title 4, chapter 3,
"Mechanical Code", of this Code
Code
Enforcement
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $750.00 for each offense 4-4-3 Fine for violating any provisions of title 4, chapter 4,
"Plumbing Code", of this Code
Code
Enforcement
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $750.00 for each offense 4-4A-3 Fine for violating any provisions of title 4, chapter
4A, "Electrical Code", of this Code
Code
Enforcement
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $750.00 for each offense 4-4B-3 Fine for violating any provisions of title 4, chapter
4B, "Property Maintenance Code", of this Code
Code
Enforcement
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 452/470
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $750.00 for each offense 4-4C-3 Fine for violating any provisions of title 4, chapter
4C, "Fuel Gas Code", of this Code
Code
Enforcement
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $750.00 for each offense 4-4D-3 Fine for violating any provisions of title 4, chapter
4D, "Energy Conservation Code", of this Code
Code
Enforcement
Fee $ 50.00 4-5-2 Issuance of certificate of occupancy Building and
Zoning
Fee 40.00 4-5-3 Periodical, semiannual, or annual code compliance
verification inspection
Building and
Zoning
Fee 25.00 4-5-3 Periodical, semiannual, or annual business office
suite code compliance verification inspection
Building and
zoning
Fee 50.00 4-5-3 Code compliance reinspection Building and
zoning
Fee 125.00 4-5-4 Minimum for any permit to alter, remodel, repair or
underpin any residential building, accessory
structures or parts thereof provided the work
authorized by permit does not exceed $10,000.00
Building and
zoning
Fee $1.40 per square foot 4-5-4A1
Single-family and multi-family residential addition
building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee $125.00 for first $10,000.00 of valuation plus $12.00 for
each additional $1,000.00 of valuation
4-5-4A2
Single-family and multi-family residential
remodeling building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee $1.20 per square foot 4-5-4A3
Single-family and multi-family residential new
construction building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee $250.00 4-5-4A4
Single-family and multi-family residential demolition
building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee $200.00 for first $10,000.00 of valuation plus $12.00 for
each additional $1,000.00 of valuation or fraction thereof
up to $1,000,000; thereafter, the fee shall be $8.50 for
each additional $1,000.00 of valuation or fraction thereof
for valuation in excess of $1,000,000.00 and less than
$5,000,000.00; thereafter, the fee shall be $6.75 for each
$1,000.00 of valuation or fraction thereof for valuation in
excess of $5,000,000.00
4-5-4B1
Commercial new construction building permit Building and
zoning
Fee $500.00 4-5-4B2
Demolition permit for industrial and commercial
buildings and accessory structures
Building and
zoning
Fee 750.00 4-5-4F Engineering plan review new single-family
residence
Building and
zoning
Fee 500.00 4-5-4F Engineering plan review for additions with footprint
increase of 20% or more
Building and
zoning
Fee 250.00 4-5-4F Engineering plan review for additions with footprint
increase of less than 20%
Building and
zoning
Fee 100.00 4-5-4F Engineering plan review for residential remodeling
if review required
Building and
zoning
Fee 100.00 4-5-4F Engineering plan review for residential construction
of a detached garage
Building and
zoning
Fee 75.00 4-5-4F Engineering plan review for residential accessory
structure
Building and
zoning
Fee 75.00 4-5-4F Engineering plan review residential site grading
permits
Building and
zoning
Fee 50.00 4-5-4F Engineering plan review for additional inspections Building and
zoning
Fee 2.5% of construction value 4-5-4F Engineering plan review for commercial/industrial
construction cost $0.00 to $50,000.00
Building and
zoning
Fee 2.0% of construction value 4-5-4F Engineering plan review for commercial/ industrial
construction cost $50,001.00 to $250,000.00
Building and
zoning
Fee 1.5% of construction value 4-5-4F Engineering plan review $250,001.00 and above Building and
zoning
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 453/470
Fee $750.00 4-5-4F Engineering plan review new parking lot Building and
zoning
Fee 500.00 4-5-4F Engineering plan review parking lot reconstruction Building and
zoning
Fee 250.00 4-5-4F Engineering plan review parking lot resurfacing Building and
zoning
Fee 50% additional to standard fee 4-5-4F Engineering plan review special flood hazard area
development
Building and
zoning
Fee $ 500.00 4-5-4F Engineering plan review demolition, residential
(building department fee)
Building and
zoning
Fee 1,000.00 4-5-4F Engineering plan review commercial demolition up
to 5,000 square feet
Building and
zoning
Fee 2,500.00 4-5-4F Engineering plan review commercial demolition
5,001 to 25,000 square feet
Building and
zoning
Fee 5,000.00 4-5-4F Engineering plan review commercial demolition
25,001 to 50,000 square feet
Building and
zoning
Fee 7,500.00 4-5-4F Engineering plan review commercial demolition
50,001 to 75,000 square feet
Building and
zoning
Fee 10,000.00 4-5-4F Engineering plan review commercial demolition
75,001 square feet and over
Building and
zoning
Fine Minimum $50.00 or cost of permit up to $500.00
whichever is greater
4-5-4G
Fine for building projects without an approved
building permit
Code
enforcement
Fine $50.00 4-5-4H Fine for building reinspection Code
enforcement
Fee $75.00 plus $35.00 zoning review 4-5-5 Swimming pool construction building permit and
zoning review
Building and
zoning
Fee $ 15.00 4-5-6 Fence building permit up to 70 feet in length Building and
zoning
Fee 35.00 4-5-6 Fence building permit greater than 70 feet in length
Building and
zoning
Fee 35.00 4-5-6 Fence building permit zoning review Building and
zoning
Fee 50.00 4-5-7A Electrical installation and alteration minimum
building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee 70.00 4-5-7A2
Electrical service upgrade or replacement for
single-family residence for 100 amp building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee 100.00 4-5-7A2
Electrical service upgrade or replacement for
single-family residence for 200 amp building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee 120.00 4-5-7A2
Electrical service upgrade or replacement for
single-family residence for 400 amp building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee 150.00 4-5-7A2
Electrical service upgrade or replacement for
single-family residence for 600 amp building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee 50.00 4-5-7A3
Electrical permit inspection Building and
zoning
Fee 50.00 4-5-8A Plumbing installation, alteration or extension of
plumbing system minimum building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee 50.00 4-5-8A1
Private well drilling building permit Building and
zoning
Fee $75.00 plus $0.90 per head 4-5-8A3
Fire suppression system building permit Building and
zoning
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 454/470
Fee $ 50.00 4-5-9 Mechanical equipment other than air conditioning,
refrigeration, elevators or fire protection systems
for residential properties building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee 150.00 4-5-9 Mechanical equipment other than air conditioning,
refrigeration, elevators or fire protection systems
for commercial and industrial properties building
permit
Building and
zoning
Fee 70.00 4-5-10A
Plan examination for single-family home Building and
zoning
Fee 35.00 4-5-10B
Plan examination for detached garages and
accessory structures for single-family homes
Building and
zoning
Fee 50.00 4-5-10C
Plan examination fee for single-family home
additions or alterations
Building and
zoning
Fee 100.00 4-5-10D
Commercial building plan review for construction
value of less than $10,000.00
Building and
zoning
Fee 15% of base fee 4-5-
10D1
Commercial building plan review for mechanical Building and
zoning
Fee 15% of base fee 4-5-
10D2
Commercial building plan review for plumbing Building and
zoning
Fee 15% of base fee 4-5-
10D3
Commercial building plan review for electrical Building and
zoning
Fee 5% of base fee 4-5-
10D4
Commercial building plan review for fire protection Building and
zoning
Fee $100.00 4-5-11A
Elevator serving a building up to 3 floors inspection
Building and
zoning
Fee 50.00 4-5-11B
Elevator reinspection Building and
zoning
Fee 36.00 4-5-12A
Heating fuel storage tank in conjunction with other
construction 0 - 2,000 gallons building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee 48.00 4-5-12A
Heating fuel storage tank in conjunction with other
construction over 2,000 gallons building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee 100.00 4-5-12B
Fuel storage tanks of flammable liquids 1,065
gallons or less building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee 150.00 4-5-12B
Fuel storage tanks of flammable liquids 1,066 to
7,000 gallons building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee 200.00 4-5-12B
Fuel storage tanks of flammable liquids 7,001 to
25,000 gallons building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee 300.00 4-5-12B
Fuel storage tanks of flammable liquids 25,001 to
50,000 gallons building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee 400.00 4-5-12B
Fuel storage tanks of flammable liquids 50,001 to
100,000 gallons building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee 500.00 4-5-12B
Fuel storage tanks of flammable liquids over
100,000 gallons building permit
Building and
zoning
Fee 500.00 4-5-
13A1
Engineering plan review or inspection for new
construction of single-family and multi-family
residential which includes preliminary and final
inspections
Building and
zoning
Fee 500.00 4-5-
13A2a
Engineering plan review or inspection for significant
additions to single-family and multi-family where
the footprint of the house is increased by 20% or
more and/or grading is required which includes
preliminary and final inspections
Building and
zoning
Fee 250.00 4-5-
13A2b
Engineering plan review or inspection for significant
additions to single-family and multi-family where
the footprint of the house is increased by 20% or
more and grading is not required which includes
preliminary and final inspections
Building and
zoning
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 455/470
Fee 75.00 4-5-
13A2c
Engineering plan review or inspection for additions
to single-family or multi-family where the increase
is less than 20% which includes preliminary and
final inspections
Building and
zoning
Fee 125.00 4-5-
13A3a
Engineering plan review or inspection for
remodeling where construction value is greater
than $20,000.00 in FEMA designated floodplain
areas
Building and
zoning
Fee 75.00 4-5-
13A3a
Engineering plan review or inspection for
remodeling where construction value is greater
than $20,000.00 for area not in designated
floodplain
Building and
zoning
Fee 75.00 4-5-
13A3b
Engineering plan review or inspection for
remodeling where construction value is less than
$20,000.00 which includes preliminary and final
inspections
Building and
zoning
Fee 75.00 4-5-
13A4
Engineering plan review or inspection for
construction of a detached garage which includes
preliminary and final inspections
Building and
zoning
Fee 50.00 4-5-
13A5
Engineering plan review or inspection for
construction of pools, decks, patios, gazebos,
sidewalks with inspection included
Building and
zoning
Fee 25.00 4-5-
13A6
Engineering plan review or inspection for
construction of sheds or other small accessory
structures, inspection included
Building and
zoning
Fee 50.00 4-5-
13A7
Engineering plan review or inspection for
construction or maintenance work, inspection
included, in ROW (including driveways and
culverts)
Building and
Zoning
Fee 50.00 4-5-
13A8
Engineering plan review or inspection for site
grading (not in designated floodplain) inspection
included
Building and
Zoning
Fee 100.00 4-5-
13A9
Engineering plan review or inspection for site
grading (in floodplain) inspection included
Building and
Zoning
Fee 35.00 4-5-
13A10
Engineering plan review or inspection for floodplain
determination, inspection not included
Building and
Zoning
Fee 35.00 4-5-
13A11
Engineering plan review or inspection of LOMRs,
LOMAs, etc., inspection not included
Building and
Zoning
Fee 2.50% 4-5-
13B1
Engineering review fees for industrial or
commercial properties with estimated cost of
construction of $0.00 to $25,000.00
Building and
Zoning
Fee 2.25% 4-5-
13B1
Engineering review fees for industrial or
commercial properties with estimated cost of
construction of $25,001.00 to $50,000.00
Building and
Zoning
Fee 2% 4-5-
13B1
Engineering review fees for industrial or
commercial properties with estimated cost of
construction of $50,001.00 to $100,000.00
Building and
Zoning
Fee 1.75% 4-5-
13B1
Engineering review fees for industrial or
commercial properties with estimated cost of
construction of $100,001.00 to $250,000.00
Building and
Zoning
Fee 1.50% 4-5-
13B1
Engineering review fees for industrial or
commercial properties with estimated cost of
construction of $250,001.00 to $500,000.00
Building and
Zoning
Fee 1.25% 4-5-
13B1
Engineering review fees for industrial or
commercial properties with estimated cost of
construction of $500,001.00 and over
Building and
Zoning
Fee $500.00 4-5-13C
Engineering plan review fees for resurfacing or
reconstruction work performed on a parking lot
which includes 2 inspections
Building and
Zoning
Fee 50.00 4-5-13D
Engineering plan review for subdivisions due to
unforeseen events or required inspections
Building and
Zoning
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 456/470
Fine Not < $50.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 4-5-14 Fine for violating any provisions of title 4, chapter 5,
"Building Permits And Fees", of this Code
Building and
Zoning
Fine Not > $750.00 4-7-4B Fine for continuing a violation beyond the time limit
provided for in subsection 4-7-4A of this Code
Building and
Zoning
Fee $ 75.00 4-7A-1-
3
Application for a site development permit Building and
zoning
Fee 500.00 4-8A-
5E
Water service reconnection fee Water
Fee $9,000.00 per inch of diameter 4-8B-
9A
Single-family residential water connection tap-on
fee for properties that are not located within a
special service area established for the purpose of
construction of a potable water system or for those
properties which are within a special service area
but which are wholly exempt from ad valorem real
estate taxes
Water
Fee $9,000.00 per unit 4-8B-
9A
Multi-family residential (2 to 4 units) water
connection tap-on fee for properties that are not
located within a special service area established for
the purpose of construction of a potable water
system or for those properties which are within a
special service area but which are wholly exempt
from ad valorem real estate taxes
Water
Fee $18,000.00 per inch of diameter 4-8B-
9A
Multi-family residential (over 4 units) water
connection tap-on fee for properties that are not
located within a special service area established for
the purpose of construction of a potable water
system or for those properties which are within a
special service area but which are wholly exempt
from ad valorem real estate taxes
Water
Fee $24,000.00 per inch of diameter 4-8B-
9A
Nonresidential service water connection tap-on fee
for properties that are not located within a special
service area established for the purpose of
construction of a potable water system or for those
properties which are within a special service area
but which are wholly exempt from ad valorem real
estate taxes
Water
Fee $ 400.00 4-8B-
9B
Water connection tap-on fee for 1 inch tap for
properties located within a special service area with
no connection tap-on fee set forth in the ordinance
establishing the special service area
Water
Fee 525.00 4-8B-
9B
Water connection tap-on fee for 1.5 inch tap for
properties located within a special service area with
no connection tap-on fee set forth in the ordinance
establishing the special service area
Water
Fee 675.00 4-8B-
9B
Water connection tap-on fee for 2 inch tap for
properties located within a special service area with
no connection tap-on fee set forth in the ordinance
establishing the special service area
Water
Fee 1,200.00 4-8B-
9B
Water connection tap-on fee for 3 inch tap for
properties located within a special service area with
no connection tap-on fee set forth in the ordinance
establishing the special service area
Water
Fee 2,000.00 4-8B-
9B
Water connection tap-on fee for 4 inch tap for
properties located within a special service area with
no connection tap-on fee set forth in the ordinance
establishing the special service area
Water
Fee 3,000.00 4-8B-
9B
Water connection tap-on fee for 6 inch tap for
properties located within a special service area with
no connection tap-on fee set forth in the ordinance
establishing the special service area
Water
Fee $500.00 per inch of diameter 4-8B-
9B
Water connection tap-on fee for above 6 inch tap
for properties located within a special service area
with no connection tap-on fee set forth in the
ordinance establishing the special service area
Water
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 457/470
Fee $200.00 per unit 4-8B-
9B
In the event any building or premises contains
more than 1 dwelling or commercial unit, an
additional permit fee shall be made for each unit
Water
Fee $12,000.00 x # of in. of diameter 4-8B-
9D
Upgrade to an existing connection where the size
of the tap-on connection is increased
Water
Fee $325.00 4-8B-11
New customer service fee for whenever a new
customer establishes an account for water service
to a property, regardless of whether there is an
already existing service connection to the property
Water
Fine Not < $50.00 nor > $750.00 for each offense 4-8D-4 Fine for violating any provisions of title 4, chapter 8,
article D, "Policy On Lawn Sprinkling And Other
Outdoor Water Uses", of this Code
Code
Enforcement
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 4-10-10
Fine for violating any provisions of title 4, chapter
10, "Registration Of Defaulted Mortgage Property",
of this Code
Code
Enforcement
Fee $200.00 biannually 4-10-11
Registration fee for defaulted mortgage property Building and
Zoning
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $750.00 for each offense 4-11-4 Fine for violating any provision of title 4, chapter 11,
"Fire Code", of this Code
Code
Enforcement
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $750.00 for each offense 4-12-3 Fine for failure to comply with Existing Building
Code
Code
Enforcement
Fine Not > $10,000.00 4-13-
10A2a
Civil penalty to vindicate the public interest in a
case brought to the Human Rights Commission if a
respondent has not been adjudged to have
committed any prior violations of title 4, chapter 13,
"Fair Housing", of this Code
Human
Rights
Commission
Fine Not > $25,000.00 4-13-
10A2b
Civil penalty to vindicate the public interest in a
case brought to the Human Rights Commission if a
respondent has been adjudged to have committed
1 other violation of title 4, chapter 13, "Fair
Housing", of this Code during the 5 year period
prior to the filing date of the current complaint
Human
Rights
Commission
Fine Not > $50,000.00 4-13-
10A2c
Civil penalty to vindicate the public interest in a
case brought to the Human Rights Commission if a
respondent has been adjudged to have committed
2 other violations of title 4, chapter 13, "Fair
Housing", of this Code during the 7 year period
prior to the filing date of the current complaint
Human
Rights
Commission
Fee $ 45.00 5-9-2C Sign permit for sign with 0 to 25 square feet Building and
Zoning
Fee 75.00 5-9-2C Sign permit for sign with 26 to 50 square feet Building and
Zoning
Fee 100.00 5-9-2C Sign permit for sign with 51 to 75 square feet Building and
zoning
Fee 150.00 5-9-2C Sign permit for sign with 76 to 100 square feet Building and
zoning
Fee $150.00 plus $5.00 per square foot over 100 5-9-2C Sign permit for sign with 101 and over square feet Building and
zoning
Fee $45.00 5-9-2C Temporary sign permit for all sized signs Building and
zoning
Escrow
Not > $500.00 5-10-3J
Escrow deposit whenever an application for a
zoning or occupancy certificate for a new or altered
structure or use indicates, in the opinion of the
zoning administrator, that the operations or
activities to be conducted may violate the
restrictions of title 5, chapter 7 of this code, the
zoning administrator shall require the deposit of an
escrow as a condition precedent to issuing a
zoning or occupancy certificate
Building and
zoning
Fee $ 300.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file a petition for text amendment(s)
Building and
zoning
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 458/470
Fee 300.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file a petition for map amendment(s) less than 1
acre
Building and
zoning
Fee 500.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file a petition for map amendment(s) 1 to 5 acres
Building and
zoning
Fee 1,400.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file a petition for map amendment(s) 5 to 10 acres
Building and
zoning
Fee 2,000.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file a petition for map amendment(s) 10 to 20 acres
Building and
zoning
Fee 2,700.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file a petition for map amendment(s) over 20 acres
Building and
zoning
Fee 350.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file a petition for planned unit development(s) less
than 1 acre
Building and
zoning
Fee 650.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file a petition for planned unit development(s) 1 to 5
acres
Building and
zoning
Fee 1,700.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file a petition for planned unit development(s) 5 to
10 acres
Building and
zoning
Fee 2,200.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file a petition for planned unit development(s) 10 to
20 acres
Building and
zoning
Fee 2,800.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file a petition for planned unit development(s) over
20 acres
Building and
zoning
Fee 150.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file a petition for subdivisions less than 1 acre
Building and
zoning
Fee 300.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file a petition for subdivisions 1 to 5 acres
Building and
zoning
Fee 700.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file a petition for subdivisions 5 to 10 acres
Building and
zoning
Fee 1,700.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file a petition for subdivisions 10 to 20 acres
Building and
zoning
Fee 2,800.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file a petition for subdivisions over 20 acres
Building and
zoning
Fee 400.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file a petition for special use(s)
Building and
zoning
Fee 150.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file a petition for variation(s)
Building and
zoning
Fee 150.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file appeals from decisions of zoning administrator
for property located in the R-1 residential district
and used for single-family residential purposes
Building and
zoning
Fee 250.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
file appeals from decisions of zoning administrator
for all other property
Building and
zoning
Fee 35.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
require plan examination for single-family
residential district (R-1) plan examination for
principal uses
Building and
zoning
Fee 25.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
require plan examination for single-family
residential district (R-1) plan examination for
accessory uses
Building and
zoning
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 459/470
Fee $40.00 plus $5.00 for each additional dwelling unit 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
require plan examination for general residential
district (R-2) plan examination for principal uses for
a 6 dwelling unit structure or less
Building and
zoning
Fee $30.00 plus $5.00 for each additional accessory use 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
require plan examination for general residential
district (R-2) plan examination for accessory uses
for a single accessory use of a 6 dwelling unit
structure or less
Building and
zoning
Fee $50.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
require plan examination for business districts (B-1
through B-4) plan examination for principal uses
Building and
zoning
Fee 40.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
require plan examination for business districts (B-1
through B-4) plan examination for accessory uses
Building and
zoning
Fee 50.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
require plan examination for office/research park
district (O-1) plan examination for principal uses
Building and
zoning
Fee 40.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
require plan examination for office/research park
district (O-1) plan examination for accessory uses
Building and
zoning
Fee 50.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
require plan examination for special uses
Building and
zoning
Fee 40.00 5-10-14
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
require plan examination for uses not involving
buildings and/or new construction
Building and
zoning
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 5-12-1 Fine for any person, firm or corporation who
violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with or who resists the enforcement of any
of the provisions of title 5 of this code
Building and
zoning
Fee $12.00 x est. population 6-3-7B Impact fee contribution for library purposes for plat
approvals
Building and
zoning
Fee See subdivision code 6-3-8B1
Impact fee contribution for fire protection district
purpose for plat approvals
Building and
zoning
Fee $75.00 6-5-3D For final subdivision approval, applicant must remit
fee for each road sign required by the city engineer
at all road intersections
Building and
zoning
Fee $500.00 per acre 6-7-4A Plan review fee for approval of preliminary and final
plats and subdivision improvements
Building and
zoning
Fee $50.00 per filing plus reimbursement of costs as set by
Cook County recorder
6-7-4B Review and filing fees for preliminary or final plats Building and
zoning
Fee 2.50% 6-7-4C City engineer review fees for subdivision
improvements with an estimated cost of
construction of $0.00 to $25,000.00
Building and
zoning
Fee 2.25% 6-7-4C City engineer review fees for subdivision
improvements with an estimated cost of
construction of $25,001.00 to $50,000.00
Building and
zoning
Fee 2.00% 6-7-4C City engineer review fees for subdivision
improvements with an estimated cost of
construction of $50,001.00 to $100,000.00
Building and
zoning
Fee 1.75% 6-7-4C City engineer review fees for subdivision
improvements with an estimated cost of
construction of $100,001.00 to $250,000.00
Building and
zoning
Fee 1.50% 6-7-4C City engineer review fees for subdivision
improvements with an estimated cost of
construction of $250,001.00 to $500,000.00
Building and
zoning
Fee 1.25% 6-7-4C City engineer review fees for subdivision
improvements with an estimated cost of
construction of $500,001.00 and over
Building and
zoning
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 460/470
Fee 1.00% 6-7-4C City review fees for subdivision improvements with
an estimated cost of construction of $0.00 to
$500,001.00 and over
Building and
zoning
Fee $ 100.00 6-7-4D Plan commission petition fee for first appearance Building and
zoning
Fee 100.00 6-7-4E Subdivision fee for less than 1 acre Building and
zoning
Fee 25.00 6-7-4E Subdivision fee for 1 to 5 acres Building and
zoning
Fee 500.00 6-7-4E Subdivision fee for 5 to 10 acres Building and
zoning
Fee 1,500.00 6-7-4E Subdivision fee for 10 to 20 acres Building and
zoning
Fee 2,500.00 6-7-4E Subdivision fee for over 20 acres Building and
zoning
Fine Not < $10.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense plus costs of
action
6-7-7 Fine for violating any provisions of title 6, chapter 7,
"Administration And Enforcement", of this code
Code
enforcement
Fee $ 35.00 7-1-13 Fee for floodplain determination report regarding
information for existing structures or vacant
property
Building and
zoning
Fee 70.00 7-1-13 Fee for floodplain determination report regarding
improvement to existing structures
Building and
zoning
Fee 100.00 7-1-13 Fee for floodplain determination report regarding
new construction or development (building permit)
Building and
zoning
Fine Not < $10.00 nor > $1,000.00 for each offense 7-1-
15A2
Fine for violating any provision of title 7, chapter 1,
"Flood Control Regulations", of this code
Code
enforcement
Fine Not < $50.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 8-1-3C Fine for violating section 8-1-3, "Stormwater
Runoffs", of this code
Code
enforcement
Fee $75.00 plus costs associated with plan review and site
inspection
8-1-4 Permit application fee for any work within any
public right of way
Building and
zoning
Fee $75.00 plus costs associated with plan review and site
inspection
8-1-5 Permit application fee for any work associated with
the removal, resurfacing, or reconstruction of an
existing or proposed private driveway
Building and
zoning
Fine $25.00 per day or payment of all costs for the city to
correct violation
8-1-6 Fine for violating any provision of title 8, chapter 1,
"Roadway Ditches And Swales; Public Rights Of
Way And Driveways", of this code
Code
enforcement
Fee $50.00 8-2-4 Permit fee for parades (does not apply to religious,
civic or social groups of the city)
Building and
zoning
Fine Not < $50.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 8-2-6 Fine for violating or failing to comply with any
provisions of title 8, chapter 2, "Parades", of this
code
Code
enforcement
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 8-3-1-
1D
Fine for any person who removes, causes the
removal of, or be in the possession of any car or
vehicle taken from a designated storage location
without first having paid all towing, preparation and
storage fees
Police
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense plus payment
for any damage to city property
8-3-1-
2C
Fine for violating any of the provisions of section 8-
3-1-2, "Obstruction Of Snow Removal", of this code
Police
Fine 50% of actual cost incurred by city for snow plowing or
removal plus actual cost incurred
8-3-1-
3B
Fine for cost incurred for snow plowing or removal
plus administrative costs for snow removal of any
street becomes a necessary access route to reach
lawfully occupied residences within a development
Code
enforcement
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 8-3-1-4
Fine for violating any of the provisions of title 8,
chapter 3, "Streets, Sidewalks And Public Ways",
of this code
Code
enforcement
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 461/470
Fine Not < $50.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense plus
restitution
8-3-3B1
Fine for violating any provision of subsection 8-3-
3A of this code
Code
enforcement
Fine Full restitution to the city for all damages created 8-3-3B2
Fine for violating any provision of subsection 8-3-
3A of this code
Code
enforcement
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 8-3-4E Fine for violation of any provisions of section 8-3-4,
"Maintenance Responsibilities Of Abutting Property
Owners", of this code
Code
enforcement
Fine Cost of removal 8-3-5C Fee for the cost of removal of an obstruction on a
public easement which the city has determined is in
violation of section 8-3-5, "Obstructing Public
Easements", of this code which the property owner
has failed to remove after being given 30 days'
notice
Code
enforcement
Fine $200.00 per day 8-4-7-
12C1
Fine for failure to activate the system in
accordance with the franchise agreement, unless
the city approved the delay
Admin
Fine $200.00 per day 8-4-7-
12C2
Fine for failure to complete system construction, in
accordance with grantee's franchise, within the
primary service area, unless the city approves the
delay
Admin
Fine $200.00 per day 8-4-7-
12C3
Fine for failure to provide data, documents, reports
or information as required in title 8, chapter 4,
"Cable Communications", of this code or the
franchise agreement unless the city approved the
delay
Admin
Fine $200.00 per day 8-4-7-
12C4
Fine for failure to cooperate or provide data,
documents, reports, or information in conjunction
with the performance evaluation session provided
for by section 8-4-4-4 of this code
Admin
Fine $200.00 per day 8-4-7-
12C5
Fine for failure to test, analyze and report on the
performance of the system within 30 days after
required by the city following a performance
evaluation session, unless the city approves the
delay
Admin
Fine $200.00 per day 8-4-7-
12C6
Fine for failure to modify the system or provide
additional service within 30 days after required by
the city following a performance evaluation
session, unless the city approves the delay
Admin
Fine $200.00 per day 8-4-7-
12C7
Fine for failure to comply with construction,
reconstruction, line extension, operation or
maintenance standards, unless the city approves
the delay
Admin
Fine $200.00 per day 8-4-7-
12C8
Fine for failure to comply with any customer service
standards, unless the city approves the delay
Admin
Fine Less than or equal to $500.00 8-4-7-
12C9
Fine for persons or commercial entities who violate
any of the provisions of title 8, chapter 4, "Cable
Communications", of this Code
Admin
Fee $20.00 per month 8-5-1 Fee for use and service of the City sewerage
system for residential users
Sewer
Fee $24.50 per month 8-5-1 Fee for use and service of the City sewerage
system for commercial users
Sewer
Fee $49.00 per month plus $6.25 per month for each
additional unit
8-5-1 Fee for use and service of the City sewerage
system for multi-units
Sewer
Fee $50.00 plus $25.00 for each subsequent inspection 8-5-7A Fee for inspection of any connection to any
sanitary sewer owned or controlled by the City
Sewer
Fee $1,125.00 8-5-7B Fee for a service connection to any sanitary sewer
owned or controlled by the City
Sewer
Fine Not < $50.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 8-5-7I Fine for violating any subsections of section 8-5-7,
"Service Connections", of this Code
Sewer
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 462/470
Fine Not < $50.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 8-5-9C Fine for violating any provision of section 8-5-9,
"Compliance With Court Decree", of this Code with
respect to sewers
Sewer
Fine Less than or equal to $500.00 8-5-14B
Fine for any person who shall continue any
violation beyond the time limit provided for
corrections to be made per subsection 8-5-14A of
this Code with respect to sewers
Sewer
Fee $15.00 plus kennel fees 9-1-
4B1b
Fee for impoundment of animal Police
Fine Not < $75.00 nor > $500.00 9-1-4B4
Fine for violating any provision of subsection 9-1-
4B of this Code
Police
Late fee
Not < $75.00 nor > $500.00 9-1-4B4
Additional penalty for failure to pay fine as
stipulated by subsection 9-1-4B of this Code within
10 days
Police
Fine Not < $75.00 nor > $500.00 9-1-7B Fine for violating any provision of section 9-1-7,
"Rabies Inoculation Required", of this Code
Police
Late fee
Not < $75.00 nor > $500.00 9-1-7B Additional penalty for failure to pay fine as
stipulated by section 9-1-7, "Rabies Inoculation
Required", of this Code within 10 days
Police
Fee $ 24.00 9-1-11E
Fee for first time annual animal license if
purchased on or before March 31 (not required for
assistance dogs or governmental police dogs)
Admin
Fee 48.00 9-1-11E
Fee for first time annual animal license if
purchased on or after April 1
Admin
Fee 12.00 9-1-11E
Fee for renewal of annual animal license if
purchased on or before March 31
Admin
Fee 24.00 9-1-11E
Fee for renewal of annual animal license if
purchased on or after April 1
Admin
Fine 24.00 9-1-11E
Fine for violating subsection 9-1-11E of this Code Police
Fee 15.00 9-1-11F
Housing cost daily fee for animals at large which
are impounded
Police
Fee 15.00 9-1-11F
Stray animal impoundment fee Police
Fee 12.50 9-1-11F
Bordetella shot necessary to kennel animal which
is impounded
Police
Fine 10.00 9-1-11F
Penalty for impoundment of an animal at large
which is unlicensed
Police
Fee 66.00 9-1-
20B2
Annual license fee to operate a pet shop Admin
Fee 66.00 9-1-
20B2
Annual license fee to operate a kennel with a
capacity of 1 to 10 animals
Admin
Fee 132.00 9-1-
20B2
Annual license fee to operate a kennel with a
capacity of 11 to 25 animals
Admin
Fee 198.00 9-1-
20B2
Annual license fee to operate a kennel with a
capacity of 26 or more animals
Admin
Fine Not < $100.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 9-1-21 Fine for violating any provision of title 9, chapter 1,
"Animal Control", of this code
Police
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 9-2-1 Fine for any person convicted of disorderly conduct
Police
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 9-2-2 Fine for violating the provisions of section 9-2-2,
"Inciting Riots", of this code
Police
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 9-2-3F Fine for violating any provision of section 9-2-3,
"Drinking In Public", of this code
Police
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 463/470
Fine Not < $50.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 9-2-4A Fine for any person who wilfully defaces, mars,
injures, destroys or removes any vault, tomb,
monument, gravestone, memorial of the dead,
church, synagogue, or any other structure
constituting a place of worship of any religion, sect,
or group of any part of any contents thereof, or any
fence, tree, shrub or plant appurtenant (defacing
and injuring houses of worship and cemeteries)
Police
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 9-2-4B Fine for any person who cuts, injures, marks, or
defaces any public building, sewer, water pipe,
hydrant or other city property, or any tree, grass,
shrub or walk in any public way or public park
(damage to public property)
Police
Fine Not > $50.00 9-2-5 Fine for any person who shall disquiet or disturb
any congregation or assembly met for religious
worship by making a noise, or by rude and
indecent behavior or profane discourse within the
place of worship, or so near to the same as to
disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting
(disturbing places of worship)
Police
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 9-2-7C2
Fine for committing vandalism as stated in
subsection 9-2-7B of this code, vandalism offenses
Police
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 9-2-8D Fine for conviction of any violation of the provisions
of section 9-2-8, "Parental Responsibility", of this
code
Police
Fine Not < $50.00 9-2-9E Fine for violating a provision of section 9-2-9,
"Curfew Hours For Minors", of this code
Police
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 9-2-
10G
Fine for violating the provisions of section 9-2-10,
"Firearms", of this code
Police
Fine $250.00 plus $250.00 if not paid within 10 days 9-2-11F
Fine for violating any provision of section 9-2-11,
"Possession Of Cannabis", of this code
Police
Fine $750.00 9-2-12D
Fine for violating any provision of section 9-2-12,
"Drug Paraphernalia", of this code
Police
Fine $100.00 for first offense; $500.00 for the second offense 9-2-13I
Fine for violating any provision of section 9-2-13,
"Possession Or Purchase Of Tobacco, Tobacco
Accessories Or Smoking Herbs By Minors", of this
code
Police
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 for each offense 9-3-
3A1a
Fine for the maintenance or operation of an alarm
system without an alarm user permit or after an
alarm user permit has been revoked pursuant to
section 9-3-5, "Revocation Of Alarm User Permit",
of this code
Police
Fee $50.00 9-3-3C1
Fee for alarm user permit for the first calendar year
Admin
Fee 40.00 9-3-3C2
Fee for annual renewal of alarm user permit on or
before March 31 of the new calendar year
Admin
Fee 80.00 9-3-3C2
Fee for annual renewal of alarm user permit on or
after April 1 of the new calendar year
Admin
Fee $125.00 per occurrence 9-3-4A1
Fee for 4 or more alarm occurrences in 1 calendar
year
Police
Fee $50.00 plus all past due service charges if applicable 9-3-5C Fee for reinstatement of a revoked alarm user
permit pursuant to section 9-3-5, "Revocation Of
Alarm User Permit", of this code
Police
Fine Not > $750.00 9-4-4D Fine for any violation under title 9, chapter 4,
"Administrative Adjudication", of this code
Police
Fine Not > $250.00 9-4-6B Fine for violation of any provision of title 10, "Motor
Vehicles And Traffic", of this code, or any
compliance violation, or violation of any other city
ordinance regulating the standing, parking or
condition of motor vehicles, other than
handicapped parking
Police
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 464/470
Fine Not > $200.00 9-4-6C Fine for violation of any city ordinance regulating
handicapped parking
Police
Fine $150.00 9-4-7H Fine for immobilization of a vehicle Police
Fine Not > $500.00 9-4-7H Fine for impoundment and towing of a vehicle Police
Fee $ 70.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for passenger
vehicles (including, but not limited to, motor cars),
base fee if purchased January 1 - March 31
Admin
Fee 105.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for passenger
vehicles (including, but not limited to, motor cars),
late fee if purchased after April 1
Admin
Fee 140.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for passenger
vehicles (including, but not limited to, motor cars),
late fee if purchased after June 1
Admin
Fee 35.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for passenger
vehicles (including, but not limited to, motor cars),
partial year prorated fee October 1 - December 31
Admin
Fee 35.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for other motorized
vehicles (including, but not limited to, motorcycles
and motor scooters), base fee if purchased
January 1 - March 31
Admin
Fee 45.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for other motorized
vehicles (including, but not limited to, motorcycles
and motor scooters), late fee if purchased after
April 1
Admin
Fee 70.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for other motorized
vehicles (including, but not limited to, motorcycles
and motor scooters), late fee if purchased after
June 1
Admin
Fee 17.50 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for other motorized
vehicles (including, but not limited to, motorcycles
and motor scooters), partial year prorated fee
October 1 - December 31
Admin
Fee 25.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for antique vehicles
and recreational vehicles (must have state issued
antique or recreational vehicle license plate), base
fee if purchased January 1 - March 31
Admin
Fee 35.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for antique vehicles
and recreational vehicles (must have state issued
antique or recreational vehicle license plate), late
fee if purchased after April 1
Admin
Fee 50.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for antique vehicles
and recreational vehicles (must have state issued
antique or recreational vehicle license plate), late
fee if purchased after June 1
Admin
Fee 12.50 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for antique vehicles
and recreational vehicles (must have state issued
antique or recreational vehicle license plate), partial
year prorated fee October 1 - December 31
Admin
Fee 30.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for senior citizens.
Must be 65 years of age or older (only 1 vehicle
license issued at lower rate to same household),
base fee if purchased January 1 - March 31
Admin
Fee 45.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for senior citizens.
Must be 65 years of age or older (only 1 vehicle
license issued at lower rate to same household),
late fee if purchased after April 1
Admin
Fee 60.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for senior citizens.
Must be 65 years of age or older (only 1 vehicle
license issued at lower rate to same household),
late fee if purchased after June 1
Admin
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 465/470
Fee 15.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for senior citizens.
Must be 65 years of age or older (only 1 vehicle
license issued at lower rate to same household),
partial year prorated fee October 1 - December 31
Admin
Fee 30.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for disabled. Only 1
vehicle license issued at lower rate to same
household (must have state issued disability
license plate), base fee if purchased January 1 -
March 31
Admin
Fee 45.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for disabled. Only 1
vehicle license issued at lower rate to same
household (must have state issued disability
license plate), late fee if purchased after April 1
Admin
Fee 60.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for disabled. Only 1
vehicle license issued at lower rate to same
household (must have state issued disability
license plate), late fee if purchased after June 1
Admin
Fee 15.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for disabled. Only 1
vehicle license issued at lower rate to same
household (must have state issued disability
license plate), partial year prorated fee October 1 -
December 31
Admin
Fee 90.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for commercial
vehicle class B 8,000 pounds or less, base fee if
purchased January 1 - March 31
Admin
Fee 135.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for commercial
vehicle class B 8,000 pounds or less, late fee if
purchased after April 1
Admin
Fee 180.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for commercial
vehicle class B 8,000 pounds or less, late fee if
purchased after June 1
Admin
Fee 45.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for commercial
vehicle class B 8,000 pounds or less, partial year
prorated fee October 1 - December 31
Admin
Fee 130.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for commercial
vehicle class D 8,001 pounds to 12,000 pounds,
base fee if purchased January 1 - March 31
Admin
Fee 195.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for commercial
vehicle class D 8,001 pounds to 12,000 pounds,
late fee if purchased after April 1
Admin
Fee 260.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for commercial
vehicle class D 8,001 pounds to 12,000 pounds,
late fee if purchased after June 1
Admin
Fee 65.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for commercial
vehicle class D 8,001 pounds to 12,000 pounds,
partial year prorated fee October 1 - December 31
Admin
Fee 170.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for commercial
vehicle class F 12,001 pounds to 16,000 pounds,
base fee if purchased January 1 - March 31
Admin
Fee 255.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for commercial
vehicle class F 12,001 pounds to 16,000 pounds,
late fee if purchased after April 1
Admin
Fee 340.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for commercial
vehicle class F 12,001 pounds to 16,000 pounds,
late fee if purchased after June 1
Admin
Fee 85.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for commercial
vehicle class F 12,001 pounds to 16,000 pounds,
partial year prorated fee October 1 - December 31
Admin
Fee 210.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for commercial
vehicle class H 16,001 pounds and over, base fee
if purchased January 1 - March 31
Admin
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 466/470
Fee 315.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for commercial
vehicle class H 16,001 pounds and over, late fee if
purchased after April 1
Admin
Fee 420.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for commercial
vehicle class H 16,001 pounds and over, late fee if
purchased after June 1
Admin
Fee 105.00 10-1-7A
Fee for annual vehicle license for commercial
vehicle class H 16,001 pounds and over, partial
year prorated fee October 1 - December 31
Admin
Fee 10.00 10-1-7A
Fee for transfer of annual vehicle license Admin
Fee 10.00 10-1-7A
Fee for duplicate annual vehicle license Admin
Fine Not > $200.00 10-1-15
Fine for violating any of the provisions of title 10,
chapter 1, "Vehicle Licenses", of this code
Police
Fine Not < $75.00 10-4-1A
Fine for any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the
instructions of an official traffic device unless
otherwise directed by a police officer
Police
Late fee
$75.00 10-4-1A
Additional penalty for failure to pay fine as
stipulated by subsection 10-4-1A of this code within
10 days
Police
Fine Not < $100.00 nor > $500.00 10-5-3C
Fine for every person who is convicted of a
violation of section 10-5-3, "Driving Under The
Influence", of this code
Police
Fine Not < $25.00 nor > $500.00 10-5-4B
Fine for every person convicted of reckless driving
(first conviction)
Police
Fine Not < $100.00 nor > $500.00 10-5-4B
Fine for every person convicted of reckless driving
(second or subsequent conviction)
Police
Fine Not < $100.00 nor > $500.00 10-5-5 Fine upon conviction for any person who, as an
operator of a motor vehicle, is a participant in drag
racing
Police
Fine $75.00 10-5-6B
Fine for any person convicted of negligent driving Police
Late fee
75.00 10-5-6B
Additional penalty for failure to pay fine as
stipulated by subsection 10-5-6B of this code within
10 days
Police
Fine Not > $500.00 10-7-20
Fine for failure to dispose of any inoperable motor
vehicle upon receipt of a notice from the city
Code
enforcement
Fine Not < $75.00 nor > $500.00 10-7-
42C
Fine for violating any provision of section 10-7-42,
"Skateboards Prohibited", of this code
Police
Late fee
Not < $75.00 nor > $500.00 10-7-
42C
Additional penalty for failure to pay fine as
stipulated by section 10-7-42, "Skateboards
Prohibited", of this code within 10 days
Police
Fine Not < $75.00 nor > $500.00 10-7-
43C
Fine for violating any provision of section 10-7-43,
"Loitering", of this code
Police
Late fee
Not < $75.00 nor > $500.00 10-7-
43C
Additional penalty for failure to pay fine as
stipulated by section 10-7-43, "Loitering", of this
code within 10 days
Police
Fine Not < $75.00 nor > $500.00 10-8-1A
Fine for any vehicle standing in an intersection,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic control device
Police
Late fee
Not < $75.00 nor > $500.00 10-8-1A
Additional penalty for failure to pay fine as
stipulated by subsection 10-8-1A of this code within
10 days
Police
Fine Not < $75.00 nor > $500.00 10-8-1B
Fine for any vehicle standing in a crosswalk, except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic
or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic control device
Police
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 467/470
Late fee
Not < $75.00 nor > $500.00 10-8-1B
Additional penalty for failure to pay fine as
stipulated by subsection 10-8-1B of this code within
10 days
Police
Fine Not < $75.00 nor > $500.00 10-8-1E
Fine for any vehicle standing within 30 feet of a
traffic signal on the approaching side, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control device
Police
Late fee
Not < $75.00 nor > $500.00 10-8-1E
Additional penalty for failure to pay fine as
stipulated by subsection 10-8-1E of this code within
10 days
Police
Fine Not < $75.00 nor > $500.00 10-8-1J
Fine for any vehicle standing either alongside or
opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such parking would obstruct traffic, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control device
Police
Late fee
Not < $75.00 nor > $500.00 10-8-1J
Additional penalty for failure to pay fine as
stipulated by subsection 10-8-1J of this code within
10 days
Police
Fine Not < $75.00 nor > $500.00 10-8-5 Fine for any person who parks a vehicle between
the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. of any day on
any street, except for emergency purposes. In all of
the districts, it shall be unlawful for any person to
park a vehicle weighing in excess of 8,000 pounds
on any street for a period of time longer than 30
minutes between the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 6:00
A.M. for any day except for emergency purposes
Police
Late fee
Not < $75.00 nor > $500.00 10-8-5 Additional penalty for failure to pay fine as
stipulated by section 10-8-5, "All Night Parking", of
this code within 10 days
Police
Fine Not > $200.00 10-8-7-
17
Fine for any person violating any provisions of
section 10-8-7, "Abandoned, Lost, Stolen,
Hazardous Unclaimed Vehicles", of this code
Police
Fine Not < $10.00 nor > $500.00 10-8-8 Fine for any person violating any provision of
section 10-8-8, "Willow Woods Condominium
Complex Parking Regulations", of this code
Police
Fine Not < $10.00 nor > $500.00 10-8-9 Fine for any person violating any provision of
section 10-8-9, "Willow Heights Condominium
Complex Parking Regulations", of this code
Police
Fine Not < $10.00 nor > $500.00 10-8-10
Fine for any person violating any provision of
section 10-8-10, "Rob Roy Country Club Village
Condominium Complex Parking Regulations", of
this code
Police
Fine Not < $10.00 nor > $500.00 10-8-
11C
Fine for any person violating any provision of
section 10-8-11, "Wimbledon Lake Estates
Residential Development Parking Regulations", of
this code
Police
Fee $1.75 10-8-
12A1
Fee for parking for 12 hour period, or part thereof,
at the Metra Commuter Station
Admin
Fine $75.00 if paid within 10 days and $150.00 if more than 10
days from the date of the violation
10-8-
12E4
Fine for failure to pay required Metra Commuter
Station parking fee as stipulated in section 10-8-12,
"Metra Commuter Station Regulations", of this
code
Police
Fee $30.00 10-8-
12F3
Fee for monthly "daily" parking permit which allows
parking every business day for a designated month
at the Metra Commuter Station
Admin
Fee 3.50 10-8-
12F4
Fee for daily "overnight" parking permit which
allows 24 hour parking at the Metra Commuter
Station
Admin
Fine Not < $10.00 nor > $500.00 10-12-3
Fine for violating any provision of title 10, "Motor
Vehicles And Traffic", of this code
Police
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 468/470
Fee $100.00 10-13-
3A
Fee for the costs of the city related to the
impoundment of motorized skateboards before the
impounded motorized skateboard is returned to its
owner
Police
Fine 25.00 10-13-4
Fine to avoid prosecution for violating any provision
of title 10, chapter 13, "Motorized Skateboards", of
this code if paid within 0 - 10 days of the time of the
violation
Police
Fine 50.00 10-13-4
Fine to avoid prosecution for violating any provision
of title 10, chapter 13, "Motorized Skateboards", of
this code if paid after 10 days of the time of the
violation
Police
Fine 100.00 10-14-
7A
Fine for violating an automated traffic law
enforcement system as stipulated in title 10,
chapter 14, "Automated Traffic Law Enforcement
System", of this code
Police
Fine 100.00 10-14-
7A
Additional fine for failing to pay fine as stipulated in
subsection 10-14-7A of this code in a timely
manner
Police
Fine Not > $150.00 10-14-
7B
Fine for violating any provisions regarding
approaching, overtaking and passing a school bus
through an automated traffic law enforcement
system (first time violation)
Police
Fine Not > $500.00 10-14-
7B
Fine for violating any provisions regarding
approaching, overtaking and passing a school bus
through an automated traffic law enforcement
system (second or subsequent violation)
Police
Late fee
$100.00 10-14-
7B
Late fee for failure to pay the original penalty as
stipulated in subsection 10-14-7B of this code in a
timely manner
Police
Fee 500.00 10-15-
1A1
Administrative, towing and storage fee for the
operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection
with violations as set forth in section 10-15-1,
"Violations Authorizing Impoundment", of this code
Police
Fee 500.00 10-15-
1A2
Administrative, towing and storage fee for the
operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection
with violations as set forth in section 10-15-1,
"Violations Authorizing Impoundment", of this code
Police
Fee 500.00 10-15-
1A3
Administrative, towing and storage fee for the
operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection
with violations as set forth in section 10-15-1,
"Violations Authorizing Impoundment", of this code
Police
Fee 500.00 10-15-
1A4
Administrative, towing and storage fee for the
operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection
with violations as set forth in section 10-15-1,
"Violations Authorizing Impoundment", of this code
Police
Fee 500.00 10-15-
1A5
Administrative, towing and storage fee for the
operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection
with violations as set forth in section 10-15-1,
"Violations Authorizing Impoundment", of this code
Police
Fee 500.00 10-15-
1A6
Administrative, towing and storage fee for the
operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection
with violations as set forth in section 10-15-1,
"Violations Authorizing Impoundment", of this code
Police
Fee 500.00 10-15-
1A7
Administrative, towing and storage fee for the
operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection
with violations as set forth in section 10-15-1,
"Violations Authorizing Impoundment", of this code
Police
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 469/470
Fee 500.00 10-15-
1A8
Administrative, towing and storage fee for the
operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection
with violations as set forth in section 10-15-1,
"Violations Authorizing Impoundment", of this code
Police
Fee 500.00 10-15-
1A9
Administrative, towing and storage fee for the
operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection
with violations as set forth in section 10-15-1,
"Violations Authorizing Impoundment", of this code
Police
Fee 500.00 10-15-
1A10
Administrative, towing and storage fee for the
operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection
with violations as set forth in section 10-15-1,
"Violations Authorizing Impoundment", of this code
Police
Fee 500.00 10-15-
1A11
Administrative, towing and storage fee for the
operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection
with violations as set forth in section 10-15-1,
"Violations Authorizing Impoundment", of this code
Police
Fee 500.00 10-15-
1A12
Administrative, towing and storage fee for the
operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection
with violations as set forth in section 10-15-1,
"Violations Authorizing Impoundment", of this code
Police
Fine 100.00 11-2-2 Fee for registration as a telecommunications carrier
or provider
Admin
Fee $1,500.00 or 2% of estimated cost of the applicant's
proposed telecommunications facilities
11-6-2A
Fee for an applicant for a license or franchise
pursuant to title 11, chapters 3,
"Telecommunications License", and 4,
"Telecommunications Franchise", of this code
Admin
Fee $0.50 per linear foot 11-6-4A
Fee per linear foot for each inch in diameter of
aerial transmission lines for cable or
telecommunications franchise licensees
Admin
Fee $0.61 per linear foot 11-6-4B
Fee per linear foot for underground transmission
lines or conduit of 4 inches or less in diameter for
cable or telecommunications franchise licensees
Admin
Fee $1.00 per linear foot 11-6-4C
Fee per linear foot for underground transmission
lines or conduit over 4 inches but less than 8
inches in diameter for cable or telecommunications
franchise licensees
Admin
Fee $1.50 per linear foot 11-6-4D
Fee per linear foot for underground transmission
lines or conduits over 8 inches in diameter for cable
or telecommunications franchise licensees
Admin
Fee 1.5% of estimated cost 11-6-6 Fee using the estimated cost of construction for a
construction permit to construct
telecommunications facilities
Building and
Zoning
Fee $0.38 per access line 11-6-7 Fee per access line which serves as
reimbursement for the City's cost in connection with
reviewing, inspecting and supervising the use and
occupancy of the public rights-of-way on behalf of
the public and existing and future uses unless
otherwise agreed in an agreement
Building and
Zoning
Fee 5% of gross revenues 11-6-8 Franchise fee for each cable television grantee Admin
Fee 2% over prime APR 11-6-11
Interest rate in the event that any fee or
recomputed amount is not paid on or before the
applicable dates as specified
Admin
Fee 5% of gross revenues 11-10-
2B
Fee for cable/video service providers Admin
Fee 1% of gross revenues 11-10-
3B
Fee for PEG access support Admin
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=920 470/470
Fine Not > $750.00 11-11-3
Fine for each day of any material breach of the
cable and video protection law by cable or video
providers in addition to the penalties provided in
the law
Admin
Fine Not > $25,000.00 11-11-3
Fine for each occurrence of a material breach of a
cable or video customer in addition to the penalties
provided in the Cable and Video Protection Law
Admin
(Ord. 0-16-18, 6-27-2016; amd. Ord. 0-17-03, 3-27-2017, eff. 4-1-2017; Ord. 0-17-08, 4-24-2017; Ord. 0-17-20, 7-24-2017; Ord. 0-17-24, 10-9-2017; Ord.
0-19-06, 2-25-2019)
Type Fine Or Fee Amount
Code
Section
Description
Department