VILLAGE OF SWANSEA, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2018 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 1836, passed 8-20-2018
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING CORPORATION
One West Fourth Street ? 3rd Floor ? Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 ? www.amlegal.com
SWANSEA, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10. Rules of Construction; General Penalty
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
30. General Provisions
31. Mayor and Board of Trustees
32. Officials and Organizations
33. Employee Rules and Regulations
34. Public Safety
35. Police and Fire Departments
36. Finance, Revenue and Taxation
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
50. General Provisions
51. Refuse Collection
52. Sewer Regulations
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70. General Regulations
71. Traffic Control Regulations
72. Parking Regulations
73. Bicycles, Toy Vehicles and Motorcycles
74. Pedestrians
75. Vehicle conditions, Equipment and Loads
76. Motor Vehicle Offenses
77. Traffic Schedules
78. Parking Schedules
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
90. Animals
91. Nuisances
1
2 Swansea - Table of Contents
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS (Cont’d)
92. Park Regulations
93. Street Regulations
94. Fireworks
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110. General Registration
111. Peddlers and Solicitors
112. Junk Yards
113. Tow Yards
114. Games of Chance
115. Liquor Control
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
130. General Provisions
131. Sex Offenses
132. Bodily Harm
133. Offenses Against Property
134. Public Health, Safety and Decency
135. Litter
136. Trespass
137. Parental Responsibility
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150. Building Code; Regulations
151. Manufactured Homes
152. Floodplains
153. Subdivision Code
154. Zoning Code
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[Reserved]
Table of Contents 3
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Resolutions
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
INDEX
4 Swansea - Table of Contents
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
10. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
1
2 Swansea - General Provisions
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
10.01 Title of code; acceptance; jurisdiction
10.02 Definitions
10.03 Section headings
10.04 Rules of construction
10.05 Official time
10.06 Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
10.07 Reference to other sections
10.08 Conflicting provisions
10.09 Amendments to code
10.10 Severability
10.11 Reference to public office or officer
10.12 Errors and omissions
10.13 Ordinances repealed
10.14 Ordinances unaffected
10.15 Ordinances saved
10.16 Technical codes
10.17 Historical and statutory references
10.18 Code alteration
10.19 Village Clerk’s certificate
10.99 General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE; ACCEPTANCE; JURISDICTION.
(A) Upon the adoption by the Village Board of Trustees, this village code is hereby declared to
be and shall hereafter constitute the official “Revised Municipal Code of the Village of Swansea”.
The Revised Municipal Code, known and cited as the “Swansea Municipal Code”, “this code of
ordinances” or “this code”, is hereby published by authority of the Village Board, and shall be
amended and updated as provided in § 10.09 of this chapter under the direction of the Village
Attorney, acting for said Village Board. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein
shall be understood to refer to the
position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and part heading and to the general penalty
clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this municipal code
by title in any legal document.
(Prior Code, § 1-101)
3
2018 S-1
4 Swansea - General Provisions
(B) This municipal code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this state as the ordinances of
the village of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in § 10.14 of
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1-102)
(C) Unless otherwise provided herein, this municipal code applies to acts performed within the
corporate limits of the village. Provisions of this municipal code also apply to acts performed outside
the corporate limits, and up to the limits prescribed by law, where the law confers power on the
village to regulate such particular acts outside the corporate limits.
(Prior Code, § 1-105)
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
AGENT. A person acting on behalf of another.
ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject of an offense,
includes not only natural persons, but also every other owner of property.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES or VILLAGE BOARD. The Board of Trustees of the village.
CIVIL CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any civilian citizen or firefighter employed or
authorized by the village to carry out the enforcement of this Code of Ordinances. This term shall not
include or apply to any member of the police force.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The Mayor and the Village Board of Trustees.
COUNTY. St. Clair County, Illinois.
COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of St. Clair County, Illinois.
(5 ILCS 70/1.07)
COURT. Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.
DECREE. Synonymous with JUDGMENT.
(5 ILCS 70/1.24)
ELECTORS. Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at municipal elections.
(65 ILCS 5/1-1-2)
2018 S-1
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 5
EMPLOYEES. Whenever reference is made in this municipal code to a village employee by title
only, it shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the village”.
EXECUTIVE OFFICER. Words used for an executive or ministerial officer may include any
deputy or other person performing the duties of that officer, either generally or in special cases.
(5 ILCS 70/1.08)
FEES. A sum of money charged by the village for carrying on of a business, profession or
occupation.
FISCAL YEAR. Begins on May 1 of each year and ends on April 30 of the following year.
HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER. HERETOFORE means any time previous to the day on
which the ordinance, resolution or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER means at any time after that
date.
(5 ILCS 70/1.17)
HIGHWAY, ROAD or STREET. Any road laid out by authority of the United States, of the
state or of any town or county of the state, and all bridges thereupon.
(5 ILCS 70/1.16)
ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1992, as heretofore and hereafter amended.
KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves, or as a
servant, agent or employee.
KNOWINGLY. Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the act or omission
within the provisions of this municipal code. It does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness
of such act or omission.
LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
LEGAL HOLIDAY. The holidays as authorized and recognized by the Village Board.
LICENSE. The permission granted for the carrying on of a regulated business, profession,
occupation or activity.
MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
MAYOR. The President of the Village of Swansea, Illinois.
MISDEMEANOR. Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this code, which is a
lesser offense than a felony as defined by state law.
6 Swansea - General Provisions
MONTH. A calendar month.
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5.
NEGLIGENT, NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE and NEGLIGENTLY. Imports a want of such
attention to the nature of probable consequences of the act or omission as a prudent person ordinarily
bestows in acting in his or her own concern.
NUISANCE. Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the
village, or any act or thing repugnant to, creating a hazard to or having a detrimental effect on the
property of another person or to the community.
OATH. Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.
(5 ILCS 70/1.12)
OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or any
part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE. Any act forbidden by any provision of this municipal code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this municipal code.
OFFICERS. Whenever reference is made in this municipal code to a village officer by title only,
it shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the village”.
OFFICIAL TIME.
(1) Central Standard Time shall be the official time for the transaction of the village
business, except during applicable Daylight Savings Time set by national or state standards when the
official time shall be advanced one hour.
(2) All clocks and other timepieces in or upon public buildings or other premises
maintained by or at the expense of the village shall be set and run at the official time prescribed by
this definition.
OPERATOR. The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, purchaser and seller
under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common of the whole or part of the property, and includes
any beneficiary of a land trust which owns property.
PERSON. Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships, corporations, joint ventures and
bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals.
(5 ILCS 70/1.05)
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 7
PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of
rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to
property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and
every right or interest therein.
POLICE OFFICERS. Police officers employed and in the service of the Village of Swansea.
POLICE FORCE shall be construed to include those persons in the employ of a village as members
of the Department of Police, who are or shall hereafter be appointed and sworn as POLICE
OFFICERS.
(5 ILCS 70/1.20)
PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and other interests.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes school districts; units of legal government; the village, county,
state or federal governments, officers and agencies thereof, or any commissions or committees
thereof; or any duly authorized public official.
PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard, body of water or
watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for the sale of merchandise, public
accommodation or amusement.
REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
RETAILER. Understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small
quantities direct to the consumer.
REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail, and CERTIFIED MAIL includes registered
mail.
SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway,
and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians.
(625 ILCS 5/1-188)
SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning ascribed in Art. VII of the Constitution of the State of
Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.29)
STATE. The State of Illinois.
STREET. Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, squares and
other public thoroughfares.
8 Swansea - General Provisions
TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a written or oral
lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the premises, alone or with others.
THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The village code hereby adopted, and as
hereinafter modified by amendment, revision and by the adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in § 1 of Art. VII of the
Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28)
VILLAGE. The Village of Swansea, Illinois.
WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals, agents and
employees; and all officials, public or private.
WHOLESALER or WHOLESALE DEALER. Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be
understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, article or things in quantity to persons who
purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILLFULLY. When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a
purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission referred to. It does not require any
intent to violate law or to injure another or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing, electronic and any other mode of representing
words and letters; but when the written signature of any person is required by law on any official or
public writing or bond, required by law, except as otherwise provided by law it shall be:
(1) The proper handwriting of that person, or in case he or she is unable to write, his or her
proper mark; or
(2) An electronic signature as defined in the Electronic Commerce Security Act, 5 ILCS
175/1-101 et seq.
(5 ILCS 70/1.15)
YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR alone is equivalent to
the expression “Year of Our Lord”.
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
(Prior Code, § 1-112) (Ord. 1826, passed 5-21-2018; Ord. 1834, passed 8-6-2018)
2018 S-1
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 9
§ 10.03 SECTION HEADINGS.
The headings or catchlines of the several sections of this municipal code are intended as mere
headings or catchwords to indicate the content of a section and shall not be deemed or taken to be the
titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, unless expressly so provided, nor shall they be
so deemed when any of such sections, including the headings or catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(Prior Code, § 1-113)
§ 10.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
(A) Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to the rules of grammar
and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether
by legislative or judicial definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(B) As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires, the following rules will be
followed.
(1) The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular.
(5 ILCS 70/1.03)
(2) Words of one gender shall include the other genders.
(5 ILCS 70/1.04)
(3) Words in the present tense shall include the future.
(5 ILCS 70/1.02)
(4) AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the context admits.
(C) (1) The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is Saturday or Sunday or is a
holiday, as defined or fixed in any statute now or hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also
be excluded.
(2) If the day succeeding Saturday, Sunday or a holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday or
Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be excluded.
(5 ILCS 70/1.11)
(D) When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as
by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an
authorized agent.
(E) Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more municipal officers or other persons
shall be construed as giving authority to a majority of the officers or persons.
(5 ILCS 70/1.09)
10 Swansea - General Provisions
(F) These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision of this code which shall contain
any express provision excluding that construction, or when the subject matter or context of this code
may be repugnant thereto.
(G) All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions shall be liberally construed in order
that the true intent and meaning of the President and Board of Trustees may be fully carried out.
(5 ILCS 70/1.01)
(H) The provisions of any ordinance, in so far as they are the same as those of any prior
ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the prior provisions, and not as a new enactment.
(5 ILCS 70/2)
§ 10.05 OFFICIAL TIME.
(A) Central Standard Time shall be the official time for the transaction of the village business,
except during applicable Daylight Savings Time set by national or state standards when the official
time shall be advanced one hour.
(B) All clocks and other timepieces in or upon public buildings or other premises maintained by
or at the expense of the village shall be set and run at the official time prescribed by this section.
(Prior Code, § 1-112)
§ 10.06 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
(A) The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance originally repealed, nor
impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
(B) The reenactment, amendment or repeal of an ordinance does not do any of the following,
except as provided in division (C) below:
(1) Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action taken thereunder;
(2) Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or liability previously acquired,
accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder;
(3) Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect
thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or
(4) Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any privilege, obligation,
liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment. The investigation, proceeding or remedy may be
instituted, continued or enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the
ordinance had not been repealed or amended.
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 11
(C) If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by a reenactment or
amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be
imposed according to the ordinance as amended.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
(A) Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a section or an inclusive
group of sections, the reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section
or sections included in the reference.
(B) References in this code to action taken or authorized under designated sections of this code
include, in every case, action taken or authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is
superseded by this code.
(C) Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the reference shall
extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or
renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision
and the context clearly indicates that the reference to the section as amended or revised was not
intended.
§ 10.08 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of these codified ordinances conflict
with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the latest passage date shall prevail. If the
conflicting provisions bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be
consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject matter taken as a whole.
§ 10.09 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
Any ordinance amending this municipal code shall set forth the chapter section number of the
section or sections to be amended. This shall constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory
requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this municipal code.
All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately codified and said ordinance
shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this municipal code. Each such
replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the
municipal code on at least a semi-annual basis.
(Prior Code, § 1-103)
12 Swansea - General Provisions
§ 10.10 SEVERABILITY.
Each section, division, sentence, clause and provision of this municipal code is severable, and if
any provision is held unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the
remainder of this municipal code, nor any part thereof, other than that part affected by such decision.
(Prior Code, § 1-109)
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or
employee of the village exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. These
references shall also include the designee or agent of the officer or office, unless the law or the
context clearly requires otherwise.
§ 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word or words, the
omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected, the use
of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when
another word or words was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and
the provision shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as
originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature
pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the
subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code
of ordinances.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
(A) (1) All general ordinances of the village passed prior to the adoption of this municipal code
are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in force, or are, by necessary
implication, herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in division (B)
below).
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 13
(2) The following ordinances are excluded from, and hereby not, repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract
ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the
transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the village; and all special ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1-106)
(B) No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways or
relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the
adoption of this municipal code or by virtue of division (A) above, excepting as this municipal code
shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
(Prior Code, § 1-107)
(C) (1) No new ordinances shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether
such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former
ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right
accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any
right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings
thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in form at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment
announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
(2) This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether
the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other
ordinance. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as abating any action now pending
under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the village herein repealed and the provisions of all
general ordinances contained in this municipal code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and
not a new enactment of the same provision; nor shall this section be deemed as discontinuing,
abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any
person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the village under any ordinance or provision
thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this municipal code.
(Prior Code, § 1-108)
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES SAVED.
Whenever an ordinance, by its nature, either authorizes or enables the Board of Trustees or a
certain village officer or employee to make additional regulations for the purpose of carrying out the
intent of the ordinance, all regulations of a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the
codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved.
14 Swansea - General Provisions
§ 10.16 TECHNICAL CODES.
Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any subsequent amendments
or revisions to the technical codes shall automatically become a part of this code and shall be made
available for public inspection by the village. Further, to the extent of any conflict between the
technical provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted by reference, the most restrictive
provision shall prevail.
§ 10.17 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
(A) As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage date of the original
ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section.
Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord.
25, passed 1-1-1985)
(B) An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates that the text of the section reads either
verbatim or substantially the same as the statute. Example: (65 ILCS 5/3.1-2-1)
(C) An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the text of the section
indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for further information. Example:
§ 38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
The village shall make available to any person for inspection or copying
all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
Statutory reference:
Freedom of Information Act, see 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
§ 10.18 CODE ALTERATION.
(A) It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way,
any section or any page of this municipal code in such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or
order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to official
instructions when so authorized by the Village Board. The Clerk shall see that the replacement pages
are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk.
(B) (1) Any person having in his or her custody an official copy of this municipal code shall
make every effort to maintain said code in an up-to-date and efficient manner. He or she shall see to
the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered to him or her or made
available to him or her through the office of the Village Clerk.
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 15
(2) Said municipal code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons shall be, and remain, the property of the village, and shall be returned to the office of the
Clerk upon termination of office or separation of duties.
(Prior Code, § 1-104) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 10.19 VILLAGE CLERK’S CERTIFICATE.
The Village Clerk’s certificate shall be substantially in the following form:
VILLAGE CLERK’S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF ST. CLAIR ) ss.
VILLAGE CLERK’S OFFICE
VILLAGE OF SWANSEA )
I, , Village Clerk of the Village of Swansea, Illinois,
do hereby certify that the following Revised Municipal Code of the Village of Swansea, Illinois, of
, published by authority of the Village Trustees, was duly passed by the Village Trustees of the
Village of Swansea, Illinois, approved by the Mayor and published in book form according to law on
this date, and that these ordinances are true and perfect copies of the ordinances, as passed and
approved, and now of record and on file in my office as provided by law.
In witness whereof, I have set my hand and affixed the corporate seal of the Village of Swansea,
Illinois this day of , 20 .
VILLAGE CLERK
VILLAGE OF SWANSEA, ILLINOIS
(Prior Code, § 1-110)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
(A) Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this municipal code shall be fined a
minimum of $25 and a sum not to exceed $750 for any one offense. Any minor or person designated
a juvenile by the state convicted of a violation of any section of this municipal code shall be fined a
minimum of $25 and a sum not to exceed $750 for any one offense, but may not be confined, except
by provisions of the Juvenile Court Act of the state.
(Prior Code, § 1-114)
16 Swansea - General Provisions
(B) When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this municipal code, any license
previously issued to him or her by the village may be revoked by the court or by the Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 1-115)
(C) (1) The penalty provided in this section shall be applicable to every section of this
municipal code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section. Any person
convicted of a violation of any section of this municipal code where any duty is prescribed or
obligation imposed, or where any act, which is of a continuing nature or declared to be unlawful,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically
provided in this municipal code.
(2) In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses
or sections of this municipal code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not
more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided that, the
revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
(3) Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any
section or provision of this municipal code, and there is no fine or penalty specifically declared for
such breach, the provisions of this section shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during, or on which, a breach or violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 1-116)
(D) The failure of any officer or employee to perform any official duty imposed by this
municipal code shall not subject such officer or employee to the penalty imposed for violation of this
municipal code, unless a penalty is specifically provided for.
(Prior Code, § 1-117)
Statutory reference:
Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1
Limitations on penalties and collection upon default in payment, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. GENERAL PROVISIONS
31. MAYOR AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
32. OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS
33. EMPLOYEE RULES AND REGULATIONS
34. PUBLIC SAFETY
35. POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
36. FINANCE, REVENUE AND TAXATION
1
2 Swansea - Administration
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
30.01 Corporate seal
30.02 Qualifications for holding office
30.03 Bonds of village officers
30.04 Salaries regulation
30.05 Reimbursement for travel expenses
30.06 Fiscal year
30.07 Municipal year
30.08 Village records
30.09 Salaries of village officials
30.10 Corrective action plans
Appendix A: Village of Swansea Trave, Meal and Lodging Expense Reimbursement Request
Form
§ 30.01 CORPORATE SEAL.
(A) The corporate seal of the village shall be the same as that heretofore provided and used by
the village. It shall be circular in form with the words, “Village of Swansea, St. Clair County, IL” in
the exterior circle, and shall say “seal” in the center.
(B) The corporate seal shall be used as such in all cases provided for by law, by the ordinances
of the village and in all other cases in which, by law and custom, it is usual and necessary for the
corporation to use a seal. The seal shall be and remain with the Village Clerk who shall be the legal
custodian.
(Prior Code, § 2-1401)
§ 30.02 QUALIFICATIONS FOR HOLDING OFFICE.
(A) No person shall be eligible to hold any municipal office unless:
(1) He or she has been a qualified elector of the municipality for at least one year next
preceding his or her election or appointment;
3
2018 S-1
4 Swansea - Administration
(2) He or she has been a resident of the municipality for at least one year next preceding his
or her election or appointment; and
(3) He or she is not a defaulter to the municipality.
(B) These requirements shall not apply to the municipal engineer, municipal attorneys or to
other appointed offices which require technical training or knowledge, and for which a requirement
of residency would significantly restrict the availability of candidates.
(Prior Code, § 2-1402)
§ 30.03 BONDS OF VILLAGE OFFICERS.
(A) Amount. Bonds of village officers required under 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30 shall be executed in
at least the following penal sums:
(1) Mayor: $10,000;
(2) Village Clerk: $10,000;
(3) Village Treasurer: $500,000;
(4) Utility Control Clerk: $20,000.
(B) Premium payment by village. The surety bonds required by law shall be paid by the village.
(C) Surety. The Village Board shall not receive or approve any bond or security whereon the
name of the Village Board, any one of the Trustees or any elected or appointed officer of the village
appear as bondsman or security. If, by mistake, a bond containing the name of such officer is
approved by the Village Board or, if any bondsman, after becoming such, is elected or appointed to
any village office, this section shall not act as a release of any such obligation incurred.
(Prior Code, § 2-1403) (Ord. 1801, passed 12-18-2017)
§ 30.04 SALARIES REGULATION.
(A) Elected. The salary or compensation of any elected municipal officer who is elected for a
definite term of office shall not be increased or diminished during such term, except as otherwise
provided by law.
(B) Appointed. The salary or compensation of any appointed official who is appointed for a
definite term of office may be increased, but shall not be decreased during such term.
2018 S-1
General Provisions 5
(C) Employees; non-contract. The Village Board may increase the salary or wage of noncontract
employees on an annual basis, but such increase shall not commence until the first day of the
first pay period that occurs fully within the month of July. The Board of Trustees may, at its
discretion, increase the salary or wage of employees or groups of employees at other times,
including, but not limited to, the completion of various steps of probationary employment. The Board
of Trustees may, at its discretion, decrease the salary or wage of employees or groups of employees
at any time.
(D) Employees; contract. Wage increases or decreases of employees serving within a collective
bargaining agreement shall be governed by the terms of the agreement.
(Prior Code, § 2-1404) (Ord. 1585, passed 7-6-2010)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-5 et seq.
§ 30.05 REIMBURSEMENT FOR TRAVEL EXPENSES.
(A) It is the policy of the village to reimburse its employees, officers and elected officials for
expenses incurred related to “public business”, meaning expenses incurred in the performance of a
public purpose which is required or useful for the benefit of the village to carry out the
responsibilities of village business, including but not limited to:
(1) The Illinois Municipal League Annual Conference;
(2) Meetings of the Southwestern Illinois Council of Mayors;
(3) Meetings of the Southwestern Illinois City Manager's Association;
(4) Applicable seminars, workshops and training events;
(5) Other village business.
(B) Expenses incurred during the course of outside-the-office public business and public
business travel will therefore be reimbursed or paid by the village, based upon documented,
reasonable and necessary expenses.
(1) Village employees, officers, and elected officials are expected to show good judgment
and common regard for economy when traveling at the village's expense, selecting travel options that
are the best available value.
(2) In order to be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses, employees, officers, and elected
officials must provide proof that the expenses were incurred on official village business and submit
receipts along with an approved reimbursement form.
6 Swansea - Administration
(3) Employees must seek pre-approval from their department head prior to booking any
airfare, rental vehicles or overnight stay accommodations to ensure that the planned itinerary is
eligible for reimbursement according to this policy.
(4) As required by the Local Government Travel Expense Control Act, all expenditures of
any elected official must be approved by roll call vote upon a proper motion in open session,
preferably before, but permissibly after the expense is incurred by the official.
(5) Requests for reimbursement of expenses must be submitted no less than quarterly.
(C) Reimbursement or payment shall only be made for the following specific types of travel,
meals, and lodging, and shall not exceed the maximum allowable amounts specified:
(1) Travel.
(a) Air travel (only when the most reasonable or cost effective mode). One hundred
percent of the best available fare at the time of purchase;
(b) Train travel. One hundred percent of the best available fare at the time of purchase;
(c) Automobile rental, taxi, shuttle or other connecting ground transportation. One
hundred percent of fare of least; expensive mode of available transportation between airport/train
station and destination;
(d) Auto travel. The GSA Privately Owned Vehicle (POV) reimbursement rate
currently in effect at the time travel occurs, with ride sharing to the greatest degree possible;
(e) Parking. 100% of least costly option within a reasonable distance of the
destination;
(f) Tolls. 100% of tolls charged along the direct route of travel.
(2) Meals. When not otherwise provided as part of the cost of the conference, training, or
event, not to exceed the current GSA Meals and Incidental Expenses (M&IE) rate for the specific
location.
(3) Lodging; hotel or motel. Not to exceed the current GSA Per Diem rate for the specific
location, provided however that 100% of the conference hotel rate for the annual Illinois Municipal
League Conference shall be reimbursed or paid.
(D) The following are specifically excluded from reimbursement or payment by the village:
(1) Alcoholic beverages;
General Provisions 7
(2) Expenses of a personal nature and incurred for the convenience of the employee, officer
or elected official, such as traveling indirect routes, upgrading a plane ticket to first class, or
upgrading room accommodations;
(3) Expenses for in-room movies, use of spa, exercise, or other hotel facilities for which
there is an optional charge;
(4) Any expenses or differential incurred for meals, travel, lodging, or any other fees
related to a spouse, other family member, friend, or other non-village employee, officer or elected
official;
(5) Parking tickets, traffic citations, or other fees that could be reasonably avoided by
following applicable traffic laws;
(6) Travel or hotel change/cancellation fees that could have been reasonably avoided;
(7) Any other non-work related expenses.
(E) TRAVEL means any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees, officers or
elected officials of the village or by wards or charges of the village involving reimbursement to
travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing transportation or related services.
(F) The village shall not reimburse any employee, officer, or elected official, for any activities
which would be considered entertainment.
(1) “Entertainment” includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements, theaters, circuses,
sporting events, or any other place of public or private entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary
to the purpose of the program or event.
(2) Activities which would otherwise be considered entertainment, but which are excluded
from the prohibition on reimbursement due to being ancillary to the purpose of the program or event,
may be reimbursed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(G) By roll call vote on a proper motion in open session, the Village Board may, on a case by
case basis, pre-approve exceptions to this policy as is deemed necessary and prudent.
(H) No reimbursement of travel, meal or lodging expenses incurred by a village employee,
officer, or elected official shall be authorized unless the village's “Travel, Meal, and Lodging
Expense Reimbursement Request Form” has been completed, submitted and approved. Said form
shall include:
(1) An estimate of the cost of travel, meals, or lodging if expenses have not been incurred
or a receipt of the cost of the travel, meals, or lodging if the expenses have already been incurred;
(2) The name of the individual who received or is requesting the travel, meal, or lodging
expense;
8 Swansea - Administration
(3) The job title or office of the individual who received or is requesting the travel, meal,
or lodging expense; and
(4) The date or dates and nature of the official business in which the travel, meal, or
lodging expense was or will be expended.
(I) The “Travel, Meal, and Lodging Expense Reimbursement Request Form”, and all
documents and information submitted with said form shall be subject to disclosure under the
Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.).
§ 30.06 FISCAL YEAR.
The fiscal year of the village shall begin on May 1 and end on the following April 30.
(Prior Code, § 2-1405)
§ 30.07 MUNICIPAL YEAR.
The municipal year shall commence on May 1 and shall end on the following April 30.
(Prior Code, § 2-1406)
§ 30.08 VILLAGE RECORDS.
All official records, including the village seal, shall be kept in the village’s Government Center.
(Prior Code, § 2-1407)
§ 30.09 SALARIES OF VILLAGE OFFICIALS.
(A) Mayor. The Mayor shall receive the sum of $15,000 per annum, payable at a rate $1,250
per month, as compensation for his or her services.
(B) Trustees. Each Trustee shall receive the sum of $7,200 per annum, payable at a rate of $600
per month, as compensation for his or her services.
(C) Clerk. The Clerk shall receive the sum of $7,200 per annum, payable at a rate of $600 per
month, as compensation for this services.
(D) Treasurer. The Treasurer shall receive the sum of $7,200 per annum, payable at a rate of
$600 per month, as compensation for his or her services.
General Provisions 9
(E) Reimbursement. Each elected official shall also be entitled to reimbursement for actual
expenses incurred by him or her in the performance of his or her duties, other than travel, meals and
lodging which shall be reimbursed in accordance with § 30.05.
(Prior Code, § 2-1408) (Ord. 1773, passed 2-6-2017)
§ 30.10 CORRECTIVE ACTION PLANS.
(A) Whenever any village department or function is inspected, evaluated, or audited, or when
any oversight is otherwise provided by an outside agency, the department head or functional
supervisor shall officially notify the appropriate oversight committee of the Village Board of Trustees
at or before the next scheduled meeting of the Board of Trustees.
(B) The department head or functional supervisor shall also provide the appropriate oversight
committee of the Village Board of Trustees with a copy of any formal inspection report, at or before
the next scheduled meeting of the Board of Trustees that follows receipt of any such report.
(C) The department head or functional supervisor shall ensure that any corrective action
specifically required by an inspecting agency is implemented within the time frame and guidelines of
the agency, and shall keep the appropriate committee of the Board of Trustees apprised of said
corrective action plan and implementation.
(D) Whenever an inspecting agency finds deficiencies but does not require corrective action, the
department head or functional supervisor shall submit a written corrective action plan to the
appropriate oversight committee as soon as possible, but no later than four months following the
inspection event. The committee will forward the corrective action plan to the entire Village Board,
if applicable.
(1) The department head or functional supervisor shall keep the committee apprised of the
implementation of any such corrective action plan, identifying all corrective actions taken, and the
results thereof.
(2) All noted deficiencies are to be corrected as soon as possible but in lieu of any other
required time frame, no later than 12 months from the date of the inspection.
(E) Once corrective action has been taken, the Board of Trustees may request re-inspection by
the inspecting agency. Any such re-inspection may be requested in its entirety or for specific
segments or the original inspection.
(F) The Village Board of Trustee is the final determining level for the assumption of risk.
(G) All reports and corrective action plans will be kept as a matter of public record.
(Ord. 1785, passed 7-5-2017)
2018 S-1
10 Swansea - Administration
General Provisions 11
APPENDIX A: VILLAGE OF SWANSEA TRAVEL, MEAL AND
LODGING EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT REQUEST FORM
In accordance with Public Act 99-0604, known as the “Local Government Travel Expense Control Act", and
Village Ordinance No.___, before an expense for travel, meals, or lodging can be paid or reimbursed, the
following minimum documentation must first be submitted in writing to the corporate authorities of the
Village, who shall approve or disapprove such request.
Details of Public Business event, conference, workshop, training or program:
Name:
Description/Purpose:
Please attach supporting documentation describing the nature of the official business event or program.
Location:
Date(s):
Name of Attendee:
Job Title/Office:
Estimated/Actual Costs
1. If seeking pre-approval, please provide an estimate of all associated costs for travel, meals, or lodging.
Attach documentation that supports your estimate.
2. If expenses have already been incurred and you are seeking reimbursement, please provide an accounting
of all associated costs for travel, meals, or lodging and attach receipts for all expenses.
Provide any other documentation that might assist the corporate authorities in considering your request for
pre-approval or reimbursement. In the discretion of the corporate authorities, additional documentation
relevant to the request for reimbursement may be required prior to action by the corporate authorities with
respect to the reimbursement request.
Requester Signature Date
******************************************************************************
Approved by the Board of Trustees this day of , 20
Signature Date
12 Swansea - Administration
CHAPTER 31: MAYOR AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Section
Board of Trustees
31.01 Composition and general powers
31.02 Meetings
31.03 Special meetings
31.04 Vacancies
31.05 Committees
31.06 Special committees
31.07 Quorum
31.08 Rules
31.09 Ordinances
31.10 Election procedure
31.11 Municipal officers, employees; regulations
31.12 Village offices consolidated
31.13 Contracts
31.14 Claims
Mayor
31.25 Election
31.26 Supervisory powers
31.27 Appointment of officers
31.28 Removal of officers
31.29 Designation of officers’ duties
31.30 Mayor pro-tem
31.31 Signature
31.32 Formal occasions
31.33 General duties
31.34 Release of prisoners
31.35 Liquor Commissioner
31.36 Deciding vote
13
14 Swansea - Administration
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 31.01 COMPOSITION AND GENERAL POWERS.
The Village Board shall consist of six Trustees, elected in conformity with this code and state
law governing elections in villages, and shall have such powers as are granted by 65 ILCS, as
amended. The term of office shall be for four years or until successors are elected and have
qualified.
(Prior Code, § 2-101)
§ 31.02 MEETINGS.
The regular meetings of the Board shall be held on the first and third Monday of each month at
the village’s Government Center at 7:00 p.m. If the regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, the
meeting shall take place on the Tuesday following at the same time. Adjourned meetings may be held
at such times as the Board may determine.
(Prior Code, § 2-102) (Ord. 1532, passed 11-3-2008; Ord. 1750, passed 6-6-2016; Ord. 1835,
passed 8-20-2018)
§ 31.03 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
Special meetings of the Village Board may be called by the Mayor or any three Trustees by
giving at least 48-hours’ notice of the time of such meeting. Such notices shall be served by mail, or
by any of the village police officers. Said notices shall specify the purpose of said special meeting
and the business to be taken up at that time and place. Such notice shall be posted at the village’s
Government Center and shall be provided to any local newspaper of general circulation, or any local
radio or television station, that has filed an annual request for such notice. Said notice shall be given
to the Mayor and members of the Village Board; provided, such news media has given an address
within the village at which notice may be given.
(Prior Code, § 2-103)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 5 ILCS 120/2.02 and 120/2.03
§ 31.04 VACANCIES.
(A) If a vacancy occurs on the Village Board and more than 28 months remain in the term and
the vacancy occurs at least 130 days before the next general municipal election, the office shall be
filled for the unexpired portion of the term by special election at that general municipal election.
During the period from the time that the vacancy occurs until the next election of Trustees, the
vacancy may be filled by the appointment of a Trustee by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of
the Village Board.
2018 S-1
Mayor and Board of Trustees 15
(B) If a vacancy occurs in the office of the Mayor and more than 28 months remain in the term
and the vacancy occurs at least 130 days before the next general municipal election, the office shall
be filled for the unexpired term by special election at that general municipal election. The Village
Board shall elect one of its members as Acting Mayor, who shall perform the duties and possess all
the rights and powers of the Mayor until a successor to fill the vacancy has been elected and has
qualified.
(Prior Code, § 2-104)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50
§ 31.05 COMMITTEES.
(A) The following standing committees of the Village Board are hereby established:
(1) Personnel;
(2) Finance;
(3) Judiciary;
(4) Community and Economic Development;
(5) Public Works;
(6) Public Safety;
(7) Cultural; and
(8) Swansea Report Committee (with the advice and consent of the Village Board).
(B) Committee members shall be appointed annually by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the Village Board at the first meeting in May, or as soon thereafter as is possible.
(C) The Chairperson of each committee shall also be appointed annually by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Village Board at that same meeting.
(D) The Mayor shall be ex-officio Chairperson of each and every standing committee. As exofficio
Chairperson, the Mayor shall not have a vote on any committee business to be considered,
nor is the Mayor to be considered a necessary member for the purposes of quorum.
(E) So far as is practicable, reports of committees shall be in writing.
16 Swansea - Administration
(F) As provided by law, any report of a committee of the Board shall be deferred for final
action thereon to the next regular meeting of the same after the report is made, upon the request of
any two Trustees present.
(G) The regular meetings of the committees shall be determined by committees annually.
Recessed meetings may be held at such times as the appropriate committee may determine.
(Prior Code, § 2-105) (Ord. 1490, passed 5-23-2007; Ord. 1499, passed 9-17-2007; Ord. 1526,
passed 8-4-2008; Ord. 1557, passed 10-19-2009)
§ 31.06 SPECIAL COMMITTEES.
Special committees may be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the advice and consent of the
Trustees as may be needed from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 2-106)
§ 31.07 QUORUM.
(A) In order to constitute a quorum for all public meetings of the Village Board, a majority of
the quorum must be physically present for the transaction of business, but a lesser number may
organize and adjourn, from day to day, and may compel the attendance of absent members.
(B) At a regular meeting, special meeting or committee meeting of the Board of Trustees, if a
quorum is physically present, a Trustee or the Village President (“Board member”) may attend the
meeting by video or audio conference if the Board member is prevented from physically attending
because of personal illness or disability, employment purposes or the business of the village, or
family or other emergency, so long as the Board member notifies the Village Clerk before the
meeting (unless advance notice is impractical) and the Board member participates by video or audio
conference for the entire meeting.
(C) After a role call establishing that a quorum is physically present where a Board member
desires to attend by video or audio conference, the presiding officer shall state that:
(1) Notice was received by a Board member to attend by video or audio conference; and
(2) The Board member will be deemed authorized to attend, unless a motion objecting to
the Board member’s attendance is made, seconded and approved by two-thirds of the corporate
authorities physically present at the meeting.
Mayor and Board of Trustees 17
(D) The provisions of this section also apply to closed meetings.
(Prior Code, § 2-107) (Ord. 1480, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 31.08 RULES.
The following rules of order and procedure shall govern the deliberations and meetings of the
Village Board.
(A) Rules of the Board. The Robert’s Rules of Order, current edition, is hereby adopted as the
rules of the Village Board of Trustees.
(B) Censure of Trustees; expulsion of Trustees. Any Trustee acting or appearing in a lewd or
disgraceful manner, or who uses abusive, obscene or insulting language to or about any member of
the Board, or who does not obey the order of the Chair, shall be, on motion, censured by a majority
vote of the members present, or expelled by a two-thirds vote of all Trustees then holding office.
(C) Decorum. Any person wishing to speak at a meeting of the Board of Trustees or a meeting
of a committee thereof on a matter on the meeting’s agenda shall first raise his or her hand to be
recognized by the meeting Chairperson. The speaker shall wait for recognition by the Chairperson,
then state his or her name and relationship to the matter under discussion, and then offer his or her
comment. Any person wishing to speak on a matter not on the agenda shall first contact any Trustee
or the Mayor no later than 4:30 p.m. on the Friday prior to the meeting so that the matter can be
referred to the proper committee of the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 2-108) (Ord. 1630, passed 11-7-2011; Ord. 1683, passed 8-19-2013)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-15 and 65 ILCS 5/3.1-45-10
§ 31.09 ORDINANCES.
(A) Introduced. A bill for ordinance shall be introduced in the appropriate committee and shall
be read one time. After review by the appropriate committees, said bill will be reported to the Board
of Trustees for action.
(B) Board consideration. While the general preference of the Board of Trustees is that
ordinances considered in a committee meeting occurring on the same date as a meeting of the Board
of Trustee, not be acted on by the Board of Trustees until a subsequent meeting, nothing in the code
shall prevent the Board of Trustees from doing so, and in fact there may be instances where the
necessity for timely action by the Board of Trustees makes it prudent that action be taken on the same
day. Therefore, the Board of Trustees, in its sole discretion, may consider the ordinance on the same
date as the date on which the ordinance is considered by a committee.
18 Swansea - Administration
(C) Passage by yeas and nays; record. The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all
ordinances, and on all propositions to create any liability against the village, or for the expenditure or
appropriation of its money, and all other cases at the request of any member and entered on the
journal of its proceeding and the concurrence of a majority of all the members elected in the Village
Board shall be necessary for the passage of any such ordinance or proposition; provided, it shall
require three-fourths of the Trustees to sell any village property.
(D) Approval and veto. All ordinances passed by the Village Board shall, before they take
effect, be deposited in the office of the Village Clerk and, if the Mayor approves thereof, he or she
shall sign the same and, such as he or she shall not approve, he or she shall return to the Village
Board, with his or her objections thereto in writing at the next regular meeting of the Village Board
occurring no less than five days after the passage thereof. Such veto may extend to any one or more
items or appropriations contained in any ordinance making an appropriation, or to the entire
ordinance; and in case the veto only extends to a part of such ordinance, the residue thereof shall
take effect and be in force. But in case the Mayor shall fail to return any ordinance with his or her
objections thereto by the time aforesaid, he or she shall be deemed to have approved such ordinance
and the same shall take effect accordingly.
(E) Reconsideration; passing over veto. Upon the return of any ordinance by the Mayor, the
vote by which the same has passed shall be reconsidered by the Village Board and, if after such
reconsideration, two-thirds of all of the members elected to the Village Board shall agree by yeas and
nays to pass the same, it shall go into effect, notwithstanding the Mayor may refuse to approve
thereof. The vote to pass the same over the Mayor’s veto shall be taken by yeas and nays and entered
in the Journal of Minutes.
(Prior Code, § 2-109) (Ord. 1529, passed 8-4-2008; Ord. 1757, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 31.10 ELECTION PROCEDURE.
(A) The provisions of 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25, concerning municipal elections, shall govern the
conduct of village elections.
(B) Inauguration of newly elected officers shall occur at the first regular or special meeting of
the Board of Trustees in the month of May, following the proclamation of the results of the regular
municipal election at which such officers were elected. The terms of such offices shall commence at
that time.
(Prior Code, § 2-110)
§ 31.11 MUNICIPAL OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES; REGULATIONS.
(A) Effect. The provisions of this section shall apply alike to all officers and employees of the
village, regardless of the time of creation of the office or position or the time of the appointment of
the officer or employees.
Mayor and Board of Trustees 19
(B) Bond. Every officer and employee shall, if required by the Village Board, give a bond upon
entering upon the duties of his or her office in such amount and with such sureties as may be
determined by the Board, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his or her office
or position.
(C) Appointment. At the first meeting of May in each year, or as soon thereafter as possible,
there shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Village Board, all
appointive village officers who shall hold their several offices for the term of one year, unless
otherwise specified, until their successors are appointed and qualified.
(D) Offices vacated by removal. Any officer of the municipality who leaves the municipality
with the intention of permanently residing outside the limits thereof shall be deemed to have vacated
his or her office.
(E) Leave of absence. Any officer desiring to be temporarily absent from the municipality shall
apply to the Mayor for a leave of absence, which may, in the discretion of the Mayor, be granted in
writing for any time and, when granted, shall be filed with the Clerk.
(F) Books delivered to successor. Every officer shall, upon going out of office, deliver to his or
her successor, all books, papers, furniture and other things appertaining to such office, and which are
the property of the village. Within five days after notification and request, any person who has been
an officer of a municipality is required to deliver to his or her successor in office, all property, books
and effects in his or her possession belonging to the municipality or pertaining to the office he or she
has held. Upon his or her refusal to do so, he or she shall be liable for all damages caused thereby,
and shall, upon conviction, be penalized according to the provisions of § 10.99 of this code of
ordinances.
(G) Books open to inspection. Every officer shall, at all times when required, submit the books
and papers of his or her office to the inspection of the Mayor, or any committee or member of the
Board.
(H) Report of fees. All officers of the village entitled to receive fees shall keep a correct account
thereof and make a report thereof, under oath, to the Village Board at the second meeting of each
month. In the report, they shall specify from whom such fees were received, for what service and
when received. All fees received shall be paid over into the Village Treasury.
(I) Other rules and regulations. Every officer of the village shall perform such other duties and
be subject to such other rules and regulations as the Board may provide by law.
(J) Oath. Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all municipal officers,
whether elected or appointed, shall take and subscribe to the following oath:
“I, , do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the
United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois and that I will faithfully discharge
the duties of the office of according to the best of my ability.”
(Prior Code, § 2-111)
20 Swansea - Administration
§ 31.12 VILLAGE OFFICES CONSOLIDATED.
(A) The Village Board may, from time to time, by law, impose upon any officer filling any
office created by the ordinances of the village, any such other or further duties as shall be consistent
with the laws of the state, and may consolidate any two or more of the offices and impose the duties
thereof upon any other officer and may make any such regulations respecting such offices as shall be
consistent with the laws of the state.
(B) In case the Village Board consolidates any offices created by it, the person performing the
duties of the offices so consolidated shall not be entitled on account thereof to receive any salary or
compensation which he or she would not have been entitled to receive if such consolidation had not
taken place.
(Prior Code, § 2-112)
§ 31.13 CONTRACTS.
(A) Generally. All contracts for purchases by the village shall be in compliance with the statutes
of the state.
(B) Public improvement contracts exceeding $25,000. Any work or public improvement, the
expense of which is expected to exceed $25,000, but which is not to be paid for in whole or in part
by special assessment or special taxation, shall be constructed:
(1) By a contract let to the lowest responsible bidder after advertising for bids in the
manner prescribed by ordinance; or
(2) By a contract entered into by the proper officers, without advertising for bids, provided
that said approach is authorized by a vote of two-thirds of all trustees then holding office; or
(3) By a department head, who shall supervise and cause to be carried out the construction
of the work or other public improvement and shall employ exclusively for the performance of all
manual labor therein, laborers, or artisans whom the municipality shall pay by the day or hour,
provided that said approach is so authorized by a vote of two-thirds of all trustees then holding
office; and further provided that all material used in the construction of the work or the purchased by
contract let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner prescribed by this code. Nothing contained
in this section, however, shall apply to any contract by the village with the federal government or
any agency thereof.
(C) Purpose of division (B). LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER does not mean the lowest
bidder financially only, but shall mean the bidder who, by experience and other qualifications is
deemed most capable of performing the work or providing satisfactory services or goods required in
a satisfactory manner.
2018 S-1
Mayor and Board of Trustees 21
(D) Other purchases. Purchases for any work or public improvement, the expense of which does
not exceed $25,000 or for other goods or services that are not a public work or public improvement,
shall be made in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) Purchases up to $1,000. Purchases for incidental materials, supplies and services up to
and including a value of $1,000, may be made under the authority of a department head, without preapproval,
provided sufficient funding is available in the municipal budget for said purchase;
(2) Purchases between $1,000 and $5,000. Purchases between $1,000 and $5,000 may be
made under the authority of the Village Administrator, or by a department head with written preapproval
from, the Village Administrator, provided sufficient funding is available in the municipal
budget for said purchase;
(3) Purchases over $5,000. Nonemergency purchase that are expected to exceed $5,000
shall be pre-approved by the Board of Trustees, in resolution form, with proposal contract, and/or
tabulation sheet attached, as each is applicable to the purchase, provided, however, that customary
purchases for those goods and services which are known, essential for the continued operation of
village services, and specifically identified in the municipal budget, do not require pre-approval by
the Board of Trustees even is the cost is expected to exceed $5,000. Examples of such purchases
include fuel, utilities, wastewater treatment chemicals, principal and interest payments on loans, and
similar expenses.
(4) Emergency purchases or repairs. The but are deemed an emergency, or for which
delaying the purchase in order to secure pre-approval from the Board of Trustees might adversely
affect the health, safety or welfare of the village, or impair the village's ability to provide essential
services, may be made under the authority of the Village Administrator with written consent of the
President of the Board of Trustees and the Chairperson of the Finance Committee. All purchases
made under this provision are to be reported to the Board of Trustees at their next meeting.
(E) Competitive quotes/bids. Purchases under division (D)(2), (D)(3) or (D)(4) above, the cost
of which is expected to exceed $1,500, shall be made only after securing or attempting to secure at
least three competitive price quotations or bids from qualified vendors, in accordance with the
following provisions:
(1) While any such quotes/bids need not be sealed, and may be accepted through mail,
email, fax or hand delivery, the price quoted/bid shall not be shared with any other vendor prior to
the deadline for submittal, in order to preserve the integrity of the process;
(2) Any resulting contract shall be let to, or purchase made from, the most qualified
vendor. MOST QUALIFIED VENDOR does not mean the vendor offering the lowest price only, but
shall moan the vendor who, by experience and other qualifications is deemed most capable of
performing the work and/or providing the services or goods required in a satisfactory manner.
2018 S-1
22 Swansea - Administration
(3) While at least three competitive quotes or bids are preferred, if, after a reasonable
effort, the village is unsuccessful in obtaining three quotes/bids, the purchase may be made on the
basis of quotes/bids received. A refusal by a vendor to submit a quote/bid may be considered as one
of the three quotes/bids referenced herein;
(4) Competitive quotes/bids shall not be required when equipment, vehicles, or other
commodities are part of a state bid or similar list where another entity or consortium has utilized a
process of competitive bidding to create a list of items and prices, and the village is allowed to buy
from that list at the established competitive prices.
(F) Sole source purchases. Competitive quotes/bids are not required when the goods or services
needed are proprietary, can only be provided by a single source, where shipping costs or the
geographical location of service of installation staff in relation to the village are excessive and would
significantly impact cost, or when no other more standardized goods or services would reasonable
satisfy the Village's requirements.
(G) Service contracts. Where the village has entered into a contract with a vendor who provides
specific services to the village, such as information technology or payroll support, or maintaining
equipment, vehicles or facilities, and that vendor has established a relationship with the village,
continues to provide satisfactory services, and has maintained the same or nearly the same charges
for those services, the village may choose to renew the service contract with said vendor without
seeking competitive bids/quotes.
(H) Professional services contracts. Professional services, including architectural, engineering
and surveying services, shall be selected on the basis on qualifications, and not on price, in
accordance with state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 2-113) (Res. 1-1653, passed 11-16-2009; Ord. 1754, passed 7-5-2016; Ord. 1804,
passed 1-16-2018)
§ 31.14 CLAIMS.
(A) Presentation. All claims against the village for goods purchased for damages, or originating
in any other way, except for claims for salaries and other allowances that are fixed by ordinance, and
except for claims referred to in division (B) hereinbelow, shall be presented to the Village Board of
Trustees at its regularly scheduled meetings at which time the Village Board of Trustees shall
determine whether such claims shall be paid. All such claims must be in writing and items shall be
specified.
2018 S-1
Mayor and Board of Trustees 23
(B) Exception.
(1) If the following expenditures are an approved budget line item and there are sufficient
funds to make the payment, the Village Treasurer is hereby authorized to pay the following claims
upon receipt of a warrant list and prior to Village Board approval:
(a) Utilities, when necessary to meet payment deadlines or to avoid penalty;
(b) Insurance premiums, when necessary to meeting payment deadlines;
(c) Principal and interest payments on long term debt, when necessary to meet payment
deadlines and to avoid late charges;
(d) Monthly payments for on-going services provided under Board approved contracts,
when, necessary to meet payment deadlines;
(e) Required payments to other governmental agencies, when necessary to meet
payment deadlines;
(f) Postage or other critical commodities if failure to replenish in a timely manner
would inhibit the village's ability to provide essential services; and
(g) Refunds due to sewer system customers.
(2) A special warrant list of all such prepaid bills shall be presented in the Village Board of
Trustees at its next regular meeting.
(Ord. 1751, passed 6-6-2016)
MAYOR
§ 31.25 ELECTION.
The Mayor shall be elected for a four-year term and shall serve until his or her successor is
elected and has qualified.
(Prior Code, § 2-115)
§ 31.26 SUPERVISORY POWERS.
The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the village, shall preside over the meetings of
the Board and shall perform such duties as may be required of him or her by statute or law. He or
she shall have supervision over all employees of the village and shall have the power and authority to
inspect all
24 Swansea - Administration
books and records pertaining to village affairs and kept by any officer or employee of the village at
any reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 2-116)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35
§ 31.27 APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.
(A) At the first annual meeting in May, the Mayor shall appoint, by and with the advice and
consent of the Village Board, all officers of the village whose election or appointment is not
otherwise provided for, and said officers shall hold their offices for the ensuing month or year, and
until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. Any vacancy occurring in any
appointive office shall be filed in the same manner. The Mayor shall issue a commission or
certificate of appointment to all persons appointed to office in the municipality.
(B) From time to time as needed, the Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the
Village Board of Trustees, a three-member negotiating team to represent the village in the negotiation
of collective bargaining agreements with employees. The negotiating team shall consist of a lead
negotiator and two assistant negotiators. The Village Attorney, by virtue of his or her office, shall
serve as a member of the negotiating team in either the lead negotiator or assistant negotiator
position. The lead negotiator and assistants shall serve for the duration of any pending negotiations,
but shall not serve beyond the current term of the appointing Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 2-117) (Ord. 1640, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 31.28 REMOVAL OF OFFICERS.
The Mayor shall have the power to remove any officer appointed by him or her on any formal
charge whenever he or she is of the opinion that the interests of the village demand such removal. He
or she shall report the reasons for such removal to the Board at a meeting to be held not less than
five days, nor more than ten days, after such removal. If the Mayor shall fail or refuse to file with
the Clerk a statement of the reasons for such removal or, if the Board, by a two-thirds vote of all its
members authorized by law to be elected by yeas and nays to be entered upon its record, disapproves
of such removal, such officer shall thereupon become restored to the office from which he or she was
removed, but he or she shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office. No officer shall be
removed a second time for the same offense.
(Prior Code, § 2-118)
Mayor and Board of Trustees 25
§ 31.29 DESIGNATION OF OFFICERS’ DUTIES.
Whenever there is a dispute as to the respective duties or powers of any appointed officer of the
village, this dispute shall be settled by the Mayor, after consultation with the Village Attorney; and
the Mayor shall have the power to delegate to any appointive officer, any duty which is to be
performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform that duty.
(Prior Code, § 2-119)
§ 31.30 MAYOR PRO-TEM.
During a temporary absence or disability of the Mayor which incapacitates him or her from the
performance of his or her duties, but does not create a vacancy in the office, the Mayor shall appoint
and, if he or she cannot, the Trustees shall appoint one of its members to act as Mayor pro-tem. The
Mayor pro-tem, during this absence or disability, shall perform the duties and possess all the rights
and powers of the Mayor. The Mayor may appoint an officer to administer the affairs of the village
with the advice and consent of the Village Board whenever the Village Board considers it necessary
and expedient.
(Prior Code, § 2-120)
§ 31.31 SIGNATURE.
The Mayor shall sign all village warrants, commissions, permits and licenses granted by
authority of the Board, except as otherwise provided and such other acts and deeds as law or
ordinance may require his or her official signature.
(Prior Code, § 2-121)
§ 31.32 FORMAL OCCASIONS.
The Mayor shall act for and on behalf of the village on formal occasions and receptions, but in
his or her absence or inability to attend any such function, the Mayor may select any village officer
to so act.
(Prior Code, § 2-122)
§ 31.33 GENERAL DUTIES.
The Mayor shall perform all the duties, which are prescribed by law, and shall take care that the
laws and ordinances are faithfully executed.
(Prior Code, § 2-123)
26 Swansea - Administration
§ 31.34 RELEASE OF PRISONERS.
The Mayor may release any person imprisoned for violation of any village ordinance and shall
report the release with reasons therefor, to the Trustees at their first meeting thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 2-124)
§ 31.35 LIQUOR COMMISSIONER.
The Mayor is hereby designated as Liquor Commissioner with all the powers to license and/or
revoke any village liquor license, according to state and village laws.
(Prior Code, § 2-125)
§ 31.36 DECIDING VOTE.
(A) The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Village Board. He or she shall not vote on
any ordinance, resolution or motion, except:
(1) Where the vote of the Trustees has resulted in a tie;
(2) Where one-half of the Trustees elected have voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution
or motion, even though there is no tie; or
(3) Where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate authorities is required by the
Illinois Revised Statutes to adopt an ordinance, resolution or motion.
(B) In each instance specified, the Mayor shall vote. Nothing in this section shall deprive an
acting Mayor or Mayor pro-tem from voting in his or her capacity as Trustee, but he or she shall not
be entitled to another vote in his or her capacity as Acting Mayor or Mayor pro-tem.
(Prior Code, § 2-126)
CHAPTER 32: OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Officials and Officers
32.01 Village Clerk; Deputy
32.02 Village Treasurer
32.03 Village Attorney
32.04 Village Engineer
32.05 Budget Officer
32.06 Village Administrator
32.07 Code Administrator
32.08 Civil Code Enforcement Officer
Organizations
32.25 Planning and Zoning Board
32.26 Foreign Fire Insurance Board
32.27 Park Board
32.28 Building and Zoning Department
32.29 Business District Development and Redevelopment Commission
OFFICIALS AND OFFICERS
§ 32.01 VILLAGE CLERK; DEPUTY.
(A) Village Clerk.
(1) Elected. The Village Clerk shall be elected at the same election as the Mayor for a fouryear
term and shall serve until his or her successor is elected and has qualified.
(Prior Code, § 2-201)
27
2018 S-1
28 Swansea - Administration
(2) Board minutes; records. The Village Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Village
Board and shall keep in a suitable book to be styled The Journal of the Village Board, a full and
faithful record of its proceedings. The Village Clerk shall record and properly index in a book kept
for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the Village Board, and at the foot of the record of each
ordinance so recorded, he or she shall make a memorandum of the date of the passage and, when
published, a memorandum of the publication of such ordinance. He or she shall also record in proper
books for the purpose, all official bonds and note upon each bond so recorded, when the same was
entered of record and the book and pages where recorded. The Clerk will take minutes for all open,
closed and special meetings of the Village Board, with the exception of the Planning, Zoning and
Park Boards.
(Prior Code, § 2-202)
(3) Delivery of papers to officers. He or she shall also, without delay, deliver to the
Mayor, all ordinances or resolutions, orders and claims in his or her charge which may require to be
approved or otherwise acted upon by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 2-203)
(4) Preparation of documents, commissions and license. The Clerk shall prepare all
commissions, licenses, permits and other official documents required to be issued by him or her
under this code or ordinances and shall attest the same with the corporate seal, and he or she shall, in
like manner, attest all deeds for the sale of real estate owned and conveyed by the village.
(Prior Code, § 2-204)
(5) License plates. In all cases where the village requires a license to be obtained for the
purpose of engaging in or carrying on any business or occupation, and the licensee is required to
obtain from the Clerk, plates, tags or stickers, it shall be the duty of the Clerk to deliver such plates,
tags or stickers to the person paying the license fee.
(Prior Code, § 2-206)
(6) Administration of oaths. The Clerk shall have the power to administer oaths or
affirmations for all lawful purposes.
(Prior Code, § 2-207)
(7) Successor. The Village Clerk shall carefully preserve in his or her office all books,
records, papers, maps and effects of every detail and description belonging to the village or
pertaining to his or her office, and not in actual use and possession of other village officers; and,
upon the expiration of his or her official term, he or she shall deliver all such books, records, papers
and effects to his or her successor in office.
(Prior Code, § 2-210)
(8) Notification to persons elected or appointed. The Clerk, within five days after the result
of an election is declared or an appointment is made, shall notify all persons elected or appointed to
office of their election or appointment. The office becomes vacant unless the person elected or
appointed qualifies within ten days after such notice.
(Prior Code, § 2-215)
Officials and Organizations 29
(9) Other duties.
(a) The Village Clerk shall attend all Village Board meetings and committee meetings,
including executive sessions, and make, prepare and keep a full record of their proceedings, except if
the Village Clerk is the subject matter of the meeting and his or her presence creates a conflict of
interest.
(b) In addition to the foregoing duties, the Clerk shall perform all such other duties
pertaining to his or her office as are or may be imposed upon him or her by law or resolution or
ordinance of the Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 2-216)
(10) Personal use. The Village Clerk shall not use the office facilities or equipment for his
or her own personal use or for his or her own business use. The Village Clerk is hereby prohibited
from using the village office facilities for any other purpose other than official village business.
(Prior Code, § 2-217)
(11) Audio recording of meetings; closed sessions. The Clerk shall destroy the audio
recordings of closed sessions of the meetings of the Board of Trustees and its committees when all of
the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a) Eighteen months have elapsed;
(b) The Board of Trustees has approved the minutes of the closed session;
(c) The Board of Trustees has approved the destruction of the recordings; and
(d) There is no court or investigation warranting the preservation of the recording.
(Prior Code, § 2-218)
(B) Deputy Clerk.
(1) The Village Clerk is hereby authorized to appoint one Deputy Clerk who shall have the
power and duty to execute all documents required by any law to be executed by the Village Clerk
and affix the seal of the village thereto whenever required, such Deputy Clerk to act at such times as
hereinafter provided. In signing any documents, said Deputy Clerk shall sign the name of the Village
Clerk followed with the word “By” and the Deputy Clerk’s own name and the words “Deputy
Clerk”.
(2) The powers and duties herein described shall be exercised by such Deputy Clerk only in
the absence of the Village Clerk from the Village Clerk’s office in the village’s Government Center
and only when either written direction has been given by the Village Clerk to such Deputy to
exercise such power or the Village Board has determined, by resolution, that the Village Clerk is
temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform such functions.
30 Swansea - Administration
(3) Such Deputy Clerk shall have the authority and powers hereinabove described and such
further power and authority as provided for by this section or state statute. Such Deputy Clerk shall
also have any such further powers and authority as may hereinafter be granted pursuant to statute.
(Ord. 1540, passed 2-2-2009; Ord. 1688, passed 12-2-2013; Ord. 1730, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 32.02 VILLAGE TREASURER.
(A) Establishment of Municipal Finance Department. There is hereby established a department
of the municipal government of the village which shall be known as the Finance Department of the
Village Board and the Village Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 2-301)
(B) Village Treasurer. The Treasurer shall be elected at the same election as the Mayor for a
term of four years. He or she shall serve until his or her successor is elected and has qualified.
(Prior Code, § 2-302)
(C) Separation of funds.
(1) The Treasurer shall keep all moneys in his or her hands belonging to the village
separate and distinct from his or her own money, and he or she shall not use, either directly or
indirectly the village moneys or warrants in his or her custody and keeping for his or her own use
and benefit, or that of any other person.
(2) Any violation of this section shall subject him or her to removal from office by the
Village Board.
(3) If the Treasurer is removed from office for cause as contained in this provision, the
Mayor shall appoint a replacement with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees to serve out
the remainder of the term of the official removed.
(Prior Code, § 2-305)
(D) Bond.
(1) Generally. The Treasurer shall give bond conditioned upon the faithful performance of
his or her duties and to indemnify the village for any loss due to neglect of duty or wrongful act on
his or her part. The Treasurer’s bond shall be in the amount of dollars that is not less than the greater
of $50,000 or three times that latest federal census population or any subsequent census figure used
for motor fuel tax purposes.
(2) Outstanding bonds. The Village Treasurer shall keep in his or her office, in a book or
books kept expressly for that purpose, a correct list of all the outstanding bonds of the village,
showing the number and amount of each; for and to whom the bonds are issued; and when the village
bonds are
Officials and Organizations 31
issued, purchased, paid or canceled. The book or books shall show the fact; and, in his or her annual
report, the Treasurer shall describe particularly, those bonds sold during the year and the terms of
sale, with each and every item of expense thereof.
(Prior Code, § 2-208)
(3) Filing of bond. Such bond shall be filed with the Clerk as required by statute.
(Prior Code, § 2-306)
(E) Statements. The Municipal Treasurer shall report to the corporate authorities at the second
monthly meeting, a full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures of the municipality, as
shown by his or her books up to the time of the report.
(Prior Code, § 2-309)
(F) Year-end report. The Treasurer shall, annually, at the close of the fiscal year, make out and
file with the Village Clerk a full and detailed report of all the receipts and expenditures of the
corporation, as shown by his or her books, and of his or her transactions as such Treasurer, during
the preceding fiscal year, and he or she shall show in such report the state of the Village Treasury at
the close of said year, which report the Village Clerk shall publish as required by law.
(Prior Code, § 2-310)
(G) Deposit of funds.
(1) Designation by Board. The Treasurer is hereby required to keep all funds and moneys
in his or her custody belonging to the village in such places of deposit as have been designated by
division (H) below. When requested by the Treasurer, the corporate authorities shall designate a
bank or banks in which may be kept the funds and moneys of the village in the custody of the
Treasurer. When a bank has been designated as a depository, it shall continue as such depository
until ten days have elapsed after a new depository is designated and has qualified as proved by law.
When a new depository is designated, the corporate authorities shall notify the sureties of the
Treasurer of that fact in writing at least five days before the transfer of funds.
(2) Qualifications of bank. No bank shall be qualified to receive village funds or money
until it has furnished the corporate authorities with copies of the last two sworn statements of
resources and liabilities which the bank is required to furnish to the Auditor of Public Accounts or to
the Comptroller of Currency. Each bank designated as a depository for such funds or moneys shall,
while acting as such depository, furnish the corporate authorities with a copy of all statements of
resources and liabilities which it is required to furnish to the Auditor of Public Accounts or to the
Comptroller of Currency.
(3) Discharge from liability. The Treasurer shall be discharged from liability for all funds
or moneys, which he or she deposits in a designated bank while the funds and moneys are so
deposited. If the village funds or moneys are deposited in a designated bank, however, the amount of
such deposits shall not exceed 75% of the bank’s capital stock and surplus, and the Treasurer shall be
responsible for funds or moneys deposited in the bank in excess of this limitation.
(Prior Code, § 2-311)
32 Swansea - Administration
(H) Designated depositories. The Treasurer of the village is authorized to deposit funds and
moneys in his or her custody belonging to the village in various banks and financial institutions as
necessary to ensure the village is able to obtain most competitive rates of return for their
investments.
(Prior Code, § 2-312) (Ord. 1423, passed 7-5-2005)
§ 32.03 VILLAGE ATTORNEY.
(A) Appointment of Attorney.
(1) The Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the approval of the Village
Board for the term of one year, unless sooner removed for cause and until his or her successor shall
have been appointed and qualified.
(2) The Attorney shall have full charge of the law affairs of the village and shall be known
as the “Village Attorney”, compensation for office services and advice and shall receive reasonable
fees for other services rendered when, in his or her judgment, or in the judgment of the Mayor or
Village Board, the same are necessary or for the best interests of the village.
(3) The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Village Board of Trustees, may appoint
such additional counsel as, in his or her discretion, may be necessary for the proper prosecution of
village business. Said additional counsel shall be retained pursuant to the provisions of this division
(A).
(Prior Code, § 2-401)
(B) Duties.
(1) Prosecute for village. The Village Attorney shall prosecute or defend, on behalf of the
village, in all cases in which the interests of the corporation or any officer thereof are involved. The
Village Clerk shall furnish the Attorney with certified copies of any ordinance, bond or paper in his
or her keeping necessary to be filed or used in any suit or proceeding.
(2) Preparation of ordinances. The Village Attorney shall, when required, advise the
Village Board, or any officer, in all matters of law in which interests of the corporation are involved,
and he or she shall draw such ordinances, bonds, forms and contracts, or examine and pass upon the
same, as may be required of him or her by the Mayor, the Village Board or any committee thereof.
(3) Judgments. The Village Attorney shall direct executions to be issued upon all judgments
recovered in favor of the village, and he or she shall direct their prompt service. He or she shall
examine all the bills of the officers of courts, and of other officers of the law, and shall certify to
their correctness and the liability of the village therefor.
(4) Commissions. The Village Attorney shall act as the legal advisor for the Planning and
Zoning Board and he or she shall perform the legal services required of said commissions.
Officials and Organizations 33
(5) Violations of ordinances. The Village Attorney shall institute and prosecute an action in
every case of violation of a village ordinance, when instructed to do so by the Mayor, Village Board
or any committee thereof.
(6) Prosecution of suits. The Village Attorney shall not be required to prosecute any suit or
action arising under the ordinance of the village, when, upon investigation of same, he or she shall
become satisfied that the complaint was instituted maliciously, vexatiously or without just cause; and
he or she shall dismiss or discontinue any such suit or proceeding upon such terms as he or she may
deem just or equitable.
(7) Collection of fees. The Village Attorney is hereby authorized and instructed to enforce
the collection of any and all taxes and special assessments in the collection of which the village is
interested and to attend all sales of real estate or personal property made to enforce the collection of
such taxes or special assessments and to bid thereat in behalf of the village.
(Prior Code, § 2-402)
(C) Prosecutor’s fees.
(1) For each complaint that is prosecuted on behalf of the village to enforce the provisions
of general ordinances of the village, and also enforce provisions of state statutes, statutes affecting
the affairs of the village, there shall be added as costs to be assessed against the defendant in each
case, the reasonable sum and cost, to be known as the Village Prosecutor’s fee.
(2) Upon said defendant being found guilty of the charges, as set up in the complaint that is
filed on behalf of the village in any of the two above named situations, it shall be the duty of the
Court before whom such matter is heard to assess a Village Prosecutor’s fee in the reasonable sum
and cost, which shall be paid directly to the Prosecutor by the Clerk of the Circuit Court, and that
the fine or penalty as assessed by the Court for the violation of the complaint shall be paid to the
Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 2-403)
§ 32.04 VILLAGE ENGINEER.
(A) Appointment of Village Engineer. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Village
Board, may appoint an Engineer for the village, who shall serve for the term of the Mayor, or for
such period not exceeding the term of the Mayor, as may be designated by the Mayor and the Village
Board.
(Prior Code, § 2-501)
(B) Duties; salary. The Engineer for the village shall make and submit plans, estimates and
specifications for any public work, which may be proposed or ordered by the Village Board. He or
she shall also examine all public works under his or her charge and see that the plans, estimates and
specifications for the same are properly executed.
(Prior Code, § 2-502)
34 Swansea - Administration
§ 32.05 BUDGET OFFICER.
(A) Appointment of Budget Officer. The Mayor, with the approval of the Board of Trustees,
shall appoint a Budget Officer who shall have the powers, duties and responsibilities enumerated in
Illinois Revised Statutes, as they are now or may hereafter be amended. The Budget Officer shall
give a bond in such sum as may be required by statute.
(Prior Code, § 2-602)
(B) Salary. The salary of the Budget Officer shall be as is provided by the President and Board
of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 2-607)
(Ord. 1609, passed 4-18-2011)
§ 32.06 VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR.
(A) Creation of office; appointment, term and qualifications. There is hereby created the Office
of Village Administrator, which shall be appointed by the Board President with the advice and
consent of the Village Board of Trustees; provided that, said term shall not extend beyond the current
term of the appointing Board president. The Administrator shall, in all cases, be subject to the
authority and direction of the Village President and Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 2-701)
(B) General duties. The Village Administrator shall be responsible to the Village President for
the proper administration of all affairs of the city. In discharging this responsibility, the Village
Administrator shall, as directed by the Village President:
(1) Coordinate activities between the departments and offices to ensure efficient utilization
of resources and maximize interdepartmental coordination and effectively and efficiently administer
the policies adopted by the Village President and Board of Trustees;
(2) Supervise activities of the administration and accounting departments;
(3) Recommend appointments and, when necessary for the good of the village, recommend
suspension or removal of any village employee;
(4) Attend all village board, committee and advisory, meetings and participate, as required,
in all discussions unless excused by the Village President;
(5) Assist the President as the Chief Administrative officer of the village and perform such
duties as may be directed by the President;
2018 S-1
Officials and Organizations 35
(6) Create and formulate the annual budget for timely submission to the Budget Officer;
(7) Be the primary point of contact with the Village Attorney and his or her staff,
coordinate and follow up attorney assignments and disseminate his or her work product to the Board,
and otherwise be the point of contact for legal advice required of any village department head, ensure
protection of the attorney-client privilege; provided that, nothing shall prohibit the President and
Trustees from consulting the Village Attorney as they deem appropriate from time to time;
(8) Keep the Village Board fully advised regarding the financial condition of the village and
the future needs of the village;
(9) Make such reports to the President and Board of Trustees as may be required,
concerning the operations of the village departments and offices and recommend various courses of
action to the Village President and Board, along with possible alternatives;
(10) Propose and recommend to the President such personnel rules and regulations as may
be useful for management of policies, handbooks, manuals and collective bargaining agreements;
(11) Prepare such administrative reports and other reports of the activities of the village as
may be required at the conclusion of the fiscal year and periodically throughout the year;
(12) Research, collect information and prepare or coordinate the preparation of applications
for all grants and loans from governmental or private entities for village programs, operations and
services;
(13) Participate to the extent requested in the collective bargaining processes of the village
and recommend to the President collective bargaining agreements for consideration and possible final
approval by the Board of Trustees;
(14) Investigate and respond to resident inquiries and complaints related to the operations of
the village;
(15) Participate in the development and implementation of economic and community
development programs for the village, including business retention, expansion and recruitment
programs;
(16) The Administrator shall cause to be prepared, maintained and kept current, a complete
set of maps and plats showing the location of village utilities, municipal properties, street and other
public places and all lots and parcels of land subdivided according to law;
(17) Oversee the evaluation of village employees’ performance in the Administration and
Accounting Departments at least once per year; and
(18) Provide staff support services for the mayor and the members of the Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 2-703)
2018 S-1
36 Swansea - Administration
(C) Office. The Administrator shall maintain an office in the village’s Government Center in an
area designated by the President, with the approval of the Board of Trustees, and shall spend such
time in the performance of duties as may be required. The position is considered full-time and
outside employment is prohibited without approval of the Village President.
(Prior Code, § 2-704)
(D) Absence. If, because of a temporary absence, disability or illness, the Village Administrator
is unable to carry out the functions of this office, the Village President with the advise and consent of
the Board of Trustees may appoint a temporary replacement to serve as Acting Administrator and
carry out the duties of the Administrator during the Administrator’s absence. This appointment shall
be effective for a period not to exceed 30 days or until the Village Administrator is able to resume
his or her duties, whichever occurs first.
(Prior Code, § 2-705)
(E) Removal from office. Section 31.28 of this code of ordinances shall govern removal from
office of the Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 2-706)
(F) Vacancy. When a vacancy occurs in the office of Village Administrator, a replacement shall
be appointed and confirmed following the procedures outlined in division (A) above. If the Village
Administrator resigns, the Village Administrator may continue to serve as Village Administrator until
a replacement is appointed and confirmed by the Board. Should the Administrator choose not to
serve until his or her replacement is appointed and confirmed, or if the President removes the
Administrator, the Village President shall have the power to appoint a temporary Village
Administrator who shall serve until a replacement Village Administrator is appointed and confirmed.
(Prior Code, § 2-707)
(G) Bond. The Administrator shall be covered by blanket bond for all employees.
(Prior Code, § 2-708)
(H) Authority of elected officers undiminished. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
diminish or detract from the statutory powers and authority of the village’s elected officials.
(Prior Code, § 2-709)
(I) Conflict of interest prohibited. The Village Administrator shall not derive any personal
benefit, directly or indirectly from any contractual work or business of the village or from the sale of
any article from the village or from the purchase of property from it.
(Prior Code, § 2-710)
2018 S-1
Officials and Organizations 37
(J) Matters directed to Village Administrator. Except for purposes of inquiry, Board members
shall deal with the administrative service through the Village Administrator. Board members shall not
give orders to any department heads or subordinates of the Village Administrator either publicly or
privately.
(Prior Code, § 2-711)
(Ord. 1503, passed 11-13-2007; Ord. 1537, passed 12-15-2008; Ord. 1730, passed 11-23-2015; Ord.
1784, passed 7-5-2017)
§ 32.07 CODE ADMINISTRATOR.
(A) Creation of office. There is hereby created the executive position of Code Administrator,
who shall be appointed annually by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees for a term of one year or until his or her successor has been appointed and is qualified.
(Prior Code, § 2-901)
(B) Duties. The duties and responsibilities of the Code Administrator shall be as follows:
(1) To administer and enforce the code requirements of the village as specified throughout
the ordinances of the village including, but not necessarily limited to, the Building Code (Ch. 150 of
this code of ordinances), Business Code (Title XI of this code of ordinances), Floodplain Code (Ch.
152 of this code of ordinances), Manufactured Home Code (Ch. 151 of this code of ordinances) and
Subdivision Code (Ch. 153 of this code of ordinances; and
(2) To serve as the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the provisions of Ch. 154 of
this code of ordinances for such appointment and shall, thereafter, administer and enforce Ch. 154 of
this code of ordinances in accordance with the duties and responsibilities listed therein.
(Prior Code, § 2-902)
(C) Salary. The salary or compensation of the Code Administrator shall be such as is provided
by the President and the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 2-903)
§ 32.08 CIVIL CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
(A) Creation of office. There is hereby created the position of Civil Code Enforcement Officer,
who shall be appointed annually by the Swansea Village President of the Board of Trustees with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for a term of one year or until his or her successor has
been appointed and is qualified. If more than one Civil Code Enforcement Officer is appointed or
authorized, the same approval process shall apply.
2018 S-1
38 Swansea - Administration
(B) Duties. The duties and responsibilities of the Civil Code Enforcement Officer shall be
prescribed as set forth by the Code Administrator with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees and shall include the authority to enforce this Code of Ordinances and issue citations for any
violation of this Code of Ordinances, except for any violations that are moving traffic violations
under the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.) or similar provisions contained in
this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 1826, passed 5-21-2018; Ord. 1834, passed 8-6-2018)
ORGANIZATIONS
§ 32.25 PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD.
(A) Creation. In order that adequate provisions be made for the preparation and implementation
of the comprehensive plan for the village, and for the guidance, direction and control of growth,
development or redevelopment within the village, a Planning and Zoning Board is hereby created.
(Prior Code, § 2-1101)
(B) Membership.
(1) The Village Planning and Zoning Board shall consist of seven members, all of whom
shall be residents of the village.
(2) Four members of the Planning and Zoning Board shall constitute a quorum, and no
meeting or public hearing shall be conducted by the Board without a quorum being present. In the
event of a meeting being cancelled due to lack of a quorum, or for any other reason, the cancelled
meeting shall be rescheduled and held within seven calendar days of the originally cancelled meeting.
(3) The concurring vote of four members of the Planning and Zoning Board shall be
necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official, or
to decide in favor of the applicant, any matter upon which it is required to pass.
(Prior Code, § 2-1102)
(C) Appointment and term of office.
(1) Members of the Planning and Zoning Board shall be individually appointed and
assigned to a specific term of office by the President of the Board, with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees.
(2) The initial terms of office shall be as follows:
2018 S-1
Officials and Organizations 38A
(a) One members for one year;
(b) Three members for two years; and
(c) Three members for three years.
(3) At the end of each appointed term, the successor to each member shall be appointed for
a term of three years.
(4) One of the members so appointed shall be named as Chairperson by the President of the
Board of Trustees, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, and empowered with the
authority to call meetings and public hearings, preside over such meetings and hearings, compel the
attendance of witnesses, issue subpoenas and administer oaths. In the absence of the Chairperson, the
member present with the longest term of office shall serve as Acting Chairperson and be empowered
with all the authority of the Chairperson.
(5) Any member of the Planning and Zoning Board desiring to resign his or her
appointment before said term has expired shall notify the President of the Board of Trustees in
writing.
(a) Resignations so received shall be effective upon the date it is received by the
President unless another date is specifically provided for.
2018 S-1
38B Swansea - Administration
Officials and Organizations 39
(b) The President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall, at the
earliest possible time, appoint a successor for the unexpired term of the member.
(6) The President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, may remove any
member of the Planning and Zoning Board for cause.
(7) The President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall, at the
earliest possible time, appoint a successor for the unexpired term of the member so removed.
(Prior Code, § 2-1103)
(D) Compensation. The members of the Planning and Zoning Board shall receive a salary or
compensation such as is provided by the President and the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 2-1104)
(E) Procedure.
(1) Immediately upon its creation, the members of the Planning and Zoning Board shall
meet, organize, elect a Recording Secretary and adopt rules and regulations of organization and
procedure consistent with village ordinances and state laws. Thereafter, the Planning and Zoning
Board may change or alter any such rules or regulations.
(2) The Planning and Zoning Board shall keep written records of its proceedings, which
shall be open at all times to public inspection.
(Prior Code, § 2-1105)
(F) Powers and duties. The Planning and Zoning Board shall have the following powers and
duties:
(1) To prepare and recommend to the Village Board of Trustees the comprehensive plan for
present and future development or redevelopment within the village.
(a) The plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or functional parts,
each of which, when adopted, shall be the official comprehensive plan, or part thereof, of the
village.
(b) Such plan shall be advisory, except as to such part thereof as has been implemented
by ordinances duly enacted by the Village Board of Trustees.
(c) All requirements for public hearings, filing or notice of adoption with the County
Recorder of Deeds and filing of the plan and ordinances with the Municipal Clerk shall be complied
with as provided by law.
(d) To provide for the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the habitants of the
village, such plan or plans shall establish reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for
resubdivisions of unimproved land and of the areas subject to redevelopment in respect to public
40 Swansea - Administration
improvements, as herein defined, and shall establish reasonable requirements governing the location,
width, course and surfacing or public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used
for residential purposes, storm water drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and
sewage collection and treatment. The requirements specified herein shall become regulatory only
when adopted by ordinance.
(2) To administer and enforce provisions of Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances, by
assuming responsibility for the following specific duties:
(a) To hear and review applications for special use permits and report its findings and
recommendations to the Board of Trustees;
(b) To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer under this section;
(c) To hear and review applications for variation from the requirements of this section
and report its findings and recommendations to the Board of Trustees;
(d) To hear and review applications for amendments to the text of this section and
report its findings and recommendations to the Board of Trustees;
(e) To hear and review applications for amendments to the official zoning map and
report its findings and recommendations to the Board of Trustees;
(f) To conduct, in accordance with law, meetings and public hearings at the call of the
Chairperson or at such other times as the Planning and Zoning Board may determine;
(g) To compel, by action of the Chairperson, the attendance of witnesses at such
meetings and hearings, to allow the testimony of such witnesses or any other person or their
designated agent or attorney, and to administer oaths to those who so testify;
(3) To review and make necessary recommendations to the Board of Trustees for the
approval or denial of plans for the exterior design of certain structures and review and
recommendation for the approval or denial of applications for variations for sign permits, and related
duties, specifically:
(a) To prepare and recommend to the Village Board of Trustees regulations for the
design and installation of all signs within the village;
(b) To review applications for variation to the sign regulations and make
recommendations to the Board of Trustees for approval or denial of same, in accord with the
limitations set forth in § 154.212(B)(5) of this code of ordinances;
Officials and Organizations 41
(c) To prepare and recommend to the Village Board of Trustees regulations for the
exterior design of all structures withing the Highway Business, Planned Business, Industrial and
Multi-Family Zoning Districts within the village, including the building materials used thereon; and
(d) To review all construction documents submitted for building permits for all
structures within the aforementioned zoning districts for compliance with exterior building design
regulations, and make the necessary recommendations to the Board of Trustees for the approval or
denial of same.
(4) To designate land suitable for annexation to the municipality and the recommend zoning
classification for such land upon annexation;
(5) To recommend to the Village Board of Trustees, from time to time, such changes in the
comprehensive plan, or any part thereof, as may be deemed necessary;
(6) To recommend to the Village Board of Trustees, from time to time, plans and/or
recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of the official comprehensive plans;
(7) To give aid to the officials of the village, charged with the direction of the projects for
improvements embraced within the official plan, or parts thereof, to further the making of such
improvements and generally to promote the realization of the official comprehensive plan;
(8) To arrange and conduct any form of publicly relative to its activities for the general
purpose of public understanding; and
(9) To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and other agencies or
groups to further the local planning program and to assure harmonious and integrated planning for
the area.
(Prior Code, § 2-1106)
(G) Land subdivision or resubdivision and the official map.
(1) At any time or time, before or after the formal adoption of the official comprehensive
plan by the corporate authorities, an official map may be designated by ordinance, which map may
consist of the whole area included within the official comprehensive plan, or one or more separate
geographical or functional parts, and may include all or any part of the contiguous unincorporated
area within one and one-half miles from the corporate limits of the village.
(2) The requirements for public hearing, filing of notice of adoption with the County
Recorder of Deeds, and filing of said plan and ordinances, including the official map, with the
Municipal Clerk shall be complied with as provided for by law.
(3) No map or plat of any subdivision or resubdivision presented for the record affecting
land within the corporate limits of the village within contiguous territory which is not more than one
and one-half miles beyond the corporate limits shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the
42 Swansea - Administration
subdivision shown thereon provides for standards of design, and standards governing streets, alleys,
public ways, ways for public service facilities, street lights, public grounds, size of lots to be used
for residential purposes, storm and flood water runoff channels and basins, water supply and
distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment in conformity with the applicable
requirements of the ordinances, including the official map.
(Prior Code, § 2-1107)
(H) Improvements. The Village Clerk shall furnish the Planning and Zoning Board for its
consideration a copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public improvements of any nature.
The Planning and Zoning Board may report in relation thereto if it deems a report necessary or
advisable, for the consideration of the Village Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 2-1108)
(I) Expenditures. If the Planning and Zoning Board shall deem it advisable to secure technical
advice or services, it may do so upon authorization from the Village Board of Trustees and an
appropriation by the Village Board of Trustees therefor.
(Ord. 1386, passed 11-1-2004; Ord. 1554, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 1583, passed 6-21-2010)Statutory
reference:
Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-3
§ 32.26 FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD.
(A) Creation. There is hereby created a Foreign Fire Insurance Board within the Village Fire
Department.
(Prior Code, § 2-1201)
(B) Membership. The Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall consist of seven Trustees: the Fire
Chief, who shall hold office by virtue of rank, and six members, who shall be elected at large by the
sworn members of the Fire Department. All members of the Fire Department shall be eligible to be
elected as officers of the Board. If there is an insufficient number of candidates to fill all these
positions, the number of Board members may be reduced, but not to fewer than three Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 2-1202)
(C) Officers and terms of office. There shall be two officers of the Board, a Chairperson and a
Treasurer. The terms of office of the Chairperson, Treasurer and at-large Trustees shall be one year.
Elections of officers and at-large Trustees shall be conducted annually.
(Prior Code, § 2-1203)
(D) Duties of the Board. The duties of the Board shall be as follows:
(1) To manage the money from the foreign fire insurance tax allocated to the Foreign Fire
Tax Board; and
Officials and Organizations 43
(2) To make rules and regulations for the conduct of the Board’s business.
(Prior Code, § 2-1204)
(E) Duties of the officers. The duties of the Chairperson and the Treasurer are as follows:
(1) To develop a list of items that the Board feels are appropriate expenditures as permitted
by 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1 to 11-10-03; and
(2) To accomplish those duties as may be assigned by the Board as authorized by statute.
(Prior Code, § 2-1205)
(F) Treasurer; duties, bond. The duties of the Treasurer shall be as follows:
(1) To receive the money appropriated and pay out the money upon the order of the Board
for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Department; and
(2) To give sufficient bond to the village, for approval by the Mayor, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of his or her duties under the ordinance and the rules and regulations of the
Foreign Fire Insurance Board.
(Prior Code, § 2-1206)
(G) Audit required. As part of the municipal audit, the funds allocated to the Foreign Insurance
Board shall be audited to verify that the funds have been expended only for the maintenance, use and
benefit of the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 2-1207)
(Ord. 1566, passed 3-1-2010)
§ 32.27 PARK BOARD.
(A) Creation. In order to ensure the development and maintenance of parks within the village
which residents will find to be adequate, clean, functional and safe, a Park Board is hereby created.
(Prior Code, § 2-1301)
(B) Membership.
(1) The Village Park Board shall consist of nine members.
(2) Five members, a majority of the Park Board, shall constitute a quorum, and no meeting
shall be conducted by the Board without a quorum being present.
(Prior Code, § 2-1302)
2018 S-1
44 Swansea - Administration
(3) The initial term of office shall be as follows:
(a) One member for one year;
(b) Three members for two years; and
(c) Three members for three years.
(C) Appointment and term of office.
(1) Members of the Park Board shall be individually appointed by the President of the
Board, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
(2) Members shall serve for a period of one year.
(3) One of the members so appointed shall be named as Chairperson at the time of his or
her appointment and empowered with the authority to call and preside over meetings.
(4) Any member of the Park Board desiring to resign his or her appointment before said
term has expired shall notify the President of the Board of Trustees in writing.
(a) Resignations so received shall be effective upon the date it is received by the
President unless another date is specifically provided for.
(b) The President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall, at the
earliest possible time, appoint a successor for the unexpired term of the member.
(5) The President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, may remove any
member of the Park Board for cause.
(a) Members of the Village Park Board shall be removed for unexcused absences in
excess of three per year. Absences may be excused by the Park Board President or the Parks and
Recreation Chairperson.
(b) The President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall, at the
earliest possible time, appoint a successor for the unexpired term of the member so removed.
(Prior Code, § 2-1303)
(D) Compensation. The Recording Secretary will be compensated at the rate of $49 per month
(providing that a meeting is held) for recording and transcribing the minutes of each Park Board
meeting.
(Prior Code, § 2-1304)
Officials and Organizations 45
(E) Procedure.
(1) Immediately upon its creation, the members of the Park Board shall meet, organize,
elect a Recording Secretary and adopt rules and regulations of organization and procedure consistent
with village ordinances and state laws. Thereafter, the Park Board may change or alter any such
rules or regulations.
(2) The Park Board shall keep written records of its proceedings, which shall be open at all
times to public inspection.
(Prior Code, § 2-1305)
(F) Powers and duties. The Park Board shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To recommend to the Board of Trustees any improvements, and the scope of any such
improvements, for the parks within the village;
(2) To recommend to the Board of Trustees measures to ensure the proper, fair and safe
management of the parks within the village; and
(3) To recommend and define the uses and functions for which the parks may be employed;
(Prior Code, § 2-1306)
(Ord. 1502, passed 10-16-2007; Ord. 1684, passed 9-16-2013; Ord. 1816, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 32.28 BUILDING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT.
(A) Establishment of Building and Zoning Department. There is hereby established a department
of the municipal government of the village which shall be known as the Building and Zoning
Department. The Building and Zoning Department shall embrace the programs, services and
functions of planning, development review, permitting, economic development and the enforcement
of land development regulations.
(Prior Code, § 2-801)
(B) Building and Zoning Director. There is hereby created the Office of Building and Zoning
Director, who shall be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, for a term of one year, to coincide with the fiscal year of the village. The Building and
Zoning Director, under the direction of the President and the Board of Trustees, shall manage the
operations of the Building and Zoning Department as listed above.
(Prior Code, § 2-802)
(C) General duties. The duties and responsibilities of the Building and Zoning Director shall be
as follows:
(1) To plan, organize and coordinate the activities of the Building and Zoning Department;
2018 S-1
46 Swansea - Administration
(2) To act as liaison between developers, builders, contractors and individuals and the
administrative services they require;
(3) To assist the Administrator in dealing with federal, state and regional officials, and
developers to discuss community and economic development related issues;
(4) To assist with the preparation, implementation, monitoring and revising of the village’s
comprehensive community master plan;
(5) To coordinate the preparation and administration of the annual Department budget and
capital improvement projects;
(6) To perform the duties of Code Administrator, as set out in § 32.07 of this code of
ordinances and the duties of Zoning Administrator;
(7) To have responsibility for initiation and pursuit of all matters that are within the scope
and jurisdiction of the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals and Building Board of Appeals, and to
provide on each matter referred, a written summary to the Board of Trustees supported by the
findings of facts of the matter being considered;
(8) To have responsibility for the coordination of all construction permits, for overseeing
other inspectors, for the scheduling, performing and recording of inspections and for coordinating
inspection efforts;
(9) To submit a report to the Mayor and the Board of Trustees on monthly basis which
contains the activities and data relating to the Department, and including comments and suggestions
relating thereto;
(10) To attend all meetings of the Board of Trustees and its related committees; and
(11) To have responsibility for other duties as assigned and as the preceding are from time to
time modified.
(Prior Code, § 2-803)
(D) Salary. The salary or compensation of the Building and Zoning Director shall be such as is
provided for by the President and the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 2-804)
§ 32.29 BUSINESS DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.
(A) Creation. In order that the Business District of the village be maintained and revitalized, a
Business District Development and Redevelopment Commission is hereby created.
(Prior Code, § 2-1601)
Officials and Organizations 47
(B) Membership.
(1) The Village Business District Development and Redevelopment Commission shall
consist of three members, with at least one of the members being a resident of the village and two
members shall either own real property within the designated Business District, or own or be an
executive of a business within the designated Business District. In addition, there shall be two nonvoting
advisors to the Commission, the Village Administrator and the Building and Zoning Director.
(2) Two members of the Business District Development and Redevelopment Commission
shall constitute a quorum and no meeting or public hearing shall be conducted without a quorum
being present.
(Prior Code, § 2-1602)
(C) Appointment and term of office.
(1) Members of the Business District Development and Redevelopment Commission shall
be appointed by the President of the Board with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
(2) The initial term of office for members appointed as of the effective date of this section
shall commence upon appointment by the President of the Board, made with the advice and consent
of the Board of Trustees. Thereafter, members shall serve for a period of one year, commencing
upon appointment by the President of the Board, made with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, and expiring on April 30 of the following year.
(3) One of the members so appointed shall be named as Chairperson at the time of his or
her appointment and empowered with the authority to call and preside over meetings.
(4) Any member of the Business District Development and Redevelopment Commission
desiring to resign his or her appointment before said term has expired shall notify the President of the
Board of Trustees in writing.
(a) A resignation so received shall be effective upon the date it is received by the
President unless another date is specifically provided for.
(b) The President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall, at the
earliest possible time, appoint a successor for the unexpired term of the member.
(5) The President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, may remove any
member of the Business District Development and Redevelopment Commission, with or without
cause.
(a) Members of the Business District Development and Redevelopment Commission
shall be removed for unexcused absences in excess of two per year. Absences may be excused by the
Commission Chairperson.
48 Swansea - Administration
(b) The President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall, at the
earliest possible time, appoint a successor for the unexpired term of the member so removed.
(Prior Code, § 2-1603)
(D) Compensation. The members of the Business District Development and Redevelopment
Commission shall not receive a salary or compensation such as is provided by the President and
Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 2-1604)
(E) Procedure.
(1) Immediately upon its creation, the members of the Business District Development and
Redevelopment Commission shall meet, organize, designate a Recorder of meeting minutes and
adopt rules and regulations of organization and procedure consistent with village ordinances and state
laws. Thereafter, the Business District Development and Redevelopment Commission may change or
alter any such rules or regulations.
(2) The Business District Development and Redevelopment Commission shall keep written
records of its proceedings, which shall be open at all times to public inspection.
(Prior Code, § 2-1605)
(F) Powers and duties. The Business District Development and Redevelopment Commission
shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To recommend programs to the Board of Trustees to enhance the financial viability of
businesses within the Business District, the boundaries of said district, having been previously set or
hereafter set by the Board of Trustees;
(2) To recommend to the Board of Trustees the construction of improvements to the streets,
sidewalks and other public facilities within the designated Business District;
(3) To recommend to the Board of Trustees promotional activities to increase the
recognition of the businesses within the designated Business District; and
(4) To recommend to the Board of Trustees the provision of financial assistance, through
loans or through the reimbursement of expenses, to business owners within the Business District for
improvements made to the exteriors and signage of their buildings, within a budget established by the
Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 2-1606)
(Ord. 1523, passed 7-21-2008)
CHAPTER 33: EMPLOYEE RULES AND REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
33.01 Hours of the Government Center, administrative offices
33.02 Hours of the Street Department
33.03 Hours of the sewer plant
33.04 Holidays
33.05 Vacation
33.06 Sick leave
33.07 Overtime pay and compensatory time
33.08 Leave of absence for death in family
33.09 Absence for attendance in court
33.10 Military reserve training and emergency call-up
33.11 Village office and property utilization
33.12 Tuition reimbursement
33.13 Insurance
33.14 Break-time/lunch
33.15 Appearance and general behavior
33.16 Pay schedules
33.17 Employee pension
33.18 Additional benefits
33.19 Exclusion of school crossing guards
Police Department; Additional Benefits
33.35 Payment for call back; court time and stand-by pay
33.36 Police pension
33.37 Uniform allowance
33.38 Educational benefits
33.39 Longevity
33.40 Insurance
33.41 Retirement benefits
49
50Swansea - Administration
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act
33.60 Adoption of Act
33.61 Definitions
33.62 Prohibited political activities
33.63 Gift ban
33.64 Future amendments to the Act
33.65 Future declaration of unconstitutionality of the Act
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 HOURS OF THE GOVERNMENT CENTER, ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES.
The location of the Village's administrative offices, which are currently located at 1444 Boul
Avenue, Swansea, Illinois, including the office of the Village Clerk and the office of the Utility
Control Clerk, shall be moved to 1444 Boul Avenue, Swansea, Illinois, and shall be open at that
location beginning October 17, 2016, and shall be open Monday through Friday thereafter from 8:00
a.m. until 4:30 p.m., unless otherwise provided by a resolution or motion passed as provided by law.
All full-time administrative office employees shall regularly work the aforementioned days and times,
with one-half hour for lunch, provided that the Village Administrator may from time to time assign
different hours, as required, not to regularly exceed more than 40 hours per week for any particular
employee.
(Prior Code, § 4-101) (Ord. 1763, passed 10-3-2016)
§ 33.02 HOURS OF THE STREET DEPARTMENT.
The village’s Street Department at 215 Service Street shall be open Monday through Friday from
7:00 a.m. until 3:30 p.m. All full-time Street Department employees shall regularly work the
aforementioned days and times, with one-half hour for lunch; provided that, the Department
Supervisor may from time to time assign different hours, as required, not to regularly exceed more
than 40 hours for any particular employee.
(Prior Code, § 4-102) (Ord. 1581, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 33.03 HOURS OF SEWER PLANT.
The village’s sewer plant at 225 Service Street shall be open Monday through Friday from 7:00
a.m. to 3:30 p.m. All full-time sewer plant employees shall regularly work the aforementioned days
and
Employee Rules and Regulations 51
times, with one-half hour for lunch; provided that, the Department Supervisor may from time to time
assign different hours, as required, not to regularly exceed more than 40 hours for any particular
employee.
(Prior Code, § 4-103) (Ord. 1581, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 33.04 HOLIDAYS.
(A) The village recognizes and observes the following holidays each year:
(1) New Year’s Day;
(2) Martin Luther King’s birthday;
(3) Lincoln’s birthday (police officers and dispatchers only);
(4) President’s Day;
(5) Friday immediately preceding Easter;
(6) Easter;
(7) Memorial Day;
(8) Independence Day;
(9) Labor Day;
(10) Veterans Day;
(11) Thanksgiving Day;
(12) The day following Thanksgiving; and
(13) Christmas Day.
(B) Every full-time permanent employee, regularly scheduled to work 80 hours per pay period
(all police officers shall work 84 hours per pay period), shall be entitled to each holiday with pay,
within the following guidelines.
(1) The day following Thanksgiving Day and the Friday immediately preceding Easter shall
not be considered a holiday for police officers or police dispatchers. Easter and Lincoln’s birthday
shall only be considered holidays for police officers or police dispatchers.
52 Swansea - Administration
(2) Police officers and police dispatchers who are scheduled and required to work on
holidays shall be compensated at a rate of two and one-half times their normal hourly wage.
(3) For those employees not normally scheduled to work on Saturdays or Sundays, if any
holiday falls on a Sunday, the holiday shall be deemed to have fallen on the following Monday. If
any holiday falls on a Saturday, the holiday shall be deemed to have fallen on the previous Friday.
(4) Each such holiday shall be observed by the village on the same date that it is observed
by Federal Government offices.
(5) Police officers not normally scheduled to work on the day on which a holiday falls shall
be compensated for 12 hours pay at their normal hourly wage.
(6) Police dispatchers not normally scheduled to work on the day on which a holiday falls
shall be compensated for 12-hours’ pay at their normal hourly wage.
(7) Holidays are based upon the fiscal year beginning May 1 and ending April 30. Personal
holidays must be scheduled and taken within the fiscal year or they are forfeited. Personal holidays
must be approved by the employee’s supervisor at least 24 hours in advance (48 hours in the case of
police officers), unless an emergency occurs. Personal holidays cannot be taken in increments of less
than one hour.
(Prior Code, § 4-105) (Ord. 1433, passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 1508, passed 3-3-2008; Ord. 1575,
passed 5-17-2010)
§ 33.05 VACATION.
(A) Effective as of the employee’s last anniversary date prior to 5-1-2010, every full-time
permanent employee of the village shall accrue vacation based on 50 pay periods on the following
schedule:
(1) Zero until completion of five years: ten days (3.2 per pay period) (80 hours);
(2) Six until completion of ten years: 15 days (4.8 per pay period) (120 hours);
(3) Eleven or more: 20 days (6.4 per pay period) (160 hours); and
(4) For the purposes of this section, all police officers will receive vacation time accrued on
their anniversary date of hire as follows:
(a) Start until completion of five years: 84 hours a year (seven hours per month);
(b) Six years until completion of ten years: 126 hours a year (ten and one-half hours
per month); and
Employee Rules and Regulations 53
(c) Eleven or more years: 168 hours a year (14 hours per month).
(B) Employees begin to accrue vacation upon hire, but may not take time earned until
completion of six months of employment.
(C) Vacation time shall be posted on each employee’s weekly bi-weekly paycheck and shall not
be taken until posted. Vacation shall be scheduled in advance and approved by the employee’s
supervisor. The Village Administrator shall approve vacation requests made by department heads.
Vacation time cannot be taken in increments of less than one hour.
(D) An employee may carry up to the number of vacation days earned in the previous year past
his or her anniversary date. Any excess time shall be forfeited, unless an emergency occurs.
Determination of emergency shall be made by the employee’s department head in conjunction with
the Chairperson of the Personnel Committee.
(E) The Supervisor may not authorize payment to any employee in lieu of taking vacation.
(F) In the event that an employee’s status changes from part time to full time, he or she shall
begin to earn vacation leave as of the date of said change. In the event that an employee’s status
changes from full time to part time, he or she shall immediately cease to earn vacation leave.
However, any previously earned and posted leave shall be retained and may be used accordingly.
(G) In the event an employee terminates employment with the village, he or she shall be entitled
to payment for all posted but unused vacation time. The employee shall also be paid for any vacation
time, which has not yet been posted, but has been earned by the employee pro-rata, on the basis of
full months of service since the last anniversary date.
(Prior Code, § 4-106) (Ord. 1575, passed 5-17-2010)
§ 33.06 SICK LEAVE.
(A) Full-time permanent employee of the village employed prior to 5-1-2011 shall earn sick
leave at a rate of eight hours per month. Full time permanent employees of the village hired on or
after 5-1-2011 shall earn sick leave at a rate of four hours per month. Police patrol officers and
sergeants refer to contract. Chief and Deputy Police Chief hired before the codification date shall
earn sick leave at a rate of 12 hours per month and after the codification enactment date shall earn
sick leave at the rate of four hours per month.
(B) Sick leave shall be posted on the first day of the month following the first full month of
employment and on the first day of each successive month. Sick leave shall not be taken until posted.
(C) No payment for unused sick leave shall be made at the time of retirement, resignation or
termination. The maximum accrual of sick leave for employees who are participants in the State
Municipal Retirement Fund shall be 2,080 hours. All sick leave accumulated to a maximum of 2,080
54 Swansea - Administration
hours by employees who are participants in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund shall be credited
towards the determination of longevity for the retirement benefit as provided in 40 ILCS 5/7-139, as
amended, and State Municipal Retirement Fund regulations.
(D) (1) An employee not covered by a collective bargaining agreement may use sick leave
benefits provided by the village for uncompensated absences due to the employee’s illness, injury,
disability, or medical appointment.
(2) Under the same terms upon which an employee not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement is entitled to use sick leave benefits for the employee’s own illness, injury, disability, or
medical appointment, the employee may use his or her sick leave benefits related to the illness,
injury, disability, or medical appointment of those family members listed in 820 ILCS 191/10, as
they now appear, and as the same may be amended and/or recodified from time to time.
(E) Sick leave cannot be taken in increments of less than 30 minutes. When the need for sick
leave is predictable, it shall be scheduled and approved by the employee’s supervisor at least 24
hours in advance.
(F) (1) If any employee uses more than two consecutive days of sick leave, a doctor’s statement
may be required upon return to work.
(2) For the purpose of this section, if a police officer uses more than three consecutive days
of sick leave, a doctor’s or other medical, professional’s statement may be required upon return to
work.
(3) The Supervisor may require documentation that sick leave was used for an authorized
purpose.
(G) (1) In the event that an employee’s status changes from part time to full time, he or she
shall have sick leave posted after the first full month of full-time employment. In the event than an
employee’s status changes from full time to part time, he or she shall immediately cease to earn sick
leave.
(2) However, any sick leave previously earned and posted shall be retained and may be
used accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 4-107) (Ord. 1575, passed 5-17-2010; Ord. 1607, passed 4-18-2011; Ord. 1678,
passed 6-17-2013; Ord. 1777, passed 4-17-2017)
2018 S-1
Employee Rules and Regulations 55
§ 33.07 OVERTIME PAY AND COMPENSATORY TIME.
(A) Employees not subject to a collective bargaining agreement shall be subject to the following:
(1) The Deputy Police Chief shall normally work 84 hours every two weeks.
(2) Every other such full-time permanent employee of the Village of Swansea shall
normally work 80 hours every two weeks.
(3) For each hour worked in excess of 40 hours per week, the employee, except the Deputy
Police Chief, shall be paid at the rate of one and one-half times his or her normal hourly rate.
(B) (1) Full-time permanent employees not normally scheduled to work Sundays and holidays,
yet subject to call-out, shall be paid for time worked on those days at a rate of two times their normal
hourly wage.
(2) Such employees shall be compensated for a minimum of two hours in such situations,
regardless of time actually worked. Calculation of time shall commence when the employee is first
called.
(C) Overtime, when required, shall be scheduled and approved by the employee’s supervisor,
unless an emergency occurs.
(D) Compensatory time, for patrolmen and sergeants refer to respective contracts, all others
computed at a rate of one and one-half hours for each hour of overtime worked, may be credited in
lieu of overtime pay. The use of this compensatory time must be authorized by his or her supervisor
in advance, emergency request may be granted. Compensatory time must be used within one year of
time earned or be lost. A maximum of 168 hours of compensatory time (112 clock-hours) may be
accrued. Overtime hours worked in excess of the maximum compensatory time accrual shall be paid
to the employee. An employee may request payment for accrued compensatory time. Said payment
for compensatory time, as computed at the one and one-half hours per hour of overtime worked rate,
shall paid at the employer’s regular rate of pay. At the time of separation from employment with the
village, any accrued compensatory time shall be paid.
(E) The provisions of this section shall not apply to salaried employees. The following positions
are determined to be exempt from overtime payment under the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act:
(1) Village Administrator: executive exemption;
(2) Police Chief: executive exemption;
(3) Deputy Police Chief: executive exemption;
(4) Fire Chief: fire protection activity exemption; and
56 Swansea - Administration
(5) Deputy Fire Chief: fire protection activity exemption.
(Prior Code, § 4-108) (Ord. 1608, passed 4-18-2011; Ord. 1620, passed 7-18-2011; Ord. 1729,
passed 10-5-2015)
§ 33.08 LEAVE OF ABSENCE FOR DEATH IN FAMILY.
(A) Every full-time permanent employee of the village shall be entitled to three days leave, with
pay, in the event of the death of a member of the employee’s immediate family. Such leave should be
taken within five days of conclusion of services unless extenuation circumstances apply as determined
by the employee’s supervisor.
(B) For the purpose of this section, IMMEDIATE FAMILY includes: wife, son, stepson,
mother, brother, grandmother, stepfather, husband, daughter, stepdaughter, father, sister,
grandfather, stepmother, any of the above as in-law relation.
(C) Employees may use posted sick leave as funeral leave in the event of the death of a family
member not specified above.
(Prior Code, § 4-109)
§ 33.09 ABSENCE FOR ATTENDANCE IN COURT.
(A) Any full-time permanent employee of the village called for jury duty or subpoenaed by any
legislative, judicial or administrative tribunal, shall be allowed time away from work with pay;
provided that, upon receiving the sum paid for jury service or witness fee, the employee submits the
payment, or its equivalent, to the village to be returned to the fund from which their original payroll
payment was drawn.
(B) Part-time or temporary employees will be allowed time off without pay for such purposes
and will be allowed to retain any payment received for jury service or as a witness fee.
(Prior Code, § 4-110)
§ 33.10 MILITARY RESERVE TRAINING AND EMERGENCY CALL-UP.
(A) Every full-time or part-time employee of the village who is a member of the reserve
component of the armed service, the state’s National Guard or the state’s Naval Militia, shall be
allowed annual leave without pay as may be necessary for the employee to fulfill their military
reserve obligation. Such leave will be granted without loss of seniority or other accrued benefits.
(B) Upon notification of annual leave dates, the employee shall provide his or her supervisor
with said dates, and upon completion of annual leave, shall provide his or her supervisor with a
certificate of attendance.
Employee Rules and Regulations 57
(C) In the case of an emergency call-up, such leave shall be granted for the duration of the
emergency, without pay, but also without loss of seniority or other accrued benefits.
(Prior Code, § 4-111)
§ 33.11 VILLAGE OFFICE AND PROPERTY UTILIZATION.
Every village officer and employee is hereby prohibited from using the village office facilities or
property of any kind for any purpose other than official village business.
(Prior Code, § 4-112)
§ 33.12 TUITION REIMBURSEMENT.
(A) The Board of Trustees may authorize reimbursement to any full-time permanent employee
for the cost of tuition and fees incurred relative to the completion of any course or courses in which
the employee is enrolled; provided that, said courses have been determined to be beneficial to the
employees professional development and the Board has authorized reimbursement prior to
enrollment.
(B) Reimbursement shall be limited to no more per credit hour than the local Community
College District charges, plus all related student fees. No reimbursement shall be made for books or
supply costs.
(C) The Board shall limit reimbursement to those courses, which it has determined each quarter
or semester to be:
(1) Directly related to the employees current job;
(2) Part of an associate degree program which is directly related to the employees current
job;
(3) Part of a bachelors degree program which is directly related to the employees current
job;
(4) Part of a masters degree program which is directly related to the employees current job;
or
(5) A course or program, which will prepare the employee for a new position within the
village for which the employee is being considered.
(D) The Board shall limit authorization for reimbursement to those full-time employees who
have at least six-months’ continuous employment, and who have submitted a written application for
authorization to the Personnel Committee prior to enrollment. Said application shall include, at a
minimum:
(1) A brief description of the course or courses;
58 Swansea - Administration
(2) Name of the educational institution;
(3) Tuition and fee cost;
(4) Requirements for degree programs (if applicable); and
(5) Scheduled time of classes.
(E) The Committee shall review each application and recommend that the full Board of Trustees
authorize, or decline to authorize, reimbursement.
(F) Upon completion of the approved courses for each quarter or semester, the employee shall
submit to the Personnel Committee a written request for reimbursement, which shall include a
tuition/fee statement, proof of payment and grade report.
(G) No reimbursement shall be made for any course in which a grade lower than “C” has been
earned.
(H) In the event an employee voluntarily terminates employment with the village within one year
after reimbursement has been granted, the village shall have the right to demand repayment of such
reimbursement. Demand for repayment shall only include reimbursement granted for the last
semester or quarter completed by the employee.
(Prior Code, § 4-113) (Ord. 1390, passed 11-15-2004)
§ 33.13 INSURANCE.
(A) All full-time permanent employees shall be entitled to fully paid life, health and dental
insurance coverage currently offered by the village. The village shall provide health, dental and life
insurance to all full-time, permanent employees, with all non-contract employees paying 5% of the
premium for health and dental insurance for the employee, and the remainder of the premium paid by
the village. Employee life insurance shall be offered by the village at no cost to the employee.
(B) Dependent insurance coverage shall be offered to all full-time permanent employees as a
shared cost, with the employee paying 30% and the village paying 70% of the actual cost of said
coverage, as it is from time to time adjusted by the insurance carrier. The village shall provide health
and dental insurance for dependents of all full-time, permanent employees with all non-contract
employees paying 35% of the premium for health and dental insurance for their dependents, and the
remainder of the premium paid by the village.
(Prior Code, § 4-114) (Ord. 1391, passed 11-15-2004; Ord. 1572, passed 5-3-2010)
Employee Rules and Regulations 59
§ 33.14 BREAK-TIME/LUNCH.
(A) All employees of the village shall be allowed one 15-minute break in the morning and one
15-minute break in the afternoon during each full day of employment.
(B) All employees will be allowed a lunch break during each full day of employment. Police
officers shall remain on call during lunch and, thus, shall be compensated during that time. Police
dispatchers shall be required to take lunch breaks at their work area and thus shall be compensated
during that time. All other employees shall be entitled to a one-half hour non-compensated lunch
break.
(Prior Code, § 4-115)
§ 33.15 APPEARANCE AND GENERAL BEHAVIOR.
(A) All village employees shall dress appropriately for the work to be performed and shall,
through their appearance and grooming, project a professional image. Any employee required to
work in water may be permitted by the supervisor to wear shorts. However, all such employees shall
be appropriately dressed when in route to and from the job site.
(B) Every employee of the village shall be courteous to residents, fellow employees and officials
at all times. No employee shall use abusive language or make innuendos or disparaging remarks to or
about residents, employees or officials.
(C) No employee will represent the village with promise or compromise unless authorized to do
so.
(D) Village owned and garaged vehicles shall be used only for village business. Village-owned
vehicles assigned to a specific employee and garaged at that employee’s residence shall be considered
a fringe benefit and any non-business mileage, including commuting to and from work, shall be
calculated and considered income in accordance with Internal Revenue Service regulations.
(Prior Code, § 4-116)
§ 33.16 PAY SCHEDULES.
(A) Each position within the village shall be classified by grade and step, and the corresponding
salary determined by the most recently adopted pay classification plan. Each new employee shall be
hired at the grade and step recommended by the Personnel Committee within the range of the
classified position.
(B) Subsequent salary increases shall be made in accordance with the most recently adopted pay
classification plan.
60 Swansea - Administration
(C) The Board of Trustees shall retain the right to adjust and modify the adopted pay
classification plan and to freeze any scheduled increase whenever the circumstances and situation
warrant such action.
(Prior Code, § 4-117)
§ 33.17 EMPLOYEE PENSION.
Through payroll withholding, every new and current employee normally scheduled to work
1,000 hours per year, except police officers, shall contribute to the state’s Municipal Retirement
Fund an amount equal to 4.5% of their gross salary each pay period. Said contribution shall be paid
to IMRF and managed on behalf of said employee in accordance with the rules and regulations
covering said Fund.
(Prior Code, § 4-118)
§ 33.18 ADDITIONAL BENEFITS.
(A) The Board of Trustees shall retain the right to grant additional benefits to any employee as
an incentive to employment or retention of employment. Such benefits shall be duly noted and
become a permanent record in the employees personnel file.
(B) The Board of Trustees shall retain the right to grant unpaid leave of absence to any
employee without loss of position or seniority.
(Prior Code, § 4-119)
§ 33.19 EXCLUSION OF SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS.
With the exception of the provisions of § 33.09 of this chapter, this chapter shall not apply to
school crossing guards employed by the village.
(Prior Code, § 4-120)
POLICE DEPARTMENT; ADDITIONAL BENEFITS
§ 33.35 PAYMENT FOR CALL-BACK; COURT TIME AND STAND-BY PAY.
(A) A CALL-BACK is defined as an official assignment of work which does not continuously
precede or follow an officer’s regularly scheduled working hours. Employees called back to work
shall be compensated for two hours at the overtime rate or for the actual time worked at the overtime
rate, whichever is greater.
Employee Rules and Regulations 61
(B) Employees that are required to attend court outside their regularly scheduled work hours,
shall receive court time pay and shall be compensated for a minimum of two hours at the overtime
rate of pay or the actual time spent in court, including travel time, at the overtime rate of pay,
whichever is greater.
(C) Officers required to be available during their off-duty hours for a possible court appearance,
after having been so notified, shall receive $30 court stand-by pay for each day in such status.
COURT STAND-BY TIME, for purposes of this section, shall be defined to mean a period of time in
which an officer must be available to respond to a call to court or other judicial hearing following
notification by the State’s Attorney’s office that the officer’s appearance may be required within a
specific time frame on a given day. Court stand-by pay shall be separate and apart from court time
pay.
(Prior Code, § 4-201)
§ 33.36 POLICE PENSION.
Through payroll withholding, every new and currently enrolled police officer shall contribute
into the Police Pension Fund an amount equal to that which is determined by the State Department of
Insurance of his or her base salary each pay period. Base salary shall not include overtime pay,
payment for vacation in lieu of taking time off, court pay and holiday pay in excess of 20 hours per
holiday worked. Police pension withholding shall, however, apply to longevity pay and educational
benefits. Police officers shall continue to contribute FICA withholding.
(Prior Code, § 4-202)
§ 33.37 UNIFORM ALLOWANCE.
(A) Every new police officer shall be provided with appropriate uniforms and equipment which
shall consist of: four long sleeve shirts; four short sleeve shirts; four trousers; one pair shoes or
boots: four turtlenecks; one all-weather coat; one raincoat; one ballistic protection vest; one hat: one
handcuff case: one portable carrier; one key keeper; one glove pouch/pager holder; one taser holster;
one CPR mask; one aluminum report holder; one aluminum ticket holder; one PC spray holder (if
requested); one traffic safety vest; one flashlight holder; four belt fasteners; one ammunition holder;
two set handcuffs; three badges; one gun belt; and one holster; and other equipment necessary to
perform his or her duties.
(B) (1) Thereafter, every uniformed police officer shall be granted a $500 uniform allowance at
the beginning of each fiscal year. Plain clothes officers shall receive a $700 uniform allowance at the
beginning of each fiscal year.
(2) The uniform allowance may be used for the purchase, replacement, repair, cleaning and
maintenance of required or authorized uniforms and equipment. Such allowance shall be in the form
of a line-item cash voucher system in the name of each officer.
62 Swansea - Administration
(3) Any unused allowance at the end of each fiscal year shall accumulate and remain,
except that no payment shall be made upon termination for any unused allowance. Upon termination,
all uniforms and equipment shall be returned to the village.
(C) Every new police dispatcher shall be provided with appropriate uniforms and equipment.
(Prior Code, § 4-203) (Ord. 1579, passed 6-7-2010)
§ 33.38 EDUCATIONAL BENEFITS.
Every police officer holding a college degree or an equivalent number of college credit hours
shall be paid an annual lump sum education pay bonus at the beginning of each fiscal year in the
following amounts:
(A) Associate’s degree (or 60 hours of college credit): $500; and
(B) Bachelor’s degree (or 120 hours of college credit): $1,000.
(Prior Code, § 4-204)
§ 33.39 LONGEVITY.
(A) In recognition of extended service, every police officer shall receive longevity pay, paid as a
one time bonus, in increments as listed below. The longevity premium is calculated by multiplying
the base wage rate times the longevity increment, then multiplying the figure derived by the base
schedule of hours, 2,080 hours (2,184 hours for sergeants, Deputy Chief of Police and Chief of
Police), paid on the next pay period after the employee’s anniversary date of employment.
(B) Upon completion of the following years of service:
(1) Four through seven years: 3% of the police officer base wage rate;
(2) Eight through 11 years: 4% of the police officer base wage rate;
(3) Twelve through 15 years: 6% of the police officer base wage rate;
(4) Sixteen through 19 years: 8% of the police officer base wage rate; and
(5) Twenty or more years of service: 10% of the police officer base wage rate.
(Prior Code, § 4-205)
Employee Rules and Regulations 63
§ 33.40 INSURANCE.
All full-time police officers, regularly scheduled to work 84 hours in a two-week pay period,
shall be entitled to the fully paid life, health and dental coverage currently offered by the village; or
insurance coverage payment rates for the dependants of police officers shall be determined by the
current collective bargaining agreement.
(Prior Code, § 4-206)
§ 33.41 RETIREMENT BENEFITS.
Fifty percent of accumulated sick leave shall be applied toward retirement, but additional
benefits other than health insurance shall not be credited for such accumulated sick leave applied
toward retirement. For example, an officer with accumulated sick time of 100 days will cease work,
but will continue to receive regular pay for the 50 days prior to the effective retirement, but shall not
receive such additional benefits for those 50 sick days.
STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT
§ 33.60 ADOPTION OF ACT.
(A) The regulations of § 5-15 (5 ILCS 430/5-15) and Art. 10 (5 ILCS 430/10-10 through
430/10-40) of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq. (hereafter
referred to as the “Act” in this subchapter) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to
the officers and employees of the village to the extent required by 5 ILCS 430/70-5.
(B) The solicitation or the acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the
Act, by any officer or any employee of the village is hereby prohibited.
(C) The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an officer or employee
of the village under the Act is hereby prohibited.
(D) The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act by any officer or employee
of the village is hereby prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 2-1501) (Ord 1374, passed 5-17-2004)
64 Swansea - Administration
§ 33.61 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE. Any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence
the selection, nomination, election or appointment of any individual to any federal, state or local
public office or office in a political organization, or the selection, nomination or election of
presidential, vice-presidential electors, but does not or include activities:
(1) Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative or administrative
action;
(2) Relating to collective bargaining; or
(3) That are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
CANDIDATE. A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election
to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains
eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in § 1-3 of the Election Code (10
ILCS 5/1-3).
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING. The same meaning as that term is defined in § 3 of the state’s
Public Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/3).
COMPENSATED TIME. With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the
employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as a condition, of his or
her employment, but for purposes of this subchapter, it does not include any designated holidays,
vacation periods, personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a
leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
COMPENSATED TIME includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the
control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is executing his or her
official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF. Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to
compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work time required of that
employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION. The same meaning as that term is defined in § 9-1.4 of the Election Code
(10 ILCS 5/9-1.4).
EMPLOYEE. A person employed by the village, whether on a full-time or part-time basis or
pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and under the control of an employer
with regard to the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an
independent contractor.
Employee Rules and Regulations 65
EMPLOYER. The Village of Swansea.
GIFT. Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance or other tangible or
intangible item having monetary value including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and
honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the
official position of an officer or employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE. Any period during which an employee does not receive:
(1) Compensation for employment;
(2) Service credit towards pension benefits; and
(3) Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER. A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or
ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY. Any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for
elective office or any political organization, but does not include activities:
(1) Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative or administrative
action;
(2) Relating to collective bargaining; or
(3) That are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. A party, committee, association, fund or other organization
(whether or not incorporated) that is required to, file a statement of organization with the State Board
of Elections or a county clerk under § 9-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with
regard to those activities that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
(1) Preparing for, organizing or participating in any political meeting, political rally,
political demonstration or other political event;
(2) Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase of, selling,
distributing or receiving payment for tickets for any political fundraiser, political meeting or other
political event;
(3) Soliciting, planning the solicitation of or preparing any document or report regarding
anything of value intended as a campaign contribution;
66 Swansea - Administration
(4) Planning, conducting or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a
campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or
against any referendum question;
(5) Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to
determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a
political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question;
(6) Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate
for elective office or for or against any referendum question;
(7) Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or
for or against any referendum question or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls;
(8) Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing or filing any petition on
behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question;
(9) Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in
connection with a campaign for elective office;
(10) Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires;
(11) Distributing, preparing for distribution or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs
or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate for elective, office or for or against any
referendum question;
(12) Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question;
(13) Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any
referendum question;
(14) Serving as a delegate, alternate or proxy to a political party convention; and
(15) Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE. Any person or entity who:
(1) Is seeking official action by an officer, by an employee or by the officer or another
employee directing that employee;
(2) Does business or seeks to do business with the officer, with an employee or with the
officer or another employee directing that employee; and/or
Employee Rules and Regulations 67
(3) Conducts activities regulated by the officer, by an employee or by the officer or another
employee directing that employee or has an interest that may be substantially affected by the
performance or non-performance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
(Prior Code, § 2-1502) (Ord 1374, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 33.62 PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
(A) No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during
any compensated time, as defined herein. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property
or resources of the village in connection with any prohibited political activity.
(B) At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee
to perform any prohibited political activity.
(C) No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political
activity in consideration for that officer or employee being awarded additional compensation or any
benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued
employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or
any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited political activity.
(D) Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to
engage in as part of his or her official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or
employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this subchapter.
(E) No person either in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public
employment or in a position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that
is subject to the federal standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grantin-
aid programs shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a
member or an officer of a political committee, of a political party or of a political organization or
club.
(Prior Code, § 2-1503) (Ord 1374, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 33.63 GIFT BAN.
(A) Gift ban. Except as permitted by this subchapter, no officer or employee, and no spouse of
or immediate family member living with any officer or employee (collectively referred to herein as
“recipients”), shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source, as defined
herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally
offer or make a gift that violates this section.
68 Swansea - Administration
(B) Exceptions. Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and
independent of every other:
(1) Opportunities, benefits and services that are available on the same conditions as for the
general public;
(2) Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or immediate family
member, pays the fair market value;
(3) Any:
(a) Contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code; or
(b) Activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political organization
or candidate.
(4) Educational materials and missions;
(5) Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business;
(6) A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother,
son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece,
husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law,
son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson,
stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister and including the father, mother,
grandfather or grandmother of the individual’s spouse and the individual’s fiancé or fiancée;
(7) Anything provided by an individual on the basis, of a personal friendship unless the
recipient has reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the
official position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member
and not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of
personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered,
such as:
(a) The history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the
recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals;
(b) Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift
personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and
(c) Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift
also at the same time gave another.
Employee Rules and Regulations 69
(8) Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in, value on a single calendar day;
provided that, the food or refreshments are consumed on the premises from which they were
purchased or prepared or catered. For the purposes of this division (B)(8), CATERED means food or
refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means;
(9) Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation and other benefits resulting from outside
business or employment activities (or outside activities that are not connected to the official duties of
an, officer or employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official
position or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to, others in similar
circumstances;
(10) Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For the purpose of this division
(B)(10), INTRA-GOVERNMENTAL GIFT means any gift given to an officer or employee from
another officer or employee and INTER-GOVERNMENTAL GIFT means any gift given to an
officer or employee by an officer or employee of another governmental entity;
(11) Bequests, inheritances and other transfers at death; and/or
(12) Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a
cumulative total value of less than $100.
(C) Disposition of gifts. An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family
member living with the officer or employee, does not violate this subchapter if the recipient promptly
takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an
amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under §
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered or
succeeded.
(Prior Code, § 2-1504) (Ord 1374, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 33.64 FUTURE AMENDMENTS TO THE ACT.
Any amendments to the Act that become effective after the effective date of this subchapter shall
be incorporated into this subchapter by reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation,
acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated
into this subchapter by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village.
(Prior Code, § 2-1509) (Ord 1374, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 33.65 FUTURE DECLARATION OF UNCONSTITUTIONALITY OF THE ACT.
(A) If the State Supreme Court declare the Act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this
subchapter shall be repealed as of the date that the State Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and
not subject to
70 Swansea - Administration
any further appeals or re-hearings. This subchapter shall be deemed repealed without further action
by the corporate authorities of the village if the Act is found unconstitutional by the State Supreme
Court.
(B) If the State Supreme Court declares part of the Act unconstitutional, but upholds the
constitutionality of the remainder of the Act, or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the
remainder of the Act as adopted by this subchapter shall remain in full force and effect; provided,
however, that, the part of this subchapter relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional shall
be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the village.
(Prior Code, § 2-1510) (Ord 1374, passed 5-17-2004)
CHAPTER 34: PUBLIC SAFETY
Section
Civil Emergency
34.01 Definitions
34.02 Declaration of emergency
34.03 Curfew
34.04 Authority of Mayor to issue orders
34.05 Effectiveness
34.06 Notification
Emergency Management
34.20 Definitions
34.21 Limitations
34.22 Establishment
34.23 Coordinator
34.24 Deputy Coordinator
34.25 Assistant Coordinators
34.26 Functions
34.27 Local disaster emergencies
34.28 Purchasing and expenditures
34.29 Oath
34.30 Testing of disaster warning devices
34.31 Authority to accept services, gifts, grants or loans
34.32 Immunity
34.33 Compensation
71
72Swansea - Administration
CIVIL EMERGENCY
§ 34.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CIVIL EMERGENCY.
(1) A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or violence or any
threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to execute by three or more persons acting
together without authority of law; or
(2) Any natural disaster or human-made calamity, including flood, conflagration, cyclone,
tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate limits of the village, resulting in the death or
injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
CURFEW. A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running, loitering, standing or
motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the corporate
limits of the village, excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated to
duty with reference to the civil emergency.
(Prior Code, § 5-101)
§ 34.02 DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY.
Whenever an emergency, as defined in § 34.01 of this chapter, exists, the Mayor shall declare
the existence by means of a written declaration, setting forth the facts, which constitute the
emergency.
(Prior Code, § 5-102)
§ 34.03 CURFEW.
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor, he or she may order a general curfew
applicable to such geographical areas of the village or to the village as a whole, as he or she deems
advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day or night as he or she deems necessary in the
interest of the public safety and welfare.
(Prior Code, § 5-103)
Public Safety 73
§ 34.04 AUTHORITY OF MAYOR TO ISSUE ORDERS.
After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor of the village may also, in the interest of
public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following orders:
(A) Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns and private clubs or portions
thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor and beer is permitted;
(B) Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any wholesale or retailer;
(C) Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away of gasoline or other liquid
flammable or combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a
motor vehicle;
(D) Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms
or ammunition of any character whatsoever; and
(E) Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property.
(Prior Code, § 5-104)
§ 34.05 EFFECTIVENESS.
The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period of 48 hours unless sooner
terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists. The
Mayor shall have the power to re-proclaim the existence of a civil emergency at the end of each 48-
hour period during the time the civil emergency exists.
(Prior Code, § 5-105)
§ 34.06 NOTIFICATION.
Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the Chief of Police shall notify the news media
serving the village and a copy of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be
posted at the village’s Government Center.
(Prior Code, § 5-106)
74Swansea - Administration
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 34.20 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
COORDINATOR. The staff assistant to the President of the village with the duty of carrying out
the requirements of this chapter.
DISASTER. An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or
property resulting from any natural or technological cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood,
earthquake, wind, storm, hazardous materials spill or other water contamination requiring emergency
action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, extended periods of severe
and inclement weather, drought, infestation, critical shortages of essential fuels and energy,
explosion, riot or hostile military or paramilitary action.
DISASTER OPERATIONS. The functions created in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter to be performed by the village and other political subdivisions to alleviate the effects of
disasters.
EMERGENCY SERVICES. The coordination of functions by the state and its political
subdivision, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, as may be
necessary or proper to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury and damage resulting from any
natural or technological causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services,
police services, emergency aviation services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering,
warning services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense,
evacuation of persons from stricken or threatened areas, emergency assigned functions of plant
protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian
protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to protecting life or property.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Any county, city, village or incorporated town.
UNITED STATES. The several states, the District of Columbia and the possessions thereof.
§ 34.21 LIMITATIONS.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
(A) Interfere with the course or conduct of a private labor dispute; except that, action otherwise
authorized by this chapter or other laws may be taken when necessary to forestall or mitigate
imminent or existing danger to public health or safety;
Public Safety 75
(B) Interfere with the dissemination of news or comment of public affairs; but any
communications facility or organization (including, but not limited to, radio and television stations
and newspapers) may be requested to transmit or print public service messages furnishing
information or instructions in connection with a disaster or emergency;
(C) Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces, firefighting forces, units of the
armed forces of the United States, or any personnel thereof, when on active duty; but the village
emergency preparedness plan shall place reliance upon such forces available for performance of
functions related to disaster emergencies; and
(D) Limit, modify or abridge the authority of the Village President or the Board of Trustees
vested in them under the Constitution, statutes or common law of the state or village, independent of
or in conjunction with any provisions of this chapter.
§ 34.22 ESTABLISHMENT.
(A) There is hereby created an agency of the village to be known as the Village Emergency
Management Agency (EMA) to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting
from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or from natural or a humanmade
disaster, in accordance with the State Emergency Management Act.
(B) The Village EMA created pursuant to this chapter supersedes any civil defense agency or
emergency service and disaster agency heretofore created by the village, including the Village ESDA
heretofore existing, the powers, functions, personnel and assets of which are hereby transferred to
the Village EMA created hereby.
(C) The Village EMA shall consist of the Coordinator, Deputy Coordinator, Assistant
Coordinators and other such technical, clerical and other administrative personnel as may be selected
by the coordinator with the approval of the Village President or Village Administrator, and may
make such expenditures within their appropriation therefore as may be necessary to carry out the
purpose of this chapter.
(D) The Village EMA shall have jurisdiction over and serve the entire village, village property
not located within the corporate limits of the village, and with the approval of the Village Board of
Trustees, any other area which may decide to contract with the village for emergency management
assistance.
(E) The Village Fire Department, by agreement with the village, shall perform the duties of the
Village EMA and the Coordinator, Deputy Coordinators and Assistant Coordinators shall be
comprised of active members of Village Fire Department.
76 Swansea - Administration
§ 34.23 COORDINATOR.
(A) (1) The Fire Chief of the Village Fire Department shall serve as coordinator of the Village
EMA. The Fire Chief shall serve as Coordinator until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
(2) The Coordinator established pursuant to this chapter shall have a term of office
commencing on 6-20-2010; until that time, the current Coordinator shall remain in office.
(B) The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration,
training and operation of the Village EMA as prescribed in the village’s emergency preparedness
plan subject to the direction and control of the Village President. He or she shall coordinate the
activities of all organizations for emergency management operations within the area served by the
Village EMA and shall maintain liaison and cooperate with the emergency management agency of the
county.
(C) In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve of the Coordinator, the
Deputy Coordinator, or his or her designee, shall be and act as Coordinator until a new appointment
is made as provided in this chapter.
§ 34.24 DEPUTY COORDINATOR.
(A) The two Deputy Fire Chiefs of the Village Fire Department shall serve as Deputy
Coordinators of the Village EMA. The Deputy Fire Chiefs shall serve as Deputy Coordinators until
his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
(B) The Deputy Coordinator shall act under the direction of the Coordinator in regards to daily
and emergency functions.
(C) In the event of the absence of the Coordinator, the Deputy Coordinator shall be and act as
Coordinator with direction of the Village EMA.
(D) In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve of the Deputy
Coordinator, the Senior Assistant Coordinator, in regards to time served, shall be and act as Deputy
Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this chapter.
§ 34.25 ASSISTANT COORDINATORS.
(A) The Assistant Coordinators of the Village EMA shall be selected and appointed from among
the active officers/members of the Village Fire Department by the Village EMA Coordinator. The
Assistant Coordinators shall serve at the pleasure of the Village EMA Coordinator. The Assistant
Coordinators will be limited to three positions.
Public Safety 77
(B) The Assistant Coordinators shall act under the direction of the Coordinator in regards to
daily and emergency functions.
(C) In the event of the absence of the Coordinator and the Deputy Coordinator, the highest
ranking Assistant Coordinator, in regards to seniority of time served, shall be and act as Coordinator
with direction of the Village EMA.
§ 34.26 FUNCTIONS.
The Village ESDA shall:
(A) Prepare and keep current a disaster emergency plan for the Village EMA;
(B) Interrelate with business, labor, industry, agriculture, civic and volunteer organizations and
community leaders in the development of such plan;
(C) Prepare and distribute to all appropriate officials in written form a clear and complete
statement of the emergency responsibilities of all local departments and offices and of the disaster
chain of command;
(D) Cooperate with all other emergency management agencies;
(E) Establish, train and maintain such communications unit(s) as may be deemed proper by the
Village Board of Trustees;
(F) Establish, train and maintain such other volunteer EMA units as may be deemed proper by
the Coordinator or Village President to place the village in a position to promptly and efficiently
respond to disaster;
(G) Prepare, for issuance by the Village President or Board of Trustees, resolutions,
proclamations and regulations as necessary or appropriate in coping with disaster;
(H) Cooperate with the federal, state and county government and any public or private agency or
entity in achieving any purpose of this chapter and in implementing programs for disaster prevention,
preparation, response and recovery; and
(I) Do all other things necessary, incidental or appropriate for the implementation of this
chapter.
78 Swansea - Administration
§ 34.27 LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCIES.
(A) (1) A local disaster emergency may only be declared by the Village President or his or her
interim successor, as defined in the Emergency Interim Executive Succession Act, 5 ILCS 275/1.
For purposes of such act, the interim successors are hereby designated as follows:
(a) First, the Village Trustee that has been designated as Mayor pro tem;
(b) Second, the Village Trustee with the next most seniority on the Village Board; and
(c) Third, the Village Trustee with the third most seniority on the Village Board.
(2) In case two Trustees have equal seniority on the Village Board, the identity of the
interim successor shall be decided by agreement or, if no agreement can be reached, by lot.
(B) A local disaster emergency shall not continue for a period in excess of seven days, except by
or with consent of the Village Board of Trustees. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or
terminating a local disaster emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed
promptly with the Village Clerk.
(C) The effect of a local disaster emergency is to activate the response and recovery aspects of
the village emergency preparedness plan and to authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance
thereunder.
§ 34.28 PURCHASING AND EXPENDITURES.
The Board of Trustees may, on the recommendations of the Coordinator, authorize any
purchases or contracts necessary to place the village in a position to effectively combat any disaster
resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health
and safety, protect property and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster,
or from human-made or natural disaster.
§ 34.29 OATH.
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Village EMA shall, before entering upon
his or her duties, subscribe to the oath as set forth in the State Emergency Management Act, which
oath shall be filed with the Coordinator of the county.
Public Safety 79
§ 34.30 TESTING OF DISASTER WARNING DEVICES.
The testing of the disaster warning devices including outdoor warning sirens and Clearlake
Township eLert system shall be held only on the first Tuesday of each month at 10:00 a.m. unless
severe weather is impacting the village.
§ 34.31 AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT SERVICES, GIFTS, GRANTS OR LOANS.
Whenever the federal, state or county governments or any agency or officer thereof or whenever
any person, firm or corporation shall offer to the village services, equipment, supplies, material or
funds by way of gift or grant for purpose of emergency management operations, the Village Board
may authorize any officer of the village to receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or
funds on behalf of the village.
§ 34.32 IMMUNITY.
Neither the village, the agency or any member thereof or any person acting at their direction,
engaged in any emergency management operation or disaster activities, while complying with or
attempting to comply with this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this chapter
is liable for the death of or any injury to persons, or damage to property, as a result of such activity.
This section does not, however, affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he or she
would otherwise be entitled under the State Emergency Management Agency Act, under the
Worker’s Compensation Act or the Worker’s Occupational Diseases Act, or under any pension law,
and this section does not affect the right of any such person to receive any benefits or compensation
under any act of Congress.
§ 34.33 COMPENSATION.
The village may, by its annual appropriations ordinance, provide for the payment of the salary of
the Coordinator, Deputy Coordinator, Assistant Coordinators and such other office staff and
personnel as may be expressly provided for in this chapter. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit
any member of the agency from receiving compensation from the State Emergency Management
Agency under any provision of this agency.
80 Swansea - Administration
CHAPTER 35: POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
Section
Police Department
35.001 Creation of Department
35.002 Office of Chief created
35.003 Office of Deputy Police Chief created
35.004 Village vehicle
35.005 Appointments
35.006 Duties of Chief
35.007 Position of Sergeant
35.009 Duties
35.010 Serving process
35.011 Conduct of members
35.012 Witness fees
35.013 Rules and regulations
35.014 Residency
35.015 Stolen property
Police Pension
35.030 Established
35.031 Pension Board
35.032 Powers and duties
35.033 Meetings
35.034 Salary
Rules of Police Department
35.045 Administration
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
35.060 Established
35.061 Appointment
35.062 Qualifications
81
82 Swansea - Administration
35.063 Appointment by Board
35.064 Administration
Fire Department
35.080 Creation of Department
35.081 Office of Chief and Deputy created
35.082 Village vehicle
35.083 Removal from office
35.084 Duties of the Chief and Deputy Chief
35.085 Reports
35.086 Inspections
35.087 Duties
35.088 Membership
35.089 Membership process
35.090 Obedience to orders
35.091 Supervision
35.092 Command at fires
35.093 Disciplinary action
35.094 Use of apparatus
35.095 Injury while on duty
35.096 Entering fire houses
35.097 Equipment
35.098 Mutual aid agreements
35.099 Reserving the public meeting room
Fire Pension
35.110 Established
35.111 Pension Board
35.112 Powers and duties
35.113 Meetings
35.114 Salary
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 35.001 CREATION OF DEPARTMENT.
There is hereby created a Police Department, an executive department of the village. The Police
Department shall consist of the Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of Police and any of such number of
Police and Fire Departments 83
lieutenants, sergeants and patrol officers as may be provided from time to time by the Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 5-301) (Ord. 1398, passed 12-7-2004; Ord. 1580, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 35.002 OFFICE OF CHIEF CREATED.
(A) There is hereby created the Office of Chief Police. The Chief shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Village Board.
(B) The Police Chief may be removed or dischargedpursuant to the Illinois Municipal Code, 65
ILCS 5/10-2.1-17.
(Prior Code, § 5-302) (Ord. 1580, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 35.003 OFFICE OF DEPUTY POLICE CHIEF CREATED.
(A) There is hereby created the Office of Deputy Police Chief.
(B) There shall be one Deputy Police Chief. The Deputy Police Chief shall be appointed by the
Chief of the Police Department. The Deputy Police Chief shall serve at the discretion of the Chief
and, if removed by the Police Chief from the Deputy Police Chief position, the officer shall revert to
the rank he or she held prior to his or her appointment to Deputy Police Chief if appointed within the
Department, without regard as to whether a vacancy exists in that rank.
(Prior Code, § 5-303) (Ord. 1580, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 35.004 VILLAGE VEHICLE.
The Chief of Police shall be provided with a village-owned vehicle for his or her 24-hour use.
Maintenance and gasoline expenditures shall be paid by the village. Limited personal use of the
vehicle is permitted provided that the user is fit for duty and is able to make an immediate and timely
response to a request for police service.
(Prior Code, § 5-304) (Ord. 1593, passed 9-23-2010)
§ 35.005 APPOINTMENT.
(A) The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall make all appointments to the positions of
patrol officer and sergeant. The rules for the conduct of examinations to determine the fitness of
candidates established by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, in compliance with the
Illinois Municipal Code 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-17, shall govern the appointment process.
84 Swansea - Administration
(B) The discharge of patrol officers and sergeants shall be conducted in accordance with the
current collective bargaining agreements.
(Prior Code, § 5-305) (Ord. 1398, passed 12-7-2004; Ord. 1580, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 35.006 DUTIES OF CHIEF.
The Chief of Police shall keep records and make reports concerning activities of his or her
Department as may be required. The Chief shall be responsible for the performance by the Police
Department of all its functions, and all persons who are members of the Department shall serve
subject to the orders of the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 5-306)
§ 35.007 POSITION OF SERGEANT.
There is hereby created the position of sergeant within the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 5-308) (Ord. 1580, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 35.008 DUTIES.
It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to enforce the code, or ordinances
and all statutes applicable herein; and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest
violators thereof.
(Prior Code, § 5-310)
§ 35.009 SERVING PROCESS.
No member of the Police Department shall serve any process, except on command of the Police
Chief.
(Prior Code, § 5-311)
§ 35.010 CONDUCT OF MEMBERS.
It shall be the duty of every member of the Police Department to conduct himself or herself in a
proper and law abiding manner, at all times, and to avoid the use of unnecessary force. Each
member of the Department shall obey the orders and directions of his or her superior.
(Prior Code, § 5-312)
Police and Fire Departments 85
§ 35.011 WITNESS FEES.
Any members of the Police Department shall appear as witness whenever this is necessary in a
prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or of any state or federal law. No such member shall
retain any witness fee for service as witness in any action or suit to which the village is a party; and
fees paid for such services shall be turned over to the Chief of Police, who shall deposit the same
with the Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 5-313)
§ 35.012 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The Chief of Police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the conduct and
guidance of the members of the Police Department as he or she shall deem advisable, and such rules,
when approved by the President, shall be binding on such members.
(Prior Code, § 5-314)
§ 35.013 RESIDENCY.
All persons appointed as police officers shall reside within a residency requirement area
consisting of the village and the area within 25 miles of the corporate limits of the village. Police
officers shall comply with this requirement within 60 days of the completion of their probation.
(Prior Code, § 5-315) (Ord. 1580, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 35.014 STOLEN PROPERTY.
The Police Chief shall be the custodian of all lost, stolen or abandoned property in the village. It
shall be stored, when physically possible, at the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 5-316)
POLICE PENSION
§ 35.030 ESTABLISHED.
There is hereby created a Police Pension Fund and a Board of Trustees of the Police Pension
Fund.
(Prior Code, § 5-501)
86 Swansea - Administration
§ 35.031 PENSION BOARD.
The Board, composed of five members, shall be known as the Board of Trustees of the Police
Pension Fund of the village, and its members shall be chosen as provided in the provisions of the
Illinois Revised Statutes pertaining thereto.
(Prior Code, § 5-502)
§ 35.032 POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Board and its members shall have the rights and powers, and be subject to the duties
provided by the Illinois Revised Statutes and the parts thereunder entitled Police Pension Fund.
(Prior Code, § 5-503)
§ 35.033 MEETINGS.
The Board herein provided for shall hold quarterly meetings on the second Monday of July,
October, January and April, annually and special meetings as called by the President.
(Prior Code, § 5-504) (Ord. 1824, passed 5-21-2018)
§ 35.034 SALARY.
The members of the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall not receive or have any
right to receive any money from the Police Pension Fund as salary for services performed as a
member of such Board.
(Prior Code, § 5-505)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 40 ILCS 5/3-128
RULES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 35.045 ADMINISTRATION.
(A) Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. The government and control of the Police
Department of the village is vested by law in a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners (hereinafter
referred to in these rules as the Commissioners.)
2018 S-1
Police and Fire Departments 87
(B) Force, how made up. To enable the Commissioners to perform the duty imposed upon them
by law, they have the power to appoint, enroll and employ a permanent police force. Said permanent
force consists of the following police officers:
(1) One Chief of Police with the rank of Colonel;
(2) One Deputy Chief of Police with the rank of Lieutenant Colonel; and
(3) Lieutenant, sergeants and police officers as authorized by the Board of Trustees.
(C) Resignation. An officer who desires to resign from the Police Department must give at least
ten days’ notice of such intention. His or her resignation must be in writing and addressed to the
Chief of Police, with a copy to the Commissioners. In the event any officer resigns within two
years of his or her start date of employment with the village and in the event that the village has paid
for such officer to attend the Police Academy, then the officer shall reimburse to the village a sum
representing 50% of the enrollment fee paid by the village, as well as 50% of the salary paid to the
officer during the time of his or her attendance at the Academy.
(D) Sickness caused by improper conduct and the like; feigning sickness.
(1) The designated Village Physician shall report in writing to the Chief of Police any
police officer who shall evade duty on the pretense of sickness, or whose sickness or disability is
caused by improper conduct, intemperate, immoral or vicious habits or practices, or in which a
police officer fraudulently or by misleading statements concerning his or her disability, endeavors to
deceive the designated Village Physician, or in which a police officer feigns sickness or disability.
(2) The Chief of Police shall make a recommendation in his or her report whether or not
such police officer shall be paid for the time he or she is absent from duty.
(E) Notification of command. Members unable to report for duty owing to sickness or disability
shall have the police station notified no less than four hours, if possible, prior to the time they are to
report for duty.
(F) Intoxicating liquor in Department building. No intoxicating liquor will be brought into or
kept in any Department building, or part thereof, or vehicle, except when officially seized, or as
authorized by the Chief of Police.
(G) Election petitions circulated in Department buildings. Persons may be permitted to circulate
petitions for political candidates in and about the Police Department building, but such petitions in
the absence of the solicitor shall not be left to be filled out. Police officers are prohibited from
circulating election petitions while on duty.
88 Swansea - Administration
(H) Criminal, civil actions. A police officer shall not make a complaint for damages, or engage
in any civil action, without first notifying the Chief of Police. Any officer who becomes involved in
a suit as a defendant, or as a witness, shall notify the Chief of Police without delay.
(I) Grievances. Members of the Police Department aggrieved by the treatment or orders of a
superior officer shall adhere to the regulations on grievances set forth in the current collective
bargaining agreements.
(J) Interview with Commissioners. Although the Department is semi-military organization and
regular channels must be followed in addressing official communications, for the purpose of good
discipline and progressive methods, every police officer shall be privileged to have an interview with
the Commissioners. Accordingly, a police officer may apply for an interview with the
Commissioners either directly or through the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 5-601) (Ord. 1586, passed 7-6-2010)
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
§ 35.060 ESTABLISHED.
It is hereby established a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, as is provided by statute. The
President with consent of the Board of Trustees shall appoint a Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners, which shall consist of three members, whose terms of office shall be three
consecutive years, or until their respective successors are appointed and have qualified. No such
appointment, however, shall be made by any President within the 30 days before the expiration of his
or her term of office.
(Prior Code, § 5-401)
§ 35.061 APPOINTMENT.
The first members of the Board shall be appointed for the following terms: one of the members
shall be appointed to serve until the end of the current fiscal year, another to serve until the end of
the fiscal year next ensuing and the third to serve until the end of the fiscal year second next ensuing,
but every member shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified.
(Prior Code, § 5-402)
§ 35.062 QUALIFICATIONS.
(A) No person shall be appointed a member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners who
is related, either by blood or marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected official of the
village.
2018 S-1
Police and Fire Departments 89
(B) No more than two members of the Board shall belong to the same political party existing in
the village at the time of such appointment.
(C) Each member of the Board shall possess the qualifications required of other officers of the
village and shall take oath or affirmation of office, give bond and be subject to removal from office
in such a manner as provided by the Illinois Revised Statutes pertaining thereto.
(Prior Code, § 5-403)
§ 35.063 APPOINTMENT BY BOARD.
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall appoint:
(A) All officers and members of the Police Department, except the Chief of Police and Deputy
Police Chief; and
(B) The Deputy Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 5-404) (Ord. 1654, passed 7-3-2012; Ord. 1783, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 35.064 ADMINISTRATION.
In the administration of the Board, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, the Village
Board and all other village officials shall have the rights and powers and be subject to the duties
provided by the part for the appointment of a “Board of Police Commissioners” of the statutes of the
state.
(Prior Code, § 5-405) (Ord. 1573, passed 5-3-2010)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 35.080 CREATION OF DEPARTMENT.
There is hereby created a Swansea Fire Department, an executive department of the village. The
Fire Department shall consist of the Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chief, and such number of paid on-call
firefighters as may be provided from time to time by the Village Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 5-701) (Ord. 1783, passed 6-5-2017)
2018 S-1
90 Swansea - Administration
§ 35.081 OFFICES OF CHIEF AND DEPUTY CREATED.
(A) There is hereby created the Office of Fire Chief. The Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor
for a one-year term with the advice and consent of the Village Board.
(B) There is hereby created the Office of Deputy Fire Chief. The Deputy Chief shall be
appointed by Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 5-702) (Ord. 1654, passed 7-3-2012)
§ 35.082 VILLAGE VEHICLE.
(A) The Fire Chief and Deputy Chief shall be provided with a village-owned vehicle for his or
her 24-hour use.
(B) Maintenance and gasoline expenditures shall be paid by the village.
(C) Limited personal use of the vehicle is permitted; provided that, the user is fit for duty and is
able to make an immediate and timely response to a request for fire service.
(Prior Code, § 5-703) (Ord. 1592, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 35.083 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
The Fire Chief and Deputy Fire Chief may be removed or discharged by the Mayor during his
or her term of appointment according to the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/10-
2.1-17.
(Prior Code, § 5-704) (Ord. 1577, passed 5-17-2010; Ord. 1654, passed 7-3-2012)
§ 35.084 DUTIES OF THE CHIEF AND DEPUTY CHIEF.
(A) Chief. The Chief of this Department shall appoint all subordinate officers, except the Deputy
Fire Chief, at the first meeting of the Fire Department members following his or her appointment.
(1) The subordinate officers shall consist of one Deputy Chief and a sufficient number of
subordinate officers as determined by the Fire Chief to be reasonably necessary for the safe and
efficient operation of the Department. No member serving his or her probationary period or retired
member shall be appointed as a subordinate officer.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Chief to be present at all fires if possible, and to plan the
attack, to direct the action of all equipment and Fire Department personnel at the scene.
2018 S-1
Police and Fire Departments 91
(3) The Chief shall make a report at the next regular meeting of all fires, and give as close
as possible, the location, date, time and type of fire and the necessary additional information.
(4) The Chief shall call a meeting of the subordinate officers each month or as needed.
(5) In the absence of the Chief, these duties shall be assumed by the Deputy Chief or next
ranking officer.
(B) Deputy Chief.
(1) Job summary. A management position that involves assisting the Fire Chief with the
overall planning and direction of the Village Fire Department. The employee in this position is the
second in command of the Department.
(2) Supervision received. Work is performed under the managerial direction of the Village
Fire Chief.
(3) Supervision exercised. Supervises all members of the Village Fire Department.
(4) Job functions. The essential job functions of the Deputy Fire Chief that must be
performed with or without accommodation, may include, but are not limited to the following:
(a) Exercise all functions, powers and duties delegated by the Village Fire Chief;
(b) Direct and generally supervise Department personnel; oversee major tasks as
assigned;
(c) Assist with the development and implementation of departmental policies, goals and
procedures, general and specific orders, memos and the laws of the state and the village;
(d) Assist the Fire Chief in monitoring and ensuring the effectiveness of departmental
operations and personnel;
(e) Assist in determining equipment and supply needs;
(f) Inspect and maintain fire stations, equipment and apparatus in working order,
excluding grounds maintenance;
(g) Assist the Fire Chief in the development of emergency preparedness plans
involving the Fire Department and the community;
(h) Oversee safety and other types of training for personnel;
2018 S-1
92 Swansea - Administration
(i) Meet the village officials, community groups and others regarding Fire Department
matters;
(j) Maintain a schedule and gather educational materials for schools during, but not
limited to, Fire Prevention Week;
(k) Speak at public and school functions on fire prevention subjects and distribute
educational materials, as required;
(l) Assist the Fire Chief as needed in the review of building construction plans;
(m) Assist the Fire Chief in conducting inspections of commercial, industrial, public,
residential and institutional buildings as required by ordinance;
(n) Perform additional job related tasks and duties as requested or assigned;
(o) Perform all duties required of a firefighter as needed; and
(p) Respond to calls for service after scheduled working hours, if possible.
(Prior Code, § 5-705) (Ord. 1654, passed 7-3-2012; Ord. 1783, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 35.085 REPORTS.
The Fire Chief shall:
(A) Make a complete annual report to the Village Board of Trustees. This report shall include
any request for new equipment which will improve the effectiveness of the Department; and
(B) Forward or cause to be forwarded a monthly activity report to the Public Safety Committee.
(Prior Code, § 5-706) (Ord. 1783, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 35.086 INSPECTIONS.
(A) The Chief is empowered to inspect, or he or she may request the State Fire Marshal to
inspect, any and all public buildings and premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of
inspecting the premises for dangerous fire hazards, which may threaten life or property.
(B) Any dangerous condition shall be ordered abated by the Fire Chief and/or State Fire
Marshal.
(Prior Code, § 5-707)
2018 S-1
Police and Fire Departments 93
§ 35.087 DUTIES.
It shall be the function and duty of the Fire Department and every member thereof to extinguish
accidental or destructive fires, perform rescues and respond to other situations for the preservation of
life or property.
(Prior Code, § 5-708)
§ 35.088 MEMBERSHIP.
(A) This organization shall be known as the Swansea Fire Department. Membership shall consist
of active and retired members. Active members shall be limited to a total of 40.
(B) All active members shall be residents of the village or reside within three miles of the
village corporate boundaries, be of good moral character and at least 19 years of age.
(Prior Code, § 5-709)
(C) Daytime firefighters. An active or former member of the Swansea Fire Department who
relocates beyond the three-mile radius required for active members, but who is a business owner or
works primarily within the village corporate boundaries or within three miles of the village corporate
boundaries, may make a request to the Fire Chief to be a daytime firefighter. Daytime firefighters
shall participate in an amount of training as prescribed by the Chief.
(Ord. 1610, passed 4-18-2011; Ord. 1783, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 35.089 MEMBERSHIP PROCESS.
(A) Persons interested in membership in the Swansea Fire Department should be referred to the
Fire Chief, who shall keep a list of interested persons.
(B) An applicant for membership shall submit an application to the Fire Chief. Among other
requirements, the application shall inform the applicant of the need for a criminal background check
prior to employment with the village. The Fire Chief will conduct, or cause to be conducted, a
criminal background check of the applicant after receiving the applicant’s written consent. The Fire
Chief shall refer the applicant for a physical agility test to determine whether the applicant can
perform the physical requirements of the position. After the physical agility test has been completed,
the application and the results of the physical agility test shall be forwarded to the Board of Trustees.
The Board of Trustees may, in its discretion, make a conditional offer of employment to the
applicant. The offer shall be conditioned upon the results of a physical examination. After the
physical examination, the Board shall approve the applicant’s membership if the results of the
applicant’s physical examination indicate that the applicant is qualified to perform the requirements
of the position.
2018 S-1
94 Swansea - Administration
(C) An applicant for membership shall assume liability for injuries incurred in performing the
test to indicate that the applicant can perform the physical requirements of the position, and shall sign
a release which releases the village of liability for any injury incurred in performing that test.
(D) New members shall be placed on a one-year minimum probationary period and will not be
removed from probation until he or she has completed the certification process developed by the
Illinois State Fire Marshal, or equivalent hours meeting National Fire Protection Association
(“NFPA”) 1001 standards. During this probationary period, should the Fire Chief find the
probationary member unfit as a firefighter, he or she shall be dropped from the roll, with the advice
and consent of the Village Board of Trustees. The Fire Chief shall report to the body when a member
is released from probation.
(Prior Code, § 5-710)
(E) A member may, for work, health or personal reasons, request and obtain from the Fire
Chief a leave of absence from the Department. This request shall be in writing and include only a
general and not a specific reason for the request. Members of the Armed Forces of the United States
of America may take leaves of absence for any period of time reasonably necessary to perform his or
her duties for the Armed Forces of the United States of America. All other members may take leaves
of absence for a period of up to six months. The Fire Chief may extend this period for extenuating
circumstances, but in no case beyond 12 total months. If a leave of absence is granted, all issued
equipment shall be returned to the Swansea Fire Department and placed in the equipment inventory.
(Ord. 1783, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 35.090 OBEDIENCE TO ORDERS.
Any firefighter in attendance at a fire, training or other Fire Department function who shall
neglect or refuse to obey the orders of the officer in command at such fire shall, upon conviction, be
reprimanded and disciplined by the Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 5-711)
§ 35.091 SUPERVISION.
The Chief or ranking available officer shall have control of the Village Fire Department,
firehouse and all fire apparatus belonging to the village to include the repair and upkeep of same.
Whenever any fire apparatus belonging to the village is in need of repair to make it safe and
serviceable, the Chief or ranking available officer will cause the same to be done without delay.
Repairs will be accomplished in accordance with guidelines of the village, purchase orders, cost
limitations and the like.
(Prior Code, § 5-712)
2018 S-1
Police and Fire Departments 94A
§ 35.092 COMMAND AT FIRES.
In case of fire, the officer of the highest rank at the fire shall take command of the Village Fire
Department and direct the management thereof for the suppression of the fire in the best manner
possible; and, when it may be necessary because of conflagration, the officer in command may cause
buildings to be removed, torn down or destroyed in the best manner possible. In the event that there
are several officers of equal rank, the officers with the most seniority shall take command.
(Prior Code, § 5-713)
§ 35.093 DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
(A) The Fire Chief shall have the authority to take progressive disciplinary actions against a
member of the Fire Department for misconduct, including a verbal or written reprimand, or
suspension from the Department.
(B) The following are examples of conduct, which could result in disciplinary actions being
brought against a member, but are not the only reasons misconduct may be charged against a
member:
(1) Any member appearing intoxicated at any meeting or function governed by this
Department;
(2) Any member willfully disobeying any officer when on duty;
(3) Any member convicted of a felony; and
2018 S-1
94B Swansea - Administration
Police and Fire Departments 95
(4) Under the use of illegal drugs during any Fire Department activity.
(C) The Fire Chief may not dismiss a member of the Fire Department without the advice and
consent of the Village Board of Trustees.
(D) If the member wishes to appear any disciplinary action taken against him or her, he or she
may do so by appealing in writing to the Chairperson of the Personnel Committee. Appeal must be
received within 30 days of the decision of the Fire Chief and will be heard at the next scheduled
Personnel Committee meeting.
(Prior Code, § 5-714)
§ 35.094 USE OF APPARATUS.
(A) No person shall use any fire engine, hose or any other apparatus belonging to the village for
any private purpose, other than the extinguishment of fires, nor shall he or she remove the same or
any part thereof from its place of deposit, or having control there, shall permit such engine, hose or
other apparatus to be used for any private purpose other than aforesaid.
(B) No person shall willfully or negligently break, deface or in any manner injure any fire
engine, hose equipment or other fire apparatus belonging to the village, or shall remove any screw,
bolt, nut or any part of such engine or other fire apparatus or in any manner interfere with the same
when being used by the proper person or authority.
(Prior Code, § 5-715) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 35.095 INJURY WHILE ON DUTY.
Any member disabled while on duty shall receive, per week, benefits according to the village’s
worker’s compensation insurance coverage.
(Prior Code, § 5-716)
§ 35.096 ENTERING FIRE HOUSES.
It shall be and hereby is declared unlawful for any unauthorized person or persons to enter the
Fire Department house or any place where the equipment and apparatus of the Fire Department is
stored, at any time, except on business pertaining to the Fire Department or other village business.
(Prior Code, § 5-717) Penalty, see § 10.99
96 Swansea - Administration
§ 35.097 EQUIPMENT.
(A) The Village Board of Trustees shall supply the necessary apparatus and equipment as may
be required from time to time to maintain the efficiency of the Department and its ability to protect
life and property.
(B) No fire apparatus or firefighting equipment belonging to the village shall be taken from the
engine room, except in case of fire or other emergency without the permission of the Chief or next
ranking officer.
(Prior Code, § 5-718) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 35.098 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.
The Village Fire Department, with the advice and consent of the Village Board of Trustees, is
authorized to enter into mutual aid agreements with neighboring fire districts or municipalities
owning fire apparatus. No apparatus or equipment shall aid a municipality or district unless an
agreement is on record. Such aid and assistance to another municipality or district shall not
jeopardize the fire protection within the village. The Fire Chief in coordination with the Village
Board shall cause the mutual aid agreements to be reviewed and updated annually.
(Prior Code, § 5-719)
§ 35.099 RESERVING THE PUBLIC MEETING ROOM.
The public meeting room located in Fire House Number 2 may be reserved under the following
conditions.
(A) Pursuant to the rules set forth by the corporate authorities of the village, the use of the
premises is hereby expressly limited to recreational and educational purposes only. It is expressly
prohibited to use the premises to conduct religious or political activities.
(B) The Village Fire Department shall verify residency by requiring the person making said
reservation to submit a copy of his or her driver’s license or other acceptable form of identification,
or by requiring the company or organization to submit a letter, on their letterhead, authorizing the
reservation.
(C) (1) Reservation requests shall be made in writing on forms provided by the Village Fire
Department, and no reservation shall be assured until a formal request is made and approved by the
Department.
(2) No reservation shall be taken over the phone.
Police and Fire Departments 97
(D) Should two reservation requests by submitted for the same day, the first such request
submitted to the village shall be given first consideration.
(E) (1) Only one person will be issued a temporary access code in order to enter the building.
All access after-hours meetings (after 4:30 p.m. on regular business days) will be the west side door
only. There will be no exceptions. The access code will expire at the conclusion of the meeting.
(2) All equipment or other belongings must be removed at the end of the meeting.
(3) The village may require an indemnity bond to guard from any liability of any kind or
character determined to be necessary to protect the village from loss or damage.
(Prior Code, § 5-720) (Ord. 1449, passed 4-3-2006)
FIRE PENSION
§ 35.110 ESTABLISHED.
There is hereby created a Fire Pension Fund and a Board of Trustees of the Fire Pension Fund.
(Prior Code, § 5-801)
§ 35.111 PENSION BOARD.
The Board, composed of five members, shall be known as the Board of Trustees of the Fire
Pension Fund of the village and its members shall be chosen as provided in the provisions of the
Illinois Revised Statutes pertaining thereto.
(Prior Code, § 5-802)
§ 35.112 POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Board, and its members shall have the rights and powers, and be subject to the duties
provided by the Illinois Revised Statutes and the parts thereunder entitled Fire Pension Fund.
(Prior Code, § 5-803)
§ 35.113 MEETINGS.
The Board herein provided for shall hold quarterly meetings on the first Monday of February,
May, August and November annually and special meetings as called by the President.
(Prior Code, § 5-804) (Ord. 1616, passed 6-6-2011)
98 Swansea - Administration
§ 35.114 SALARY.
The members of the Board of Trustees of the Fire Pension Fund shall not receive or have any
right to receive any money from the Fire Pension Fund as salary for services performed as a member
of such Board.
(Prior Code, § 5-805)
CHAPTER 36: FINANCE, REVENUE AND TAXATION
Section
Investment Policy
36.001 Policy
36.002 Objective
36.003 Safety
36.004 Liquidity
36.005 Return on investments
36.006 Ethics and conflicts of interest
36.007 Authorized and suitable investments
36.008 Investment restrictions
36.009 Collateralization
36.010 Diversification
36.011 Safekeeping and custody
36.012 Internal controls
36.013 Asset allocation
36.014 Competitive bidding
36.015 Limitation of liability
36.016 Reporting
Budget Procedures
36.030 Adoption of annual budget
36.031 Computation of annual budget
36.032 Financial reserves
36.033 Public inspection, notice and hearing on budget
36.034 Revision of annual budget
Industrial Revenue Bonds
36.045 Village policy
36.046 Definitions
36.047 Application process and requirements
36.048 Sale of bonds
36.049 Approval for bond issue
99
100 Swansea - Administration
36.050 Attorney review
36.051 Professional review process
36.052 Prevailing wage rate
36.053 Insurance required
36.054 Hold harmless agreement
36.055 Denial of application
36.056 Project disclosure
36.057 Application fee
36.058 Village review process
36.059 Presentation of project
Automobile Renting Occupation Tax
36.070 Tax imposed
36.071 Filing report
36.072 Payment
36.073 Filing copy
Foreign Fire Insurance Companies
36.085 Conformance
36.086 Required reports
36.087 Unlawful operation
General Taxes
36.100 Corporate fund property tax
36.101 Fire protection tax
36.102 Insurance and tort judgments tax
36.103 Municipal auditing tax
36.104 Police Pension Fund tax
36.105 Police protection tax
36.106 Street and bridge tax
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax
36.120 Definitions
36.121 Simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed
36.122 Collection of tax by retailers
36.123 Returns to department
36.124 Resellers
Finance, Revenue and Taxation101
Water Utility Tax
36.135 Necessity
36.136 Tax imposed
36.137 Additional taxes
36.138 Definitions
36.139 Effective date
36.140 Notification
36.141 Collection
36.142 Reports to municipality
36.143 Credit for over-payment
Gas and Electric Utility Tax
36.155 Definitions
36.156 Tax
36.157 Collection
36.158 Tax remittance and return
36.159 Resellers
36.999 Penalty
INVESTMENT POLICY
§ 36.001 POLICY.
(A) It is the policy of the Treasurer of the village to invest all funds under the control of the
Treasurer in a manner, to the best of his or her ability, which will provide the highest investment
return using authorized instruments while meeting the village’s daily cash flow demands and in
conformance with all village and state statutes governing the investment of public funds. This policy
shall apply to all investments entered into on or after the effective date of this subchapter.
(B) Until the expiration of investments made prior to the effective date of the policy, such
investments shall continue to be governed by the policies in effect at the time such investments were
made.
(Prior Code, § 2-313)
102 Swansea - Administration
§ 36.002 OBJECTIVE.
The primary objective in the investment of village funds is to ensure the safety of principal while
managing liquidity to pay the financial obligations of the village and providing the highest investment
return using authorized investments.
(Prior Code, § 2-313)
§ 36.003 SAFETY.
The safety of principal is the foremost objective of the investment program. Village investments
shall be undertaken in a manner, which seeks to ensure the preservation of capital of the portfolio.
To attain this objective, diversification is required to ensure that the Treasurer prudently manages
market, interest rate and credit risk.
(Prior Code, § 2-313)
§ 36.004 LIQUIDITY.
The investment portfolio shall remain sufficiently liquid to enable the village to meet all
operating requirements, which might be reasonably projected.
(Prior Code, § 2-313)
§ 36.005 RETURN ON INVESTMENTS.
The investment portfolio shall be designed to obtain the highest available return, taking into
account the Treasurer’s risk constraints and cash flow needs. The portfolio shall seek to obtain the
highest investment return using authorized investments during budgetary and economic cycles as
mandated in § 36.001 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-313)
§ 36.006 ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
Authorized investment officers, elected officials and employees in policy-making positions shall
refrain from personal business activity that could conflict with or impair their ability to make
impartial decisions. Such individuals shall disclose to the Treasurer any material financial interests in
financial institutions, which conduct business with the village, and they shall further disclose any
personal financial investment positions that could be related to the performance of the investment
portfolio. Such individuals shall subordinate their personal investment transactions to those of the
investment portfolio, particularly with regard to the time of purchase and sales.
(Prior Code, § 2-313)
Finance, Revenue and Taxation 103
§ 36.007 AUTHORIZED AND SUITABLE INVESTMENTS.
The Treasurer is authorized to invest in the following types of investments subject to the
provisions as provided in § 32.02(L) of this code of ordinances:
(A) General obligation securities of the United States of America or the state;
(B) Interest bearing savings accounts, certificates of deposit and time deposits in any bank where
such investments are insured in the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Federal Savings
and Loan Insurance Corporation;
(C) Short-term discount obligation of the Federal National Mortgage Association; and
(D) Money market mutual funds registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940, being
15 U.S.C. §§ 80a-1 through 80a-64, as from time to time amended; provided that, the portfolio of
any such money market mutual fund is limited to bonds, notes, certificated of indebtedness, treasury
bills or other securities now or hereafter issued which are guaranteed by the full faith of the United
States of America as to principal and interest, and including agreements to repurchase such
obligations.
(Prior Code, § 2-313)
§ 36.008 INVESTMENT RESTRICTIONS.
(A) The following investments are prohibited:
(1) Investments: equities, mutual funds, exchange traded funds, collateralized mortgage
obligations and commodities;
(2) Leveraging of assets through reverse purchase agreements; and
(3) Direct investments in tri-party repurchase agreements.
(B) Investments may not be made on any savings and loan association.
(Prior Code, § 2-313)
§ 36.009 COLLATERALIZATION.
All village deposits, repurchase agreements and securities lending shall be secured as required.
Financial institutions shall submit to the Treasurer a listing of U.S. government securities that
guarantee the safety of funds on deposit, the amounts of which exceed the insurance constraints of
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
(Prior Code, § 2-313)
104 Swansea - Administration
§ 36.010 DIVERSIFICATION.
The investment portfolio shall be diversified to eliminate the risk of loss resulting from
concentration of assets in a specific maturity, a specific issuer or a specific class of securities.
(Prior Code, § 2-313)
§ 36.011 SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.
All security transactions entered into by the Treasurer shall be conducted on a delivery-versuspayment
or receipt-versus-payment basis. Securities shall be held by a safekeeping agent designated
by the Treasurer and evidenced by safekeeping receipts.
(Prior Code, § 2-313)
§ 36.012 INTERNAL CONTROLS.
The Treasurer shall establish a system of internal controls, which shall be documented in writing
and filed for review. The controls shall be designed to prevent losses of public funds arising from
fraud, employee error and misrepresentation by third parties, unanticipated changes in financial
markets or imprudent actions by authorized investment officers.
(Prior Code, § 2-313)
§ 36.013 ASSET ALLOCATION.
The allocation of assets within investment categories authorized under § 36.007 of this chapter
shall be approved by the Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 2-313)
§ 36.014 COMPETITIVE BIDDING.
(A) Authorized investment officers shall attempt to obtain competitive bids from at least three
authorized institutions prior to executing the purchase or sale of any authorized investments.
(B) Certificates of deposit shall be purchased by authorized investment officers on the basis of a
qualified financial institutions ability to pay a required rate of interest to the Treasurer set on a daily
basis. Such rate is generally determined on the basis of treasury or other appropriate market rates for
a comparable term.
(Prior Code, § 2-313)
Finance, Revenue and Taxation 105
§ 36.015 LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.
The standard of prudence to be used by authorized investment officers shall be the “prudent
person” standard and shall be applied in the context of managing an overall portfolio. Authorized
investment officers acting in accordance with written procedures and this subchapter and exercising
due diligence shall be relieved of personal liability for an individual security’s credit risk or market
price changes, provided deviations from expectations are reported in a timely fashion and necessary
action is taken to control adverse developments.
(Prior Code, § 2-313)
§ 36.016 REPORTING.
The Treasurer shall develop performance reports in compliance with established industry
reporting standards. The Treasurer reserves the right to amend this subchapter at any time if with the
advice and consent of the Finance Committee of the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 2-313)
BUDGET PROCEDURES
§ 36.030 ADOPTION OF ANNUAL BUDGET.
The village hereby adopts 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1 through and including 5/8-2-9.10 providing for an
annual municipal budget in lieu of the passage of an annual appropriation ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 2-601)
§ 36.031 COMPUTATION OF ANNUAL BUDGET.
The Budget Officer shall compile a budget pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1 through 5/8-2-9.10 as
they are now, or may hereafter be, amended containing estimates of the revenues available before the
beginning of the fiscal year to which it applies, together with recommended expenditures for the
municipality and all of its boards, commissions and departments. Said budget shall be adopted prior
to May 1 of each fiscal year.
(Prior Code, § 2-603)
106 Swansea - Administration
§ 36.032 FINANCIAL RESERVES.
(A) General Fund. The unrestricted fund balance of the General Fund shall be maintained at a
level amounting to no less than two months, nor more than four months, of the current fiscal year
budgeted General Fund revenues, exclusive of federal, state or county grant funds. Use of the
minimum unrestricted fund balance shall be authorized only when emergency expenditures or an
unexpected revenue reduction, including, but not limited to, unanticipated operating expenses, major
equipment repairs, weather related damages or unanticipated legal expenses, or to off-set
unanticipated decreases in revenues, such as national recessions or delays in distribution of state
revenue designated for local governments would cause the General Fund budget to end the fiscal year
with a negative balance. The amending of the budget to utilize the unrestricted fund balance shall
require approval of an ordinance by a two-thirds vote of the members. The fund balance shall be
restored to its required level in the following fiscal year.
(B) Sewer funds. There shall be three sewer funds. Fund balance levels for each fund are set
forth below. The amending of the budget to utilize an unrestricted fund balance shall require
approval of an ordinance by a two-thirds vote of the Trustees. The fund balance shall be restored to
its required level in the following fiscal year.
(1) Sewer Operations and Maintenance Fund. The fund balance shall be maintained at a
level of 25% of the utility’s annual operations and maintenance expenses. The fund may be used for
emergency repairs or purchases or working capital needs. The amending of the budget to utilize the
unrestricted fund balance shall require approval of an ordinance by a two-thirds vote of the members.
The fund is an unrestricted net assets fund.
(2) Sewer Capital Replacement and Improvement Fund. The fund is established to provide
sufficient reserves for future major capital replacement and capital improvement expenses for a
period of one to five years. The fund balance shall be maintained at a level equaling the total
estimated cost of the next five years’ capital improvement expenses and shall include the amounts
annually required in the next year to make such payments on any outstanding loans as established by
the loan agreements. The fund is a restricted net assets fund.
(3) Sewer Reserve Fund. The fund is established to provide sufficient reserves to maintain
its service level during potential short-term cash flow interruptions caused by an unusually high
number of customer delinquencies or other unanticipated revenue shortfalls. The fund balance shall
be maintained at 5% of the utility’s current year projected rate revenues. The fund is an unrestricted
net assets fund.
(Prior Code, § 2-604) (Ord. 1609, passed 4-18-2011)
§ 36.033 PUBLIC INSPECTION, NOTICE AND HEARING ON BUDGET.
Copies of the tentative annual budget shall be made available for public inspection in printed or
typewritten form in the office of the Village Clerk for at least ten days prior to the passage of the
annual budget. Not less than one week after the budget is available for inspection, and prior to final
action on
Finance, Revenue and Taxation 107
the budget, at least one public hearing shall be held on the budget by the Board of Trustees. Notice
of this hearing shall be given by the publication in a newspaper having a general circulation in the
village at least one week prior to the time of the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 2-605) (Ord. 1609, passed 4-18-2011)
§ 36.034 REVISION OF ANNUAL BUDGET.
(A) The Board of Trustees may delegate authority to heads of municipal departments, boards or
commissions to delete, add to or change items previously budgeted to the department, board or
commission, subject to such limitation or requirement for prior approval by the Budget Officer or
Chairperson of the Finance Committee, as the Board of Trustees, upon a two-thirds vote of the
members, may establish.
(B) The annual budget may be revised by a vote of two-thirds of the Board of Trustees by
deleting, adding to or changing budgeted items.
(C) No revision of the budget shall be made, increasing the budget in the event funds are not
available to effectuate the purpose of the revision.
(Prior Code, § 2-606) (Ord. 1609, passed 4-18-2011)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/8-2-1 et seq.
INDUSTRIAL REVENUE BONDS
§ 36.045 VILLAGE POLICY.
It is declared to be the public policy of the village to favorably consider the issuance of industrial
revenue bonds to qualified industries whose project proposals meet the requirements of these
guidelines, applicable ordinances of the village, relevant federal and state statutes and regulations and
the State Constitution. In reaching a decision with respect to whether a particular project qualifies for
assistance hereunder and whether or not to authorize tax exempt financing for a project, the Board of
Trustees, whose determination shall be conclusive, will duly consider and evaluate each project
proposal in light of guidelines and criteria established in this section.
(Prior Code, § 8-101)
108 Swansea - Administration
§ 36.046 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
COST. The sum total of all reasonable or necessary costs incidental to a project, including, but
not limited to, and without limitation, the following: real property; studies and surveys; plans and
specifications; architectural and engineering services; underwriting fees; legal, accounting, marketing
and other special services relating to a project or incurred in connection with the issuance and sale of
bonds, necessary application and other fees to federal, state and local governmental agencies for any
requisite approvals for construction, for assisted financing or otherwise; and all other necessary and
incidental expenses, including trustee and rating agency fees and an initial bond and interest reserve
together with interest on bonds issued to finance a project to a date six months subsequent to the
estimated date of completion; and premiums with respect to insurance with respect to bonds; and
such other expenses as the village shall deem appropriate.
PROJECT or PROJECT PROPOSAL. Any:
(1) Capital project, including one or more buildings and other structures, improvements,
machinery and equipment whether or not on the same site or sites now existing or hereafter acquired,
suitable for use by any manufacturing, industrial, research or commercial enterprise, including, but
not limited to, use as a factory, mill, processing plant, assembly plant, packaging plant, fabricating
plant, office building, industrial distribution center, warehouse, repair, overhaul or service facility,
freight terminal, research facility, test facility, commercial facility and including also the sites thereof
and other rights in land therefor whether improved or unimproved, site preparation and landscaping,
and all appurtenances and facilities incidental thereto such as utilities, access roads, railroad sidings,
truck docking and similar facilities, parking facilities, dockage, wharfage and other improvements
necessary or convenient thereto; or
(2) Any land, buildings, machinery or equipment comprising an addition to, or renovation,
rehabilitation or improvement of any existing capital project.
(Prior Code, § 8-102)
§ 36.047 APPLICATION PROCESS AND REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Prior to submitting a formal application to the village, potential applicants shall contact the
village for a preliminary project review and an explanation of application procedures.
Finance, Revenue and Taxation 109
(B) Upon a potential applicant’s determination that a formal application is desired to be
submitted, a complete application form shall be tendered to the village, which shall be addressed to
the Village Board President and contain a complete and thorough analysis of the particular industrial
or commercial purpose including, inter alia, the following information:
(1) A statement defining the project, showing its achievement of stated public policy
objectives and specifically indicating the number of jobs created, yearly anticipated payroll, increases
in sales and property taxes to the village and any other specific data more fully explaining the
achievement of public policy objectives;
(2) A detailed cost breakdown of all elements of anticipated costs (not just a general
statement of total anticipated costs);
(3) Balance sheets and income statements pertaining to the applicant entity for the past three
years (if the applicant entity is a corporation, said financial statement shall be prepared by a certified
public accountant);
(4) The name of the person that will purchase the bonds (if known purchasers are
available);
(5) A SEC-10-K report in the event that the applicant entity is a corporation required to file
such a report;
(6) The name and address of two commercial bankers who may be contacted and used for
reference purposes;
(7) A list of all officers, directors and principals, including their biographies and personal
financial statements if the particular project proposes that bonds will be guaranteed by them;
(8) Complete architectural design and construction documents sufficient to enable the
village to evaluate a proposed building, rebuilding or remodeling or improvement thereby proposed;
(9) An underwriter’s or institutional investor’s letter as to proposed interest rates and
possibility of placement;
(10) All documents identifying the legal description of the property and a full abstract,
owner’s title policy or preliminary title report;
(11) A written commitment from proposed purchasers of the bonds to the effect that any of
the bonds be purchased and stating the terms of such purchase (the applicant must have arrangements
made or proposed for private placement of the bonds);
(12) A letter guaranteeing to pay all the costs of the village, its agents and employees,
whether or not the issue is approved;
110 Swansea - Administration
(13) A schedule and timetable of planned construction, rebuilding or remodeling; and
(14) Any other information, documents, assurances, security or agreements as required by
the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 8-103)
§ 36.048 SALE OF BONDS.
The Board of Trustees will issue such revenue bonds only where the bonds are to be sold at
public or private sale, in such manner and upon such terms, as may be determined by the Board of
Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 8-104)
§ 36.049 APPROVAL FOR BOND ISSUE.
In addition to normal zoning, building and village code requirements, the Board of Trustees
reserves the right of final approval or disapproval of plans and specifications for purposes of issuing
bonds hereunder. For example, the village will not utilize its bond powers to build buildings that
aesthetically are not pleasing, even though such construction might satisfy other requirements. Also,
each project, its plans and specifications must be consistent with the village’s community plan.
(Prior Code, § 8-105)
§ 36.050 ATTORNEY REVIEW.
Prior to approaching the Board of Trustees, any proposal will have to be reviewed by the Village
Attorney and/or the village’s bond consultant. The Board will not proceed and will not adopt any
preliminary resolutions until their respective reports, even if preliminary in form, are received. The
applicant must indicate the name, address, telephone number and individual to contact at the office of
bond counsel desired to be retained by the applicant if other than the village’s normal bond counsel;
however, the village reserves the right to reject the applicant’s choice of bond counsel.
(Prior Code, § 8-106)
§ 36.051 PROFESSIONAL REVIEW PROCESS.
The village reserves the right, subject to the applicant’s approval, to employ legal, accounting,
appraisal, financial, engineering, architectural and other consultants to review the proposed project
and its financing, and the costs thereof as defined above, together with the administrative expenses,
to be paid by the applicant, whether or not a particular project is completed and funded hereunder.
The village reserves the right to require additional cash deposits sufficient to cover such consulting
costs. Any unexpected balance of such deposit shall be returned to the applicant if the project is
aborted for any
Finance, Revenue and Taxation 111
reason; and, if the project is approved, the village will allow such expenses to be paid or reimbursed
as part of the project cost financed.
(Prior Code, § 8-107)
§ 36.052 PREVAILING WAGE RATE.
The applicant shall be required to comply with the stipulation that not less than the prevailing
rate of wages as determined by the pertinent provisions of the Prevailing Wage Act, 820 ILCS
130/0.01 et seq., as amended, shall be paid to all laborers, mechanics and other workers performing
work on any community improvement project authorized by any bond or ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 8-108)
§ 36.053 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
Applicants shall provide and maintain at all times adequate worker’s compensation, liability, fire
and other related necessary types of insurance coverage relating to the project in amounts and in
form satisfactory to the village.
(Prior Code, § 8-109)
§ 36.054 HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT.
The applicant and, if underwriters are involved in the issuance and sale of such tax exempt
obligations, the underwriters shall hold harmless the village, its officers, employees, consultants and
agents for any alleged or actual violation of any securities laws, state or federal, in connection with
the issuance of bonds or loans for the project. The village may require a bond or appropriate
insurance to assure compliance with this section.
(Prior Code, § 8-110)
§ 36.055 DENIAL OF APPLICATION.
The village reserves the right to deny any application for any reason and to revoke approval of
an application at any time before actual issuance of bonds or making of the loan without liability of
the village, its Board members, officers or agents to the applicant, the underwriter, attorneys or other
counsel associated with the project.
(Prior Code, § 8-111)
112 Swansea - Administration
§ 36.056 PROJECT DISCLOSURE.
All applicants will name the real parties in interest in the project including the principal
stockholders if a corporation or if a partnership, the general partners and a copy of the partnership
agreement must be submitted as well.
(Prior Code, § 8-112)
§ 36.057 APPLICATION FEE.
Any application shall be accompanied with a fee of $3,000 to be used to defray eligible
application costs. If the application is withdrawn, any unexpended funds will be returned.
(Prior Code, § 8-113)
§ 36.058 VILLAGE REVIEW PROCESS.
Before the village issues industrial revenue bonds, pursuant to any application or petition, the
President and Board of Trustees will require the following statements from various agents and
employees and commissions of the village:
(A) A statement from the Village Attorney or corporation counsel, as the case may be, to the
effect that he or she has reviewed or will review all documents pertinent to the application and bond
issue and that they are satisfactory to the village;
(B) A statement from the village’s financial consultant, or bond counsel, as the case may be, to
the effect that based upon the consultant’s study of the information supplied and from other available
sources, nothing has come to his or her attention to indicate:
(1) The applicant is not in a position to undertake its commitment;
(2) It is inadvisable for the village to lend its name to the proposed project even though it
does not thereby undertake any financial obligations;
(3) The Chairperson of the Village Plan Commission to the effect that the industry and
proposal is in compliance with the village’s community plan that the industry would be an asset to the
village; and
(4) A statement from the village’s Auditor to the effect that suitable arrangements have
been made for the payment of all fees, costs and expenses incurred in behalf of the village.
(Prior Code, § 8-114)
Finance, Revenue and Taxation 113
§ 36.059 PRESENTATION OF PROJECT.
(A) The President and Board of Trustees reserve the right to have the applicant appear before
them to explain the proposed development and to answer any questions that may be deemed to be in
the public interest.
(B) Upon completion of all steps, conditions and requirements of this section, the President and
Board of Trustees shall consider approval of the industrial bond issue.
(Prior Code, § 8-115)
AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX
§ 36.070 TAX IMPOSED.
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting automobiles in the
village at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business
while this subchapter is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code,
65 ILCS 5/8-11-7.
(Prior Code, § 3-101)
§ 36.071 FILING REPORT.
Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on or before the last day of
each calendar month, the report to the State Department of Revenue required by the Retailers’
Occupation Tax Act, 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 3-102)
§ 36.072 PAYMENT.
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the
amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the renting of automobiles during the preceding month.
(Prior Code, § 3-103)
§ 36.073 FILING COPY.
The Village Clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the State Department of Revenue a certified
copy of this subchapter not later than five days after the effective date of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-104)
114Swansea - Administration
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES
§ 36.085 CONFORMANCE.
The village, in effecting or soliciting fire insurance, shall pay to the Village Treasurer on the
July 15 of each and every year, a sum equal to 2% of the gross receipts of all corporations,
companies and associations not incorporated under the laws of the state which are engaged in this
premiums received by such corporations, associations or companies, or their agency, agency(s), for
business effected or transacted for fire insurance within the village for the year preceding July 1. The
sum above named shall be as a tax or license fee upon all such corporations, companies or
associations transacting said business with the village.
(Prior Code, § 3-201)
§ 36.086 REQUIRED REPORTS.
(A) Every person acting as an agent, or otherwise, for or on behalf of any such corporation,
company or association shall, on or before July 15 of each and every year, render to the Village
Clerk a full, true, and just account, verified by oath, of all the premiums which, during the year
ending on July 1 of each and every year shall have been received by him or her, or any other person
for him or her, in behalf of such corporation, company or association, and shall fully and specifically
set out in such report, the amount or amounts received as premiums for fire insurance.
(B) The said agent(s) shall also, at the time of making the above mentioned report, pay to the
Village Treasurer, the said sum of 2% upon the gross receipts of such corporation, company or
association obtained as premiums for effecting fire insurance in the village as specified in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-202)
§ 36.087 UNLAWFUL OPERATION.
If such an account be not rendered on or before the day herein specified for that purpose, or if
the above mentioned rates for the said tax or license fees shall remain unpaid after that day, it shall
be unlawful for any such corporation, company or association to transact any business of fire
insurance in the village; until the requirements hereof are fully complied with; but this provision
shall not relieve any company, corporation or association from the payment of any such risk that may
be taken in violation hereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-204)
Finance, Revenue and Taxation115
GENERAL TAXES
§ 36.100 CORPORATE FUND PROPERTY TAX.
The corporate authorities of the village are hereby authorized to annually levy a corporate fund
property tax the rate of which does not exceed any maximum imposed by state statutes, and in
accordance with 65 ILCS 5/8-3-1 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 3-301)
§ 36.101 FIRE PROTECTION TAX.
The corporate authorities of the village are hereby authorized to annually levy a fire protection
tax, the rate of which does not exceed any maximum imposed by state statutes, and in accordance
with the 65 ILCS 5/11-7-1.
(Prior Code, § 3-302)
§ 36.102 INSURANCE AND TORT JUDGMENTS TAX.
The corporate authorities of the village are hereby authorized to annually levy an insurance and
tort judgment tax, the rate of which does not exceed any maximum imposed by state statutes, and in
accordance with 745 ILCS 10/9-107.
(Prior Code, § 3-303)
§ 36.103 MUNICIPAL AUDITING TAX.
The corporate authorities of the village are hereby authorized to annually levy a municipal
auditing tax, the rate of which does not exceed any maximum imposed by state statutes, and in
accordance with 65 ILCS 5/8-8-8.
(Prior Code, § 3-304)
§ 36.104 POLICE PENSION FUND TAX.
The corporate authorities of the village are hereby authorized to annually levy a Police Pension
Fund tax, the rate of which does not exceed any maximum imposed by state statutes, and in
accordance with 40 ILCS 5/3-125.
(Prior Code, § 3-305)
116 Swansea - Administration
§ 36.105 POLICE PROTECTION TAX.
The corporate authorities of the village are hereby authorized to annually levy a police protection
tax, the rate of which does not exceed any maximum imposed by state statutes, and in accordance
with 65 ILCS 5/11-1-3.
(Prior Code, § 3-306)
§ 36.106 STREET AND BRIDGE TAX.
The corporate authorities of the village are hereby authorized to annually levy a street and bridge
tax, the rate of which does not exceed any maximum imposed by state statutes, and in accordance
with 65 ILCS 5/11-81-1 and 5/11-81-2.
(Prior Code, § 3-307)
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
§ 36.120 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AMOUNT PAID. The amount charged to the taxpayer’s service address in the municipality
regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT. The Illinois Department of Revenue.
GROSS CHARGE. The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in the municipality and for all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits,
services and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on
account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs
or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included
only as and when paid. GROSS CHARGES for private line service shall include charges imposed at
each channel point within the municipality, charges for the channel mileage between each channel
point within the municipality, and charges for that portion of the interstate inter-office channel
provided within the state. However, GROSS CHARGE shall not include:
(1) Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made pursuant to: the tax
imposed by this subchapter; the tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, being 35
ILCS 630/1 et seq.; the tax imposed by § 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code; 911 surcharges; or
charges
Finance, Revenue and Taxation 117
added to customers’ bills pursuant to the provisions of §§ 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act,
220 ILCS 5/9-221 and 9-222, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers’ bills by
retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the State Commerce Commission for the purpose
of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of the Public
Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS 5/5-101 et seq.;
(2) Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such municipality;
(3) Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by
the Department of Commerce and Community Affairs;
(4) Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information
for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change its form or
content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of
computers under a time-sharing agreement;
(5) Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by
the customer from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and separately identified from
other charges;
(6) Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under 220 ILCS 5/9-222.1 of the
Public Charges Act for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly-owned subsidiaries or between whollyowned
subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this subchapter has already been paid to a retailer
and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly-owned subsidiaries
or between wholly-owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations and not
the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service;
(7) Bad debts (BAD DEBT means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for
which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or
uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt
deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during
the reporting period in which the payment is made);
(8) Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication devices; or
(9) Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the Telecommunications
Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, being 35 ILCS 635/1 et seq.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that either originate or
terminate outside the state.
118 Swansea - Administration
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within the state.
PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company or a receiver, trustee, guardian or
other representative appointed by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including
state universities created by statute, or any city, town, county or other political subdivision of the
state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL. The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through
a sale at retail.
RETAILER. Every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this
section. The Department may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax
hereby imposed by any RETAILER not maintaining a place of business within the state, who, to the
satisfaction of the Department, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and payment of the
tax. Such RETAILER shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so
authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications in the state in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer
maintaining a place of business within the state. The Department, at its discretion, may revoke the
permit.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. (or any like term)
Any retailer having or maintaining within the state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution
facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business or any agent or
other representative operating within the state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary,
irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here
permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in the
state.
SALE AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all
services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a consideration, to persons other than
the federal and state governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a
parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their
use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received by
a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging
systems and maritime systems, SERVICE ADDRESS means the customer’s place of primary use as
defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act, being § 2-27 of the Retailers’
Occupations Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 120/2-27. For air-to-ground systems and the like, SERVICE
ADDRESS shall mean the location of a taxpayer’s primary use of the telecommunications equipment
as defined by telephone number, authorization code or location in the state where bills are sent.
Finance, Revenue and Taxation 119
TAXPAYER. A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees or permittees
engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in a municipality and
who incurs a tax liability as authorized by this subchapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS. In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it,
includes, without limitation, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide
area telephone service, private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio,
stationary two-way radio, paging service or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or twoway
communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or
similar facilities. (As used in this subchapter, “private line” means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive
service for a single customer, that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a
communications channel or group of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more
other specified locations.) The definition of TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value
added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code,
and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
shall not include purchases of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use
as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who
originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications. Carrier access charges, right of
access charges, charges for use of inter-company facilities and all telecommunications resold in the
subsequent provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications
service shall be non-taxable as sales for resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be
considered TELECOMMUNICATIONS subject to the tax imposed under this subchapter. (For
purposes of this section, “prepaid telephone calling arrangements” means that term as defined in § 2-
27 of the Retailers’ Occupations Tax Act, 35 ILCS 120/2-27.)
(Prior Code, § 3-401)
§ 36.121 SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX IMPOSED.
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
(A) The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality
intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 3% of the gross charge for such
telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer;
(B) The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality
interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 3% of the gross charge for such
telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the
act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this division (B), any taxpayer, upon proof that the
taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax
enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due
and paid in such other state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or
local tax in the state; and
120 Swansea - Administration
(C) The tax imposed by this subchapter is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent
such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the
subject of taxation by the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 3-402)
§ 36.122 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS.
(A) (1) The tax authorized by this subchapter shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer
maintaining a place of business in the state and shall be remitted by such retailer to the Department.
Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this subchapter and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall constitute a debt owed
by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the
gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for
use, in the manner prescribed by the Department. The tax authorized by this subchapter shall
constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for such sale at retail.
(2) If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be
required to pay the tax directly to the Department in the manner provided by the Department.
(B) Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this subchapter shall, when collected, be stated as
a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for telecommunications.
(Prior Code, § 3-403)
§ 36.123 RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT.
On or before the last day of February, and on or before the last day of every month thereafter,
the tax imposed under this subchapter on telecommunication retailers shall be returned with
appropriate forms and information as required by the Department pursuant to the State Simplified
Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (Public Act No. 92-526, § 5-50), 35 ILCS 636/5-1 et seq.,
and any accompanying rules and regulations created by the Department to implement the Act.
(Prior Code, § 3-404)
§ 36.124 RESELLERS.
(A) If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be a reseller of such
telecommunications, such person shall apply to the Department for a resale number. Such applicant
shall state facts, which will show the Department why such applicant is not liable for the tax
authorized by this subchapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional information
as the Department may reasonably require.
Finance, Revenue and Taxation 121
(B) Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale number to the
applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The Department may cancel any number
which is obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such
telecommunication tax-free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies
because of the person’s having discontinued the making of resales.
(C) Except as provided hereinabove in this section, the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in the state shall not be made tax-free on the ground of being a sale for
resale unless the person has an active resale number from the Department and furnishes that number
to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is non-taxable
because of being a sale for resale.
(Prior Code, § 3-405)
WATER UTILITY TAX
§ 36.135 NECESSITY.
There is a continuing increase in cost of services rendered to its citizens.
(Prior Code, § 3-501)
§ 36.136 TAX IMPOSED.
Pursuant to the powers granted under the terms and provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2, a tax is
hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling water for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the village, and not for resale,
said tax to be in the amount of 5% of the gross receipts therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 3-502)
§ 36.137 ADDITIONAL TAXES.
The tax imposed in § 36.136 of this chapter shall be in addition to the payment of any moneys or
services furnished to the village as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public
place, or installations and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder, of poles, wires, pipes or other
equipment used by any such persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling water for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the village.
(Prior Code, § 3-503)
122 Swansea - Administration
§ 36.138 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling water for use or consumption and not for resale, and for all services rendered in connection
therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, services, and
property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith, and shall be determined
without any deduction on account of the cost of the services, product or commodity supplied, the cost
of material used, labor or services cost or any other expenses whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 3-504)
PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint trust
company, other governmental body, joint venture, corporation or a receiver, trustee or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
(Prior Code, § 3-505)
§ 36.139 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This subchapter shall be effective and shall apply to all moneys which may be collected on
accounts “billed” on and after the billing cycle one month from the date of this subchapter as “gross
receipts” as herein above defined by an “persons” engaged in the business on which the foregoing
tax is imposed.
(Prior Code, § 3-506)
§ 36.140 NOTIFICATION.
The Village Clerk is herewith directed to forward certified copies of this subchapter to all
“persons” engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling water for use or
consumption within the corporate limits of the village which is not for resale.
(Prior Code, § 3-507)
§ 36.141 COLLECTION.
The tax authorized by this subchapter shall be collected from the purchaser by the person
maintaining a place of business in the state who delivers the water to the purchaser. This tax shall
constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the water to the purchaser and if unpaid,
is recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the water. Any tax required to
be collected pursuant to this subchapter and any such tax collected by a person delivering water shall
constitute a debt owed to the municipality by such person delivering water. Persons delivering water
shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
water.
Finance, Revenue and Taxation 123
Persons delivering water shall be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to 3% of
the tax to reimburse the person delivering water for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting tax, supplying data to the village upon request and
any other costs associated with this tax. If the person delivering water fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to the municipality in the
manner prescribed by the municipality. Persons delivering water who file returns pursuant to this
paragraph shall, at the time of filing such return, pay the municipality the amount of the tax collected
pursuant to this subchapter. Persons delivering water shall provide the village an updated list of the
purchases of water within the village on a quarterly basis commencing 10-1-2005.
(Prior Code, § 3-508)
§ 36.142 REPORTS TO MUNICIPALITY
(A) On or before the last day of each month, the persons delivering water shall make a return to
the village for the preceding month stating:
(1) Name;
(2) Principal place of business;
(3) Gross receipts during the month upon the basis of which tax is imposed;
(4) Amount of tax; and
(5) Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require.
(B) The persons delivering water making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of
making such return, pay to the village the amount of tax herein imposed: provided that, in connection
with any return, the persons delivering water may, if he or she so elects, report and pay an amount
based upon his or her total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the
return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between such billings, and the taxable gross receipts.
(Prior Code, § 3-509)
§ 36.143 CREDIT FOR OVER-PAYMENT.
(A) If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions
of this subchapter, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount
shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the persons
delivering water who made the erroneous payment; provided that, no amounts erroneously paid more
than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited.
124 Swansea - Administration
(B) No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provision of this subchapter shall be
commenced more than three years after the due date of such amount.
(Prior Code, § 3-510)
GAS AND ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX
§ 36.155 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AMOUNT PAID. The amount charged to the taxpayer’s service address in such municipality
regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
BILLING ADDRESS. The mailing address of the service user where the service supplier
submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer.
GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas, or electricity for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and for all
services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise,
including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered
therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of distributing,
supply, furnishing or selling gas or electricity without any deduction on account of the cost of the
service, product or commodity supplied, at the cost of materials used, labor or service cost or any
other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint venture, corporation, municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state, or a
receiver, trustee, conservator or a representative appointed by order of court. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, no municipal utility tax shall be assessed upon bills for utility service rendered to the
municipality itself or the following governmental entities: High Mount School District116 and Wolf
Branch School District 113.
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Any person having or
maintaining within the state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate, an office, generation
facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any
employee, agent or other representative operating within the state under the authority of the person
or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other
representative is located in the state permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary
or other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in the state.
Finance, Revenue and Taxation 125
PURCHASE AT RETAIL. Any acquisition of gas or electricity by a purchaser for purposes of
use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of electricity by a public utility,
as defined in § 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2), directly in the generation,
production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
PURCHASER. Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the village,
electricity or gas acquired in a purchase at retail, other than from an exempt purchaser.
VILLAGE. The Village of Swansea, Illinois.
(Prior Code, § 3-601)
§ 36.156 TAX.
Pursuant to § 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2) and any and all other
applicable authority, a tax is hereby imposed upon any and all of the following acts or privileges.
(A) Persons exercising the privilege of using or consuming gas acquired in a purchase at retail
and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the village at the rate of 5% of the gross receipts
therefrom for all such gas.
(B) Persons exercising the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at
retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the village at rates not to exceed the
following, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
(1) For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.408 per kilowatthour;
(2) For the next 43,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.267 per kilowatthour;
(3) For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.241 per kilowatthour;
(4) For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.234 per kilowatthour;
(5) For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.227 per kilowatthour;
(6) For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.214 per
kilowatt-hour;
(7) For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.211 per
kilowatt-hour;
126 Swansea - Administration
(8) For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.207 per
kilowatt-hour;
(9) For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.204 per
kilowatt-hour;
(10) For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-hours in a month:
$0.201 per kilowatt-hour;
(C) The tax rates set forth in division (B) above will be used at least through 12-31-2008, are
proportional to the rates enumerated in 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2 (as modified by Public Act No. 90-561)
and do not exceed the revenue that could have been collected during 1997 using the rates enumerated
in 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2 (as modified by Public Act No. 90-561).
(D) Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2, the rates set forth in division (B) above shall be effective
upon approval by the State Commerce Commission.
(E) The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the village,
the state or any other political subdivision of the state.
(F) The tax imposed by this subchapter is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent
such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statues of the United States, be made the
subject of taxation by the municipality.
(G) The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity and gas by
residential and non-residential customers beginning with the first bill issued by the person
maintaining a place of business in the state who delivers electricity or gas after said tax has been
incorporated into their charges, but no later than 8-1-2005.
(Prior Code, § 3-602) (Ord. 1462, passed 7-17-2006; Ord. 1463, passed 8-7-2006)
§ 36.157 COLLECTION.
(A) The tax imposed under this subchapter shall be collected from the person maintaining a
place of business in the state who delivers gas and/or electricity. This tax shall constitute a debt of
the person who delivers the gas and/or electricity and is recoverable at the same time and in the same
manner as the original charge for delivering the gas and/or electricity.
(B) Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this subchapter shall, when collected, be stated as
a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charges for gas and/or electricity.
Finance, Revenue and Taxation 127
(C) Persons delivering gas and/or electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge
an amount equal to 3% of the tax to reimburse the person delivering electricity for the expense
incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and
supplying the data to the municipality upon request.
(Prior Code, § 3-603)
§ 36.158 TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN.
(A) Every person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas
and/or electricity for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the village and serving as tax
collector shall, on a monthly basis, file a return on a form prescribed by the village. The return and
accompanying remittance shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the month
during which the tax is collected or is required to be collected.
(B) If the person delivering gas and/or electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser, then
the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the village and pay the tax directly to the
village on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the gas and/or
electricity is used or consumed.
(Prior Code, § 3-604)
§ 36.159 RESELLERS.
(A) Gas and/or electricity that is delivered to a person in the village shall be considered to be for
the use and consumption by that person unless the person receiving the gas and/or electricity has an
active resale number issued by the Budget Director and furnishes that number to the person who
delivers the gas and/or electricity and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or
partially non-taxable as a sale for resale.
(B) If a person who receives gas and/or electricity in the village claims to be an authorized
reseller of gas and/or electricity, that person shall apply to the Budget Director for a resale number.
The application shall state facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this section on
any purchases of gas and/or electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the Budget
Director may reasonably require.
(C) Upon approval of the application, the Budget Director shall assign a resale number to the
applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
(D) The Budget Director may cancel the resale number of any person if the person fails to pay
any tax payable under this section for gas and/or electricity used or consumed by the person, or if the
number:
(1) Was obtained through misrepresentation; or
128 Swansea - Administration
(2) Is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued making resales.
(E) If a reseller has acquired gas and/or electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for
resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this subchapter directly to the village on the amount
of gas and/or electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect the tax and remit the tax
on the amount of gas and/or electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.
(F) Any person who delivers gas and/or electricity to a reseller having an active resale number
and complying with all other conditions of this subchapter shall be excused from collecting and
remitting the tax on any portion of the gas and/or electricity delivered to the reseller; provided that,
the person reports to the village the total amount of gas and/or electricity delivered to the reseller and
such other information that the village may reasonably require.
(Prior Code, § 3-605)
§ 36.999 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is
prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(B) Any persons delivering water who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return,
or who willfully violates any other provision of §§ 36.135 through 36.143 of this chapter is guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $750,
and, in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.
(Prior Code, § 3-511)
(C) Any person who willfully violates any provision of § 36.159 of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $750 for each offense and,
in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. Each day a violation occurs
shall be considered a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 3-605)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
50. GENERAL PROVISIONS
51. REFUSE COLLECTION
52. SEWER REGULATIONS
1
2 Swansea - Public Works
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Department of Public Works
50.01 Department established
50.02 Supervision
50.03 Village vehicle
50.04 Full time positions established
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
50.15 Easements
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
§ 50.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
There is hereby established a department of the municipal government of the village which shall
be known as the Department of Public Works, which consist of parks, streets and sewer systems
(Prior Code, § 6-101)
§ 50.02 SUPERVISION.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall exercise direct supervision over the affairs of the
Department of Public Works and, therefore, over the village’s parks, streets and sewer system. The
Superintendent shall ascertain the condition and needs thereof; shall, from time to time, report the
same to the President and Village Board of Trustees so that a full understanding thereof shall be had
and, generally, shall do all acts necessary to promote the efficiency of the Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-102)
3
4 Swansea - Public Works
§ 50.03 VILLAGE VEHICLE.
The Superintendent of Public Works may be provided with a village-owned vehicle.
Maintenance and gasoline expenditures shall be paid by the village. Said vehicle shall be used for
official use only. OFFICIAL USE is defined as use while on duty, or when commuting to and from
the Superintendent’s residence to a village facility, or when responding from the Superintendent’s
residence to a location requiring service by the Public Works Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-103) (Ord. 1590, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 50.04 FULL TIME POSITIONS ESTABLISHED.
(A) Adoption of recitals. The Board of Trustees of hereby adopt the recitals in the preamble of
this ordinance codified herein as its findings of fact.
(B) Position established. A full-time position of wastewater treatment plant lead operator is
hereby created in the wastewater treatment plant, Public Works Department. The job description for
the wastewater treatment plant lead operator is on file in the village offices and is incorporated herein
as if included in full. The wages, hours and terms and conditions of employment for this position will
be determined by the Personnel Committee with the approval of the President of the Board of
Trustees.
(C) Additional positions established. Four full-time positions of wastewater treatment plant
operator are hereby created in the wastewater treatment plant, Public Works Department. The job
description for the wastewater treatment plant operator is attached hereto as exhibit b. the wages,
hours and terms and conditions of employment for these positions will be determined by the
Personnel Committee with the approval of the President of the Board of Trustees on a case by case
basis.
(D) Effective date. This section shall be in full force and effect after its passage and approval as
provided by 65 ILCS 5/l-2-4.
(Ord. 1713, passed 12-15-2014)
POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
§ 50.15 EASEMENTS.
The inspector and other duly authorized employees of the village bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the village holds a dulynegotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
General Provisions 5
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms
of the duly-negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Prior Code, § 6-1003)
6 Swansea - Public Works
CHAPTER 51: REFUSE COLLECTION
Section
Licensing Requirements
51.01 License required
51.02 Types of license; limitation on number
51.03 License application, issuance and renewal
51.04 License; fee
51.05 Vehicle requirements
51.06 Disposal within city prohibited; exception
General Regulations
51.20 Definitions
51.21 Title to wastes
51.22 Unlawful removal of recyclable material
51.23 Removal or damage to village recycling bins
51.24 Disposal of yard waste
51.25 Depositing materials on another’s property
51.26 Depositing materials on streets
51.27 Unauthorized use of refuse containers
51.28 Uncovered refuse
51.29 Wind-blown refuse
51.30 Enforcement
Residential Collections
51.45 Collection required
51.46 Method of collection
51.47 Construction debris
51.48 Commingling prohibited
51.49 Title to recycling bins
51.50 Replacement of recycling bins
51.51 Collection services
7
8Swansea - Public Works
Non-Residential Collections
51.65 Commercial collection
51.66 Disposal in containers required
51.67 Approved containers
51.68 Collection services
51.99 Penalty
LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
§ 51.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
(A) No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of refuse collection, namely, the
collection or disposal of animal, human or vegetable refuse, or offal, or refuse of any kind, without
having first secured a license from the village therefor. Any such license shall be issued for the
period beginning May 1 and ending on April 30 of the following year. Any such license may not be
assigned, transferred or conveyed in any manner without the written consent and approval of the
Board of Trustees of the village.
(B) The village retains the authority to withdraw any license issued under this chapter for cause,
and refund a pro rata share of the license fee paid, at any time during the license year. In the event a
license is recommended for withdrawal, the President of the Board of Trustees shall call a public
hearing, conducted by the President and Board of Trustees, and hear testimony supporting
withdrawal of the license. At least a three-day written notice shall be provided to the licensee,
affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and present opposing testimony at said hearing.
Delivery of the required notice shall be by certified mail or by the Village Police Department acting
as agent for the Mayor and Village Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 7-101) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.02 TYPES OF LICENSE; LIMITATION ON NUMBER.
(A) Residential solid waste collection and disposal license. A residential solid waste collection
and disposal license shall permit the licensee to collect garbage and rubbish, compostable material
and recyclable material from any residential location within the village when comprised of one, two
or three dwelling units on one parcel. There shall be only one residential solid waste collection and
disposal license issued by the village and in effect at any time. In the event of annexation of eligible
residential properties, a transition period may be provided. During said transition period, a
household may complete
Refuse Collection 9
a contract with its present waste hauler not to exceed the current billing period in effect on the date
of annexation, and in no case to exceed three months from the date of annexation. No additional
licenses will be issued to cover waste hauler during annexation transition periods.
(B) Non-residential solid waste collection and disposal license.
(1) A non-residential solid waste collection and disposal license shall permit the licensee to
collect garbage and refuse, compostable material and recyclable material from any location in the
village other than those comprised of one, two or three dwelling units on one parcel. Authorized
collection locations shall therefore include multiple-family dwellings of four or more units, mobile or
manufactured homes in licensed manufactured home parks, commercial locations and industrial
locations. Holders of a non-residential license shall also be authorized to collect home remodeling,
construction and repair materials from buildings comprised of one, two or three dwelling units
whenever such buildings are under construction or remodeling and require a “roll-off” container or
“dumpster” for building material waste.
(2) There shall be no more than eight non-residential solid waste collection and disposal
licenses issued by the village and in effect at any one time.
(Prior Code, § 7-102)
§ 51.03 LICENSE APPLICATION, ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL.
(A) Application for an initial license shall be made to the office of Village Clerk and, thereafter,
shall be referred by him or her to the President and Board of Trustees for approval. No such license
shall be issued, except on order of the President and Board of Trustees.
(B) (1) Application for each renewal license shall be made to the office of Village Clerk, by the
first Monday in April of each calendar year.
(2) A renewal license may be approved and issued by the President, independent of the
Board of Trustees; provided, the licensee has duly completed the required application, given the
information required and paid the appropriate fee.
(C) In the event that renewal has not been completed on or before May 1 of the license year, the
license shall expire and the refuse collector shall be required to re-apply as an applicant for an initial
license.
(D) (1) With each application for license or application for renewal license, each refuse
collector shall file with the office of Village Clerk, a complete list of its charges for multi-family,
commercial, business and industrial establishments that will be in effect during the license year.
10 Swansea - Public Works
(2) In addition, each refuse collector shall provide proof of general liability insurance
coverage of at least $300,000 and bodily injury and property damage coverage of at least $100,000.
(Prior Code, § 7-103)
§ 51.04 LICENSE; FEE.
The annual fee for the residential solid waste collection and disposal license shall be $100. The
annual fee for a non-residential solid waste collection and disposal license shall be $500.
(Prior Code, § 7-104)
§ 51.05 VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Each licensee shall provide an adequate number of vehicles to assure regular collection of
refuse. Every such vehicle shall be kept in good repair and appearance, painted, maintained in a
sanitary condition at all times, and shall be clearly marked with the name of the licensee. No such
vehicle shall leak fluids, oil, hydraulic fluids or other such materials.
(B) Each vehicle shall also be water-tight and equipped with air-tight covers for such portions as
are used for the transportation of garbage or similar refuse, so that offensive odors are not allowed to
permeate the air and cause a nuisance within the village.
(C) The village reserves the right to inspect any vehicles used for collection in the village in
order to assure that each is maintained in satisfactory condition and in accordance with the terms of
this section. Upon finding any vehicle which is not in compliance, the licensee shall immediately
provide a replacement and not return the offending vehicle to service until it has been properly
repaired.
(Prior Code, § 7-105)
§ 51.06 DISPOSAL WITHIN CITY PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
No refuse collector shall dispose of or store any refuse in any place within the village limits or
within one and one-half miles thereof, except with the permission of the President and Board of
Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 7-106) Penalty, see § 51.99
Refuse Collection11
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 51.20 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMMERCIAL STOP. A location occupied and used exclusively as a non-residential use.
COMMERCIAL STOPS will not be included in any license agreement.
DISPOSAL UNIT. Different meanings as follows.
(1) For the purpose of refuse collection (Class 1 and 2 materials), a DISPOSAL UNIT shall
mean one water-tight metal or plastic reusable waste container with handles when filled with no more
than 32 gallons in capacity or 50 pounds in weight of refuse; or one plastic bag when filled with no
more than 32 gallons in capacity or 50 pounds in weight of refuse. Pre-approved toters will also be
considered DISPOSAL UNITS.
(2) For the purpose of collecting one large item of refuse (Class 3) or one bundle of
construction materials (Class 4), a DISPOSAL UNIT shall be the item itself (a sofa, chair, roll of
carpeting and the like); or a box, carton or other disposable container, not exceeding one cubic yard
in capacity which is filled with construction debris, or the same capacity of materials which are
securely bundled by rope or twine so that they can be easily loaded into the collection vehicle.
(3) For the purpose of collecting one appliance, with or without Freon (Class 5 or 6), a
DISPOSAL UNIT shall be the unit itself.
(4) For the purpose of collecting yard waste, a DISPOSAL UNIT shall be one
biodegradable two-ply kraft paper bag designed for yard waste collection when filled with no more
than 32 gallons in capacity or 50 pounds in weight of yard waste; or one water-tight metal or plastic
reusable waste container with handles when filled with no more than 32 gallons in capacity or 50
pounds in weight of yard waste; or one bundle of brush or branches, securely tied with rope or twine
and not exceeding three feet in diameter, four feet in length and 50 pounds in weight, or one “live”
Christmas tree, regardless of size.
(5) For the purpose of collecting refuse and yard waste, an optional DISPOSAL UNIT shall
consist of one 90-gallon wheeled “toter” cart when filled with yard waste, regardless of weight.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A location, licensed as such by the village, and providing
individual lots for manufactured homes, but on one property under ownership by the park operator.
12 Swansea - Public Works
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, PARTICIPATING. A mobile or manufactured home park,
the owner of which has requested that the park and its residents be included within the village’s solid
waste management program.
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL STOP. A location with four or more dwelling units. MULTIFAMILY
RESIDENTIAL STOPS will not be included in the initial phase of any license agreement.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Metal cans (aluminum cans and steel [tin] cans); plastics (clear
HDPE, colored HDPE, PET and #3 P.V.C.); newspaper; glass (brown, green and clear; cardboard
(corrugated cardboard and kraft paper grocery bags); other metals (scrap steel, copper, brass,
aluminum); office paper (white); colored ledger paper; computer paper; magazines; books; bleach
board (paperboard which is 100% white such as toothpaste cartons, aspirin cartons and the like); and
other paperboard (paperboard which is brown or gray on the inner surface, such as that used in dry
food packaging for cereal boxes, cracker boxes and the like).
REFUSE. Includes the following classes:
(1) CLASS 1. Kitchen wastes, such as discarded food, vegetable matter, food residues, and
the paper necessarily used for wrapping same, aluminum cans, bi-metal cans, steel (tin) cans, bottles,
boxes, cartons, crates, bags, books, magazines, newspapers, cloth material, discarded toys,
discarded clothing and similar materials;
(2) CLASS 2. Sod, earth, rock;
(3) CLASS 3. Large items such as furniture; automobile wheels; rolls of carpeting;
(4) CLASS 4. Home remodeling, construction and repair materials;
(5) CLASS 5. Appliances which contain Freon, including window air-conditioners, outside
air-conditioner units, refrigerators and freezers and dehumidifiers; and
(6) CLASS 6. Appliances without Freon such as stoves, washers, dryers and dehumidifiers.
RESIDENTIAL STOP. A dwelling designed for occupancy by one, two or three families.
YARD WASTE. Grass clippings, garden clippings and leaves, and twigs or branches not greater
than three inches in diameter.
(Prior Code, § 7-201) (Ord. 1447, passed 4-3-2006)
Refuse Collection 13
§ 51.21 TITLE TO WASTES.
All refuse, yard waste and recyclable materials collected in accordance with the terms hereof
shall become and be the property of the licensee as soon as the same is picked up or otherwise placed
in the contractor’s vehicle. Prior to such collection by the licensee, title to all such wastes shall
remain with the property owner and shall not be removed by any other person.
(Prior Code, § 7-202)
§ 51.22 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF RECYCLABLE MATERIAL.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, except an authorized licensee of the
village, to remove any item of recyclable materials placed in or adjacent to village recycling
containers.
(Prior Code, § 7-203) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.23 REMOVAL OR DAMAGE TO VILLAGE RECYCLING BINS.
Except as authorized by the Village Board of Trustees, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to remove any village recycling bin from the residential premises to which it is
registered, or to damage it in any way.
(Prior Code, § 7-204) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.24 DISPOSAL OF YARD WASTE.
Yard waste shall not be commingled with refuse or with recyclable materials, but shall be
disposed of in compliance with state law.
(Prior Code, § 7-205)
§ 51.25 DEPOSITING MATERIALS ON ANOTHER’S PROPERTY.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or dump refuse, yard waste, recyclable materials or
garbage containers, upon the property of another or on the public right-of-way or any public
property, without the consent of the owner.
(Prior Code, § 7-206) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.26 DEPOSITING MATERIALS ON STREETS.
It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle any refuse, yard waste or
recyclable material on any public street or alley in the village; provided that, this section shall not be
construed to prohibit placing refuse, recyclable material and yard waste, as herein defined, in a
container complying
14 Swansea - Public Works
with the provisions of this chapter preparatory to having such refuse, recyclable material and yard
waste collected and disposed of in the manner provided in § 51.52 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-207) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.27 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF REFUSE CONTAINERS.
(A) No person shall, without authorization from the owner thereof, deposit into any public or
private refuse container, any refuse, yard waste or similar material, which has been generated from a
private residence or business, and transported to the receptacle in order to avoid having to dispose of
such waste from the private residence or business.
(B) No person shall deposit in any receptacle in any park within the village any refuse, yard
waste or similar waste material, which has been generated from a private residence or business, and
transported to the park in order to avoid having to dispose of said waste from said private residence
or business.
(Prior Code, § 7-208) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.28 UNCOVERED REFUSE.
It is unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the village any refuse, other than leaves
and grass or recyclable material placed in a recycling bin, unless said refuse is placed in a tightlycovered
or enclosed container.
(Prior Code, § 7-209) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.29 WIND-BLOWN REFUSE.
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate anywhere in the village, except when in a
covered or enclosed container, any refuse or other such material that can be blown away by the
wind.
(Prior Code, § 7-210) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.30 ENFORCEMENT.
Any refuse, yard waste or recyclable material left on private or public property in violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter is deemed a potential public health and safety hazard. The
village may remove, or cause to be removed, any such garbage and rubbish, compostable material or
recyclable material, and recover the reasonable costs of removal from the owner of the real estate or
other responsible party in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13.
(Prior Code, § 7-211)
Refuse Collection15
RESIDENTIAL COLLECTIONS
§ 51.45 COLLECTION REQUIRED.
Within the village, all owners and occupiers of residential structures of one, two or three
dwelling units, including mobile or manufactured homes on private lots, and mobile or manufactured
homes in participating mobile home parks shall provide for the collection and disposal of
accumulations of refuse, recyclable material or yard waste at least once every 14 days, by the refuse
collector licensed by the village, pursuant to § 51.02(A) of this chapter, and in the manner provided
for in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-301) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.46 METHOD OF COLLECTION.
For single-family dwellings and multi-family dwellings of two or three units, and mobile or
manufactured homes in participating mobile home parks, it shall be unlawful to dispose of any refuse
or yard waste anywhere in the village, and placed for collection as herein prescribed; provided,
however, that, nothing in this section shall prevent individual composting of yard wastes, or the
recycling of materials elsewhere within the village, by taking those materials to a recycling drop-off
location which agrees to accept same.
(Prior Code, § 7-302) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.47 CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS.
Home remodeling, construction and/or repair materials, which comprise more than one cubic
yard by volume, shall be disposed of by the property owner or occupant of the premises making
arrangements with any company licensed by the village to provide non-residential solid waste
collection and disposal services. Any such uses of these services shall be by individual contract with
the licensee and all costs shall be borne by the property owner or occupant as the case may be.
(Prior Code, § 7-304) (Ord. 1447, passed 4-3-2006) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.48 COMMINGLING PROHIBITED.
No material, other than designated recyclable materials, shall be placed in any recycling bin. No
refuse or recyclable material shall be placed in any containers designated for compostable materials.
No compostable materials shall be placed in any container designated for refuse.
(Prior Code, § 7-305) Penalty, see § 51.99
16 Swansea - Public Works
§ 51.49 TITLE TO RECYCLING BINS.
All recycling bins shall remain the property of the village shall be registered to the property on
which the dwelling unit is located, and shall not be removed from said property without the written
consent of the Board of Trustees of the village. Should any property provided with residential
collection services under this chapter be sold, the recycling bin assigned to said property shall remain
there and responsibility for it shall transfer to the new owner.
(Prior Code, § 7-306)
§ 51.50 REPLACEMENT OF RECYCLING BINS.
Any damage to or loss of recycling bins shall be reported to the Village Police Department by
the primary user of the recycling bins or by the person responsible for the damage or loss within 24
hours of such damage or loss. The cost to repair or replace recycling bins damaged or lost due to
negligence shall be borne by the person responsible for said negligence.
(Prior Code, § 7-307)
§ 51.51 COLLECTION SERVICES.
(A) All single-family dwellings and multi-family dwellings comprised of three or less units (not
in a complex of more than three total units), and all mobile or manufactured homes in participating
mobile home parks shall be picked up at curbside, unless otherwise authorized by the Board of
Trustees.
(B) All containers shall be placed in a manner readily accessible for collection immediately
behind the curb, at the street or at the alley lot line, as designated by the Board of Trustees, no
earlier than 7:00 p.m. on the day preceding the day on which collection is scheduled. The empty
containers shall be removed as soon as possible but, in no event later than 7:00 p.m. on the day of
collection.
(C) The routes and schedules for collection of refuse and recyclable materials shall be
established by the licensee and approved by the Board of Trustees of the village. The licensee shall
notify the Board of Trustees of the village of any proposed modifications to said routes at least 30
days prior to those changes taking effect.
(Prior Code, § 7-308) Penalty, see § 51.99
Refuse Collection17
NON-RESIDENTIAL COLLECTIONS
§ 51.65 COMMERCIAL COLLECTION.
Within the village, all owners and occupiers of non-residential structures, multi-family structures
of four or more dwelling units and mobile or manufactured homes in non-participation licensed
manufactured home parks shall provide for the collection and disposal of accumulations of garbage
and refuse, recyclable material and compostable material regularly and systematically, at least once
every 14 days, by a refuse collector licensed by the village pursuant to § 51.02(B) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-401)
§ 51.66 DISPOSAL IN CONTAINERS REQUIRED.
For non-residential structures, multi-family structures of four or more dwelling units and nonparticipating
mobile or manufactured homes in licensed manufactured home parks, it shall be
unlawful to dispose of any garbage and rubbish or compostable material anywhere in the village,
except through placement of such material in appropriate containers serviced by a refuse collector
licensed by the village pursuant to § 51.02(B) of this chapter; provided, however, that, nothing in
this section shall prevent individual composting of yard wastes, or the recycling of materials
elsewhere within the village, by taking those materials to a recycling drop-off location which agrees
to accept same.
(Prior Code, § 7-402) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.67 APPROVED CONTAINERS.
Containers to be used for the collection of garbage and refuse from non-residential premises
shall be tightly-covered metal or other non-corrodible, water-tight containers. Mobile garbage and
refuse containers required to be left at curb side shall be placed at curbside no earlier than 7:00 p.m.
on the day preceding the day on which collection is scheduled, and shall be removed from curb side
no later than 7:00 p.m. on the day of collection.
(Prior Code, § 7-403) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.68 COLLECTION SERVICES.
(A) All non-residential structures, multi-family structures of four or more dwelling units and
non-participating mobile or manufactured homes in licensed manufactured home parks shall have
designated locations for the pickup of garbage and rubbish. Where a dumpster is used, it shall be
screened in accordance with zoning regulations.
18 Swansea - Public Works
(B) The routes and schedules for collection of refuse shall be established by the licensee and
provided, upon request, to the Village Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 7-404) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less
than $20, nor more than $750, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 7-107)
CHAPTER 52: SEWER REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
52.001 Definitions
Use of Public Sewers Required
52.015 Required use of sewer
52.016 Unlawful connection to storm sewer
52.017 Unlawful deposit of wastes
52.018 Unlawful discharge into natural outlet
52.019 Unlawful construction of privy
52.020 When private system allowed
52.021 When sewers become available
52.022 Operation of private system
52.023 Additional requirements
Building Sewers and Connections
52.035 Unauthorized tampering
52.036 Classes of permits
52.037 Construction costs
52.038 Separate sewers
52.039 Use of old sewers
52.040 Fitting types and joints and connections
52.041 Slope and size of sewer
52.042 Notification for inspection
52.043 Inspection
52.044 Gravity flow
52.045 Connection at sewer
52.046 Barricades
52.047 Building sewer permit
52.048 Responsibility of maintenance
19
20Swansea - Public Works
Restrictions on the Use of Public Sewers
52.060 Discharges restricted
52.061 Discharges of unpolluted drainage
52.062 Prohibited discharges
52.063 Industrial user cost recovery system
52.064 Discharges; determination of acceptance
52.065 Action by village on prohibited discharges
52.066 Interceptors provided
52.067 Maintenance required at facilities
52.068 Manhole required
52.069 Measurements, tests and analyses
52.070 Determining regulations on measurements, tests and analyses
52.071 Special agreements
52.072 Protection from damage
Wastewater Service Charges
52.085 Basis for wastewater service charges
52.086 Measurement of flow
52.087 Debt service charge
52.088 Basic user charge
52.089 Surcharge rate
52.090 Computation of surcharge
52.091 Computation of wastewater service charge
52.092 Septic system sludge
52.093 Wastewater service charges for non-residents
Sewer Regulations
52.110 Private water system
52.111 Multiple units served by single meter
52.112 Deductions for water not entering sewer
52.113 Authority to deduct
52.114 Application for meter
52.115 Owner-occupant liability
52.116 Non-payment
52.117 Lien rights and collection
52.118 Water service discontinued
52.119 Service discontinued
52.120 Sewer Billing
52.121 Accounts
52.122 Notice of rates
52.123 Access to records
Sewer Regulations21
Violations
52.135 Notice of violation
52.136 Liability
52.999 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.001 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
APARTMENT HOUSE. Any structure containing two or more dwelling units, each unit having
a separate facility for using water service.
APPLICANT. An owner (or owners) of premises who has made written application to the
village for a permit to install or repair a house connection.
BOD or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C,
expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and
conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER. See SEWER LATERAL.
CHURCH. A sanctuary for public worship.
EPA ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
EPA DIRECTOR. The Director of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state that will separate by gravity from
wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free
of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
22 Swansea - Public Works
GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
GARBAGE, PROPERLY SHREDDED. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely
under the flow conditions normally prevailing in the public sewers, with no particle greater than onehalf
inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
INSPECTOR. The person or persons duly authorized by the village to inspect and approve the
installation of building sewers and their connection to the public sewer system.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It
is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly,
parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and
wastewater analysis.
NPDES PERMIT. Any permit or equivalent documents or requirements issued by the
Administrator or, where appropriate by the Director, after enactment of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Amendments of 1972, to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to § 402 of the Federal
Act.
PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, company, corporation, society, group
or governmental body.
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed by
one of the procedures outlined in Standard Methods.
POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste
on a treatment works or stream. One POPULATION EQUIVALENT is 100 gallons of sewage per
day, containing 0.22 pounds of BOD and 0.22 pounds of suspended solids.
ppm. Parts per million by weight.
PUBLIC BUILDING. A building owned by a public tax-supported subdivision of the state.
RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER. A single-family dwelling.
SCHOOLS. School buildings, public or parochial.
SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings,
institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as
may be present.
Sewer Regulations 23
SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER, COMBINED. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
SEWER LATERAL.
(1) The conduit or pipe which connects the building wastewater sources to the public
sewer. The LATERAL commences five feet outside the building foundation wall and terminates at
the public sewer.
(2) If the LATERAL enters the public sewer by way of a “T”, “Y” or other in-line fitting,
the LATERAL shall include that leg of the fitting by which the lateral accesses the public sewer. If
the LATERAL enters the public sewer by way of a tapping sleeve, the tapping sleeve is also
considered a part of the LATERAL.
SEWER MAINS AND LATERALS, SANITARY. The sanitary sewer interceptors, mains and
laterals of the village.
SEWER, PUBLIC. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is
controlled by public authority.
SEWER, SANITARY. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground
waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWER, STORM. A sewer which carries surface runoff and to which sewage is not admitted.
SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of Public Works of the village or his or her
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS.
(1) Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or
industrial waste, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device.
(2) Quantitative determination of SUSPENDED SOLIDS shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
TRAILERS. House trailers either movable or located on a lot adjacent to a house.
(Prior Code, § 6-601)
24Swansea - Public Works
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
§ 52.015 REQUIRED USE OF SEWER.
The owner of any house, building, trailer, coach, mobile home or other property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within the village on any lot, block,
tract or parcel of land in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sewer
or combined sewer of the village, is hereby required, at his or her expense, to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so; provided that, the
public sewer is within 200 feet of the closest property lines.
(Prior Code, § 6-701) Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.016 UNLAWFUL CONNECTION TO STORM SEWER.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to connect or cause to be connected, any
drain carrying, or intended to carry, any toilet, sink, basement, septic tank, cesspool, industrial
waste or any fixture or device discharging polluting substances, to any storm sewer or drain in the
village.
(Prior Code, § 6-702) Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.017 UNLAWFUL DEPOSIT OF WASTES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary
manner upon public or private property within the village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
village, any animal or human excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste which ordinarily
would be regarded as sewage or industrial waste.
(Prior Code, § 6-703) Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.018 UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE INTO NATURAL OUTLET.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the village, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the village, any sanitary sewage, industrial waste or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-704) Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.019 UNLAWFUL CONSTRUCTION OF PRIVY.
(A) It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, cesspool or other private
sewage disposal facilities, which do not comply with § 52.020 of this chapter.
Sewer Regulations 25
(B) This section shall not restrict the temporary use of self-contained “chemical toilets” or
similar facilities, typically used at construction sites or where such facilities are warranted.
(Prior Code, § 6-705) Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.020 WHEN PRIVATE SYSTEM ALLOWED.
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of § 52.015 of
this chapter, the village may grant a permit allowing the building sewer be connected to a private
sewage disposal system; provided that, said system complies with all requirements of the State
Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act, 225 ILCS 225/1 et seq., and Code as administered by the
County Director of Land Development, and is approved by the inspectors.
(Prior Code, § 6-706)
§ 52.021 WHEN SEWERS BECOME AVAILABLE.
At such times as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a sewage disposal
system, as provided in § 52.015 of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal
facilities shall be abandoned.
(Prior Code, § 6-707) Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.022 OPERATION OF PRIVATE SYSTEM.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner
at all times at no expense to the village.
(Prior Code, § 6-708) Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.023 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional
requirements that may be imposed by the Village Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 6-709)
26Swansea - Public Works
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 52.035 UNAUTHORIZED TAMPERING.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
village.
(Prior Code, § 6-801) Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.036 CLASSES OF PERMITS.
(A) There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(1) For residential and commercial services; and
(2) For service to establishments producing industrial waste.
(B) In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the village. The permit applications shall be supplemented by the plans, specifications
or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the inspector.
(Prior Code, § 6-802)
§ 52.037 CONSTRUCTION COSTS.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be
borne by the owner. The owner or the person installing the building sewer for the owner shall
indemnify the village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation.
(Prior Code, § 6-803)
§ 52.038 SEPARATE SEWERS.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where
one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot, and no private sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear of the building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered
as one building sewer. Other exceptions will be allowed only by special permission granted by the
Superintendent of Public Works.
(Prior Code, § 6-804)
Sewer Regulations 27
§ 52.039 USE OF OLD SEWERS.
Old building sewers or portions thereof may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found upon examination and test by the inspector to meet all requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-805)
§ 52.040 FITTING TYPES AND JOINTS AND CONNECTIONS.
Materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing
of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling of the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the
Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the village. In the absence
of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual of Practice No. 9 and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 6-806) Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.041 SLOPE AND SIZE OF SEWER.
The size and slope of the building sewers shall be subject to the Plumbing Code and the approval
of the inspector, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The village may require
larger sized building sewers for locations where the use of said building is subject to frequent
change. The slope of any such building sewer shall be not less than one-eighth inch per foot. A slope
of one-fourth inch per foot shall be used wherever practical. A slope of more than one-fourth inch
per foot shall not be permitted unless within six feet of the main.
(Prior Code, § 6-807)
§ 52.042 NOTIFICATION FOR INSPECTION.
(A) The applicant for the building sewer shall notify the inspector when the building sewer is
ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the inspector or his or her representative.
(B) It shall be the responsibility of the building owner and his or her contractor to assure that
inspections are requested in accordance with the policies and procedures of the village. If an
inspection is requested by the owner or his or her contractor, but cannot be performed by the
inspector upon his or her arrival because the work is not yet ready for inspection, or because the
work has not been completed in accordance with the village codes and ordinances, and the inspector
must, therefore, leave the site to return at a later time, the village may charge the owner a reinspection
fee of $20.
(Prior Code, § 6-808)
28 Swansea - Public Works
§ 52.043 INSPECTION.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from the frost. All excavations
required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved
by the Inspector. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with A.S.T.M.
specifications (designation C12); except that, no backfill shall be in place until the work has been
inspected and approved by the inspector or his or her representative.
(Prior Code, § 6-809)
§ 52.044 GRAVITY FLOW.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such drains shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to
the building sewer, at the expense of the owner. No water-operated sewage ejector shall be used.
(Prior Code, § 6-810) Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.045 CONNECTION AT SEWER.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the “Y” branch
designated for that property, if such branch is available at a suitable location. Any connection not
made at the designated “Y” branch in the main sewer shall be made only as directed by the
inspector.
(Prior Code, § 6-811)
§ 52.046 BARRICADES.
(A) All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades
and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
(B) Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work
shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village.
(Prior Code, § 6-812) Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.047 BUILDING SEWER PERMIT.
A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it
can be demonstrated that the downstream sewage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and
wastewater treatment facilities have sufficiently served capacity to adequately and efficiently handle
the additional anticipated waste load.
(Prior Code, § 6-813)
Sewer Regulations 29
§ 52.048 RESPONSIBILITY OF MAINTENANCE.
After application and connection of sewer laterals is completed, the owner or owners of the
property connected to the sewer laterals shall be responsible for and pay for all labor, material and
other costs associated with maintenance, repair or other work to be performed upon any sewer lateral
without regard to where said sewer laterals are located in relation to the property of an owner.
(Prior Code, § 6-814)
RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 52.060 DISCHARGES RESTRICTED.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial
process waters to any sanitary sewer.
(Prior Code, § 6-901) Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.061 DISCHARGES OF UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.
Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the village. Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the village to a storm
sewer or natural outlet.
(Prior Code, § 6-902)
§ 52.062 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or
wastes to any public sewers:
(A) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or
gas;
(B) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
(C) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;
and
30 Swansea - Public Works
(D) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics,
wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper
dishes, cups, milk containers and the like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(Prior Code, § 6-903) Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.063 INDUSTRIAL USER COST RECOVERY SYSTEM.
No industrial user may discharge sewage into any public sewer until the village has adopted an
industrial cost recovery system which:
(A) Meets the requirements of § 204(b)(1)(B) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972 (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and applicable federal regulations; and
(B) Has been approved by the Agency in accordance with the conditions of any grant made to
the village by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or by the state for the construction of any
part of the sewer system or sewage treatment works of the village.
(Prior Code, § 6-904)
§ 52.064 DISCHARGES; DETERMINATION OF ACCEPTANCE.
(A) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances,
materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the village, that such wastes can
harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In
forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the village will give consideration to such
factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials
or construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and maximum limits
established by regulatory agencies.
(B) The substances prohibited are:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (60°C);
(2) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between 32° and 150°F (0° and 65°C);
Sewer Regulations 31
(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any
garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (.076 hp metric) or greater shall
be subject to the review and approval of the village;
(4) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated
plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
(5) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or similar objectionable
or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any
such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the village for such materials;
(6) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances,
in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the village as necessary after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
(7) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed
limits established by the village in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;
(8) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
(9) Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg at any time,
except as permitted by the village in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;
(10) Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time, except as permitted by the village in
compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;
(11) Materials, which exert or cause:
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to,
Fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to,
sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
(b) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions);
(c) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities
as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works; and/or
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting “slugs”, as
defined herein.
32 Swansea - Public Works
(12) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amendable to treatment or
reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amendable to treatment only to such
degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
(Prior Code, § 6-905) Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.065 ACTION BY VILLAGE ON PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
(A) If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public
sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 52.064 of
this chapter and/or which are in violation of the standards for pre-treatment provided in Ch. 1, EPA
Rules and Regulations, Subch. D, Water Programs, part 128, Pre-Treatment Standards, Federal
Register Volume 38, No. 215, Thursday, 11-8-1973, and any amendments thereto, which, in the
judgment of the village, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment
or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
village may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pre-treatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(4) Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not
covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions of § 52.070 of this chapter.
(B) If the village permits the pre-treatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and
installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the village and
subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(Prior Code, § 6-906)
§ 52.066 INTERCEPTORS PROVIDED.
(A) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided in accordance with the State Plumbing
Code to assure the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units.
(B) All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the village and shall be located
so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Sewer Regulations 33
(C) All fast-food and sit-down restaurants shall install a grease interceptor with a capacity of at
least 1,500 gallons, and designed in accordance with Ch. 154, App. A. Food establishments that
serve a minimum amount of fried foods such as deli sandwich shops, shall install a grease interceptor
with a capacity of at least 1,000 gallons, and designed in accordance with Ch. 154, App. A.
(Prior Code, § 6-907)
§ 52.067 MAINTENANCE REQUIRED AT FACILITIES.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
(Prior Code, § 6-908) Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.068 MANHOLE REQUIRED.
Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and when required by the village, the
owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer
to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required,
shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the village. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained
by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(Prior Code, § 6-909) Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.069 MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES.
(A) The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall
provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance
with this code and any special conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory
agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type and frequency of laboratory
analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village, but no less than once per
year, the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to
assure that compliance with the federal, state and local standards are being met.
(B) The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the village at
such times and in such manner as prescribed by the same. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses and reporting required by the village. At such times as deemed necessary,
the village reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory
service.
(Prior Code, § 6-910)
34 Swansea - Public Works
§ 52.070 DETERMINING REGULATIONS ON MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND
ANALYSES.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in this code shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard
Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken
at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole
shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which
the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to
life, limb and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour
composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be
taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solid analyses are obtained from 24-hour
composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.)
(Prior Code, § 6-911)
§ 52.071 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement
or arrangement between the village and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste or
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the village for treatment, subject to payment
therefor by the industrial concern; provided, such payments are in accordance with federal and state
guidelines for user charge systems and industrial cost recovery systems.
(Prior Code, § 6-912)
§ 52.072 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the
municipal sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest
under charge of disorderly conduct.
(Prior Code, § 6-913) Penalty, see § 52.999
Sewer Regulations35
WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES
§ 52.085 BASIS FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES.
The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities
of the village shall consist of a basic user charge for operation and maintenance, plus replacement, a
debt service charge and a surcharge, if applicable.
(A) Debt service charge. The debt service charge shall be computed by dividing the annual debt
service for all outstanding bonds by the number of users; through further divisions, the monthly and
quarterly debt service charges.
(B) Basic user charge. The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by
water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal concentrations:
(1) A five-day, 20°C biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 260 mg/l; and
(2) A suspended solids (SS) content of 260 mg/l. It shall consist of operation and
maintenance costs, plus replacement and shall be computed as follows:
(a) Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and maintain the
wastewater facilities including a replacement fund for the year, for all works categories;
(b) Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility categories by volume,
suspended solids and BOD, if possible;
(c) Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to be treated;
(d) Proportion the estimated costs to non-industrial and industrial users by volume,
suspended solids and BOD;
(e) Compute costs per 100 cubic feet for normal sewage strength; and
(f) Compute surcharge costs per 100 cubic feet per mg/l in excess of normal sewage
strength for BOD and SS.
(C) Surcharge. A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed the normal
concentrations for BOD (260 mg/l) and SS (260 mg/l). The surcharge will be based on water usage
as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for all wastes which exceed the 260 mg/l, and 260
mg/l concentration for BOD and SS respectively. Sections 52.089 and 52.090 of this chapter specify
the procedure to compute a surcharge.
36 Swansea - Public Works
(D) Review of service charge. The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed
annually by certified public accountants for the village in their annual audit report. The wastewater
service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in debt service or a change in
operation and maintenance costs including replacement costs.
(Prior Code, § 6-1101)
§ 52.086 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
The volume of flow used for computing basic water user charges and surcharges shall be the
metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of 100 cubic feet.
(A) If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any part of all of his or her
water from sources other than from the Illinois-American Water Company, all or part of which is
discharged into the public sewers, the person shall install and maintain, at his or her expense, water
meters of a type approved by the village for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained
from these other sources. Charges shall then be based upon readings from said meters.
(B) Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the village if
these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records.
(C) Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be installed, owned and
maintained by the person. Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed,
unless service is canceled, without the consent of the village.
(Prior Code, § 6-1102)
§ 52.087 DEBT SERVICE CHARGE.
(A) Effective with those sewer bills dated 4-30-2009, the debt service charge shall be $24.80 bimonthly
and shall, thereafter, be billed at the changed rate to each unit connected to the wastewater
facility of the village, and shall continue to be billed at all times that said unit is connected to the
wastewater facility, regardless of whether usage has occurred during the billing period.
(B) If the owner or person in possession of said units does not notify the village within 20 days
from the date of billing, it shall be deemed that the owner, or person in possession, has been
correctly billed as to the number of units shown on the bill.
(Prior Code, § 6-1103) (Ord. 1415, passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 1520, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 1530,
passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 1547, passed 4-27-2009; Ord. 1764, passed 11-21-2016)
Sewer Regulations 37
§ 52.088 BASIC USER CHARGE.
Effective with those sewer bills dated 4-30-2009, the basic user charge for the use of, and for
treatment service supplied by, the wastewater facility of the village shall be $2.48 per every 100
cubic feet of water consumption, as measured at each water meter. Said charge shall thereafter be
applied against all users and billed bi-monthly.
(Prior Code, § 6-1104) (Ord. 1415, passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 1520, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 1530,
passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 1547, passed 4-27-2009; Ord. 1548, passed 4-27-2009)
§ 52.089 SURCHARGE RATE.
(A) The rates of surcharge for BOD and SS shall be as follows:
Increase for BOD concentrations/ - 0.86(0.4) = $0.0013/ppm
100 cubic feet above 260 ppm 260
Increase for SS concentrations/ - 0.86(0.4) = $0.0013/ppm
100 cubic feet above 260 ppm
(B) These rates have been established by allocating 40% of the treatment facility costs to SS and
20% of the treatment facility costs to flow.
(Prior Code, § 6-1105)
§ 52.090 COMPUTATION OF SURCHARGE.
The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges shall be established by waste
sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as often as may be deemed necessary by the village
and shall be binding as a basis for surcharges.
(Prior Code, § 6-1106)
§ 52.091 COMPUTATION OF WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE.
(A) The wastewater service charge shall be computed by the following formula:
SC = DS+(BC x V) + SU (if applicable)
Where:
(1) SC = Amount of wastewater service charge ($) per billing period;
(2) DS = Debt service charge (§ 52.087 of this chapter);
38 Swansea - Public Works
(3) V = Wastewater volume for the billing period;
(4) BU = Basic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement (§ 52.088 of this
chapter); and
(5) SU = Amount of surcharge (§§ 52.089 and 52.090 of this chapter)
(B) Effective with those sewer bills dated 4-30-2009:
SC = $24.80 + (2.48 x V) + SU (if applicable)
(Prior Code, § 6-1107) (Ord. passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 1520, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 1530, passed 8-
18-2008; Ord. 1547, passed 4-27-2009)
§ 52.092 SEPTIC SYSTEM SLUDGE.
The village’s wastewater treatment plant shall accept for appropriate treatment or disposal, any
septic system sludge generated by any private residence within the village, or within any other unit of
local government within the county, which is not served by its own wastewater treatment facility, in
accordance with the following.
(A) Payment shall be made in the form of a check payable to the village, at the time such sludge
is accepted at the wastewater treatment plant.
(B) The charge for such treatment and disposal shall be at a rate of $0.03 per gallon, based upon
the maximum capacity in gallons of the tank used to transport said sludge to the plant, whether said
tank is completely or partially full.
(C) The minimum charge for such treatment and disposal shall be $50.
(D) The company transporting sludge to the village’s wastewater treatment plant for treatment
and disposal, shall provide written certification that said sludge was generated by a private residence,
and provide the address of that residence, noting whether it is within the village or within another
unit of local government in the county which does not provide its own wastewater.
(Prior Code, § 6-1109)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 415 ILCS 5/12.3
Sewer Regulations 39
§ 52.093 WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES FOR NON-RESIDENTS.
(A) (1) Absent any agreement to the contrary, any residential and/or commercial sewage
received from any source outside the corporate limits of the village, whether located within another
municipal corporation or not, shall be charged one and one-half times the current village fee user
rate. Said village fee user rate shall be computed in accordance with the preceding sections of this
subchapter.
(2) This non-resident fee user rate shall be directly billed by the village to the non-resident
consumer.
(B) (1) Absent any agreement to the contrary, the tap-in fee for a user of the village’s waste
water treatment plant located outside the corporate limits of the village, whether located within
another municipal corporation or not, shall be two times the then current tap-in fee schedule as found
in § 150.04 of this chapter.
(2) This non-resident tap-in fee shall be directly billed by the village to the non-resident
consumer.
(Ord. 1686, passed 11-4-2013)
SEWER REGULATIONS
§ 52.110 PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM.
From and after this chapter becomes effective, all residential, commercial, industrial and other
establishments having private water supplies, which are not metered, shall be billed for sewer service
based upon water consumed as estimated by the Village Board of Trustees or its authorized
representative.
(Ord. 1764, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 52.111 MULTIPLE UNITS SERVED BY SINGLE METER.
If any premises should contain multiple units (such as residences or businesses) with each unit
discharging sewage directly or indirectly into the sewage system of the village, but each unit does not
have a separate water meter, then each unit shall pay a debt service charge of $24.80 bi-monthly,
effective 4-30-2009, and shall be billed for sewer service based on a rate computed as follows:
(A) Divide the total number of individual units connected to any one meter into the bimonthly
usage in cubic feet, as read on the meter, and then apply the rates as set forth in § 52.088 herein to
each of the units as if the usage, as read, was actually equally distributed among all units served by
that meter.
40 Swansea - Public Works
(B) If the owners do not notify the village within 20 calendar days from the date of the first bill
for such a location, it shall be deemed that the owners have been billed correctly as to the number of
units shown on the bill, that said units do not have more than one meter showing their water
consumption, and that the total water used is equally attributable to each unit.
(C) If the owners believe that one or more of the units served by a single meter use an
appreciably higher percentage of the water read by the meter than the other units, they shall jointly
agree upon the percentage of use attributable to each unit, and shall provide that information to the
village, in writing and signed by each of the owners. The village shall then multiply the bi-monthly
usage in cubic feet, as read on the meter, by the percentage of use attributable to each unit, and then
apply the rates as set forth in § 52.088 herein to each of the units as if the usage, as read, was
actually distributed among all units served by that meter in accordance with those percentages. The
distribution as submitted in writing by the owners, shall continue with each bi-monthly billing
thereafter.
(D) Should the owners be unable to agree upon the percent of usage attributable to each unit, the
village shall bill each unit for usage in accordance with division(A) herein.
(Ord. 1764, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 52.112 DEDUCTIONS FOR WATER NOT ENTERING SEWER.
The village shall have the authority to allow deductions on sewer bills for water, which is used
but does not enter the sanitary sewer system. In every case, a request for deduction shall be made by
written application on forms provided by the village and shall be subject to the following regulations:
(A) Metered water supply. No deductions shall be granted for users of the sewer system who do
not have a metered water supply.
(B) Delinquent users. No deductions shall be granted for users of the sewer system who are
delinquent in their payments to the village for such service.
(C) One hundred percent of any used water for which a deduction is requested, must have been
prevented from entering the sanitary sewer system.
(D) Authority. The President and the Village Board of Trustees, or its authorized representative,
shall determine which used waters are eligible for discharge to some point other than the sanitary
sewer system, and shall have the authority to prohibit discharges which they determine to be
potentially harmful to the public health, safety, or welfare, provided, however, that no used water
which contains suspended matter in any form (organic or inorganic), or which contains any dissolved
substances, shall be eligible for discharge to any point other than the sanitary sewer system,
including storm sewers or any other watercourse, without approval of the State Sanitary Water
Board.
Sewer Regulations 41
(E) Metered deductions. Users who, at their own expense, install a meter which measures water
not entering the sanitary sewer system, shall be eligible for deduction of that used water throughout
the year.
(1) Any such meter shall be of an approved design, shall be registered with the Sewer
Billing of the village prior to use, and shall be used only by the user to whom it is registered and at
the service location to which it is assigned.
(2) Thereafter, the user shall periodically, and preferably at least once per year, provide
said meter reading to the Sewer Billing where it may be recorded and utilized to determine any
metered deduction since the previous reading.
(3) The Sewer Billing shall then credit the user's sewer account by subtracting the previous
reading from the current reading, as taken from the meter, multiplying the difference by the current
basic user charge, and then deducting 100% of that product from the next bi-monthly billing.
(4) The President and the Village Board of Trustees, or their designated representative,
shall have authority over the installation of meters used for deduction and, from time to time, may
test the accuracy of said meters. Any necessary repairs to such meters shall be at the user's expense.
(F) Special occurrence deduction. Users may apply for a special occurrence deduction in the
event that a leak in water service lines allows metered water to discharge on their property to some
point other than the sanitary sewer system.
(1) Following submission of a written application for a special occurrence deduction, the
Sewer Billing shall verify the presence of a leak that said leak was repaired or corrected, and that the
leak was of such a nature that water discharged through said leak did not enter the sanitary sewer
system.
(2) A special occurrence deduction shall be calculated by determining the user's average
consumption during the five billing cycles immediately proceeding the billing cycle during which the
leak occurred, and then subtracting that average, from the consumption for said billing cycle. The
Sewer Billing shall then credit the user's sewer account by multiplying that difference by the current
basic user charge, and deducting 90% of that product from the next billing cycle.
(G) Annual summer usage deduction. All users other than those who receive metered deductions
under division (E) above, may apply for an annual summer usage deduction in accordance with the
provisions of their division.
(1) Annual summer usage deductions shall be granted only to the customer of record to
whom the bill is mailed.
(2) The customer requesting the summer usage deduction must have maintained service at
that location for a period of at least one year prior to said request.
42 Swansea - Public Works
(3) A summer usage deduction shall be granted once annually with the October 30 billing,
provided that an application for such deduction has been submitted by the user between September 15
and October 15 of that year.
(4) A summer usage deduction shall be calculated by determining the user's average
consumption during the four bi-monthly billings immediately preceding May 1 of the current
calendar year, and then determining the average consumption for the two bi-monthly billings
following May 1 of the same year.
(5) The village shall then determine the average increased summer consumption by
subtracting the average for the four bimonthly billings prior to May 1 from the average for the two
bi-monthly billings after May 1, and credit the user's sewer account by deducting 50% of said
difference from the water consumption reported to the village by the water company, and using that
adjusted consumption as the customer's usage for the next billing cycle.
(Ord. 1764, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 52.113 AUTHORITY TO DEDUCT.
Authority to grant deductions in accordance with § 52.112(E) shall be delegated by the President
and Village of Swansea Board of Trustees to the Sewer Billing and chairperson of applicable Board
of Trustees Committee, provided that any request for such a deduction complies with all
requirements of said section.
(Ord. 1764, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 52.114 APPLICATION FOR METER.
(A) Wherever the foregoing methods for the computation of water discharged to the sanitary
sewer may seem impracticable, the sewer user may make application to the President and the Village
Board of Trustees for permission to meter water discharged only to the sanitary sewer. If, upon
investigation of the premises, the President and the Village Board of Trustees approve application,
the necessary meter or meters shall be installed by the sewer user so as to measure all water
discharged into the sanitary sewer and the readings of this meter or meters shall be taken as the basis
for the sewer charge, which charge shall be calculated in accordance with the rates herein provided.
(B) The President and the Village Board of Trustees shall designate the make and type of meter
to be installed by the sewer user and supervise the installation and shall test these meters whenever
deemed necessary by the President and the Village Board. All necessary repairs to such meters shall
be made by the village and charged to the sewer user.
(Ord. 1764, passed 11-21-2016)
Sewer Regulations 43
§ 52.115 OWNER-OCCUPANT LIABILITY.
(A) The owner(s) of any owner occupied premises served by the village sewer system shall be
jointly and severally liable for paying for all sanitary sewer services provided to said premises.
(B) Bills for services referred to in division (A) of this section shall be mailed to the service
address or to an address provided by said owner(s), and shall include all current and past due charges
for the premises in question.
(C) The owner(s) of any tenant occupied premises served by the village sewer system, and the
occupant(s) or any other user thereof, shall be jointly and severally liable for paying for all sanitary
sewer services provided to said premises whether utilized by the owner, or another occupant, tenant,
or user thereof.
(D) Bills for services referred to in division(C) of this section shall be mailed to the owner(s), or
the management company of record, at an address provided by said owner(s), and shall include all
current and past due charges for the premises in question, regardless of whether services were
utilized by the owner or any occupant, tenant, or other user thereof.
(E) The owner(s) of any tenant occupied single-family or two-family premises served by the
village sewer system, may request that sanitary sewer bills for such premises be mailed directly to
the service address, to be paid by the occupant(s) thereof, provided that said owner(s) have
completed an owner liability form and placed it on file with the Sewer Billing Department.
(F) Said owner liability form shall require the owner(s) to clearly acknowledge that they remain
legally liable for payment for all sanitary sewer services provided to said premises, as well as any
late fees, penalties, disconnection fees and collection or legal costs incurred by the village should the
owner's tenant fail to pay said bill.
(G) Information on said owner liability form shall be updated by the owner(s) of the premises
with each change in tenant, and kept current including a current mailing address and phone number
for the owner(s) at all times.
(H) In the case of any such tenant occupied single-family or two-family premise, where the
owner(s) have requested that sanitary sewer bills for such premises be mailed directly to the service
address to be paid by the occupant(s) thereof, the Village Sewer Billing shall notify said owner(s) via
first class United States mail service at the address on file whenever such bill remains unpaid for a
period of 30 days after it was originally mailed. The failure of the village to mail such notice, or the
failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect the right of the village to foreclose on any
lien pursuant to statutes of the State of Illinois for unpaid sewer bills or to pursue any other collection
procedures available.
44 Swansea - Public Works
(I) If a bill for sewer services remains unpaid for a period of 30 days after it was originally
mailed, the owner/customer shall be liable for reasonable collection costs, attorney's fees, and the
cost of any litigation in connection with collection of said delinquent sum.
(Ord. 1764, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 52.116 NON-PAYMENT.
(A) Bills shall be rendered bi-monthly and shall be payable on or by the twentieth day of the
month. If payment of the full amount of the bills is not made by the due date of the original bill, then
a penalty of 10% of the amount of the bill shall be added and collected.
(B) Said 10% penalty shall be computed by taking the percentage times the actual unpaid
balance of each bi-monthly bill for sewer service.
(Ord. 1764, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 52.117 LIEN RIGHTS AND COLLECTION.
Whenever a bill for sewer services remains unpaid for 30 days after it has been rendered, the
village may file with the Recorder of Deeds, St. Clair County, Illinois a statement of lien claim. This
statement shall contain the service address and parcel number of the premises served, the amount of
the unpaid bill, plus filing fees, and notice that the village claims a lien for this amount as well as for
all charges for sewer service subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
(Ord. 1764, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 52.118 WATER SERVICE DISCONTINUED.
(A) The village has signed an agreement with the Illinois-American Water Company to turn off
the water source to any service location whenever a bill for sewer service at that location remains
unpaid for 30 days after it has been mailed.
(B) The village shall notify the water company and request such shut-off by providing the
service address for which the village is requesting discontinuance of water service with respect to the
payment of charges for sewerage service that have become delinquent.
(C) If the property is unoccupied and charges for sewerage service are not paid within 30 days
after the bill for such service is mailed, the water service may be discontinued without further notice
by removing the water meter and shall not be reinstated until all past due bills, filing fees, court
costs, and attorney's fees associated with said turn off fees, as well as any turn on fees, charges
associated with reconnection to the American Water System, and reimbursement for costs associated
with the previous disconnection from said water system, are paid in full.
Sewer Regulations 45
(D) If the property is occupied and charges for sewerage service are not paid within 30 days
after the bill for such service is mailed, the water service may be discontinued upon the following
terms:
(1) The water company shall send notice to the service address, via first class United States
mail service, of its intent to discontinue water service, not less than ten days prior to any
disconnection.
(2) If the charges are not paid in full prior to the disconnection date specified in the notice,
then the water at the property may be disconnected without further notice.
(3) Any person affected by the water being disconnected may obtain a hearing before the
Village Board of Trustees by requesting, in writing, a review of the decision by the village to have
the American Water Company disconnect the water. Said request shall be made within seven days of
the date said notice was mailed.
(4) The party requesting a hearing before the Board shall have the right to be represented
by counsel of their choice and shall be permitted to call witnesses on behalf of the party.
(5) The Village Board of Trustees shall render its decision at the conclusion of the hearing.
(E) Municipal water service to any property previously disconnected shall not be reconnected
until all past due bills, water company fees, filing fees, court costs, and attorney's fees associated
with said disconnection and reconnection are paid in full.
(F) In the case of any tenant occupied single-family or two-family premise, where the owner(s)
have requested that sanitary sewer bills for such premises be mailed directly to the service address to
be paid by the occupant(s) thereof, the Village Sewer Billing shall notify said owner(s) via first class
United States mail service at the address on file, of the water company's plans to disconnect service.
The failure of the village to mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall
not affect the right of the village to disconnect the water source to said service location.
(Ord. 1764, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 52.119 SERVICE DISCONTINUED.
(A) If the charges for sewage service are not paid within 30 days after the rendition of the bill
for such service and the property is unoccupied, the service may be discontinued without further
notice by removing the sewer lateral tap-in at the municipal sewer main, and shall not be reinstated
until all past due bills, filing fees, court costs, and attorney's fees associated with said disconnection,
as well as any tap-in fees, charges associated with reconnection to the village sewer system, and
reimbursement for costs associated with the previous disconnection from said sewer system, are paid
in full.
46 Swansea - Public Works
(B) If the charges for sewerage service are not paid within 30 days after the rendition of the bill
for such service and the property is occupied, the service may be disconnected upon the following
terms:
(1) The village shall direct notice to the last known address of the owner, via first class
United States mail service, of its intent to discontinue service to the address of the affected property
not less than 30 days prior to any disconnection. In addition, the village shall cause a copy of said
notice to be posted on the affected property. Said notice shall be given not less than 60 days prior to
disconnection.
(2) If the charges are not paid in full prior to the disconnection date specified in the notice,
then the property may be disconnected without further notice.
(3) Any person affected by a notice of disconnection may obtain a hearing before the
Village Board of Trustees by requesting, in writing, a review of the decision by the village to
disconnect. Said request shall be made within 14 days of the date said notice was posted on the
affected property.
(4) The party requesting a hearing before the Board shall have the right to be represented
by counsel of their choice and shall be permitted to call witnesses on behalf of the party.
(5) The Village Board of Trustees shall render its decision at the conclusion of the hearing.
(C) Any property disconnected from the municipal sewer system shall be required to provide a
private sewage system (aerator) to service said property, pursuant to 225 ILCS 225/6.
(D) Municipal sewerage service to any property previously disconnected from the village sewer
system shall not be reinstated until all past due bills, filing fees, court costs, and attorney's fees
associated with said disconnection, as well as any tap-in fees, charges associated with reconnection to
the Village sewer system, and reimbursement for costs associated with the previous disconnection
from said sewer system, are paid in full.
(Ord. 1764, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 52.120 SEWER BILLING.
It is hereby made the duty of the Sewer Billing of the village to render bills for sewage service
and all other charges in connection therewith, and to collect all monies due there from.
(Ord. 1764, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 52.121 ACCOUNTS.
(A) The Village Sewer Billing shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper
books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made for all transactions
Sewer Regulations 47
relative to the sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals, he shall cause to be made an audit by
an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the sewerage
system.
(B) In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect
the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to
indicate the sewer service charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts required
to be recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do, in fact, meet those regulations. In this
regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following:
(1) Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for the current fiscal
year.
(2) Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
(3) Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
(4) Number of users connected to the system.
(5) Number of non-metered users.
(6) A list of users discharging non-domestic wastes (industrial users) and volume of waste
discharged.
(Ord. 1764, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 52.122 NOTICE OF RATES.
A copy of §§ 52.085 through 52.096 properly certified by the Village Clerk shall be filed in the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds of the county and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate
of the charges of the sewerage system of said village on their properties. If rates are changed, notice
of said changes shall be sent to each user with next regular billing is made.
(Ord. 1764, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 52.123 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representatives shall have access
to any books, documents, papers, and records of the village which is applicable to the village system
of user charges or industrial cost recovery for the purpose of making audit examination excerpts and
transcriptions thereof to insure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any
state grant.
(Ord. 1764, passed 11-21-2016)
48Swansea - Public Works
VIOLATIONS
§ 52.135 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except § 52.072 of this chapter,
shall be served by the village with written notice, stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
(Prior Code, § 6-1301)
§ 52.136 LIABILITY.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the village for
any expense, loss or damage occasioned the village by reason of such violation.
(Prior Code, § 6-1303)
§ 52.999 PENALTY.
Any person who shall continue any violation of this chapter beyond the time limit provided in §
52.135 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
in an amount no less than $25 and not more than $750 for each violation. Each day on which any
such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-1302)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
70. GENERAL REGULATIONS
71. TRAFFIC-CONTROL REGULATIONS
72. PARKING REGULATIONS
73. BICYCLES, TOY VEHICLES, AND MOTORCYCLES
74. PEDESTRIANS
75. VEHICLE CONDITIONS, EQUIPMENT, AND LOADS
76. MOTOR VEHICLE OFFENSES
77. TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
78. PARKING SCHEDULES
1
2 Swansea - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section
Generally
70.001 Definitions
70.002 Adoption of Illinois State Vehicle Code
Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws
70.015 Obedience to police officers
70.016 Public officers and employees to obey traffic code; exceptions
70.017 Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn vehicles
70.018 Fleeing or attempted to elude police officer
Traffic Signs, Signals and Markings
70.030 Obedience to traffic-control devices
70.031 Traffic-control signal legend
70.032 Pedestrian-control signals
70.033 Lane-control signals
70.034 Flashing signals
70.035 Display of unauthorized signs, signals, markings or advertising signs
70.036 Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs or signals
70.037 Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances and structures
70.038 Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker
70.039 Zones of quiet
70.040 No-turning signs and turning markers
70.041 Stop and yield signs
70.042 Posting signs
70.043 Shopping centers powers to contract
Administration
70.055 Generally
70.056 Duty of Traffic Division
70.057 Records of traffic violations
3
4 Swansea - Traffic Code
70.058 Accident investigations
70.059 Accident studies
70.060 Accident reports
70.061 Annual traffic safety report
70.062 Traffic Engineer
70.063 Traffic-control regulations and devices
70.064 Traffic Commission
Impoundment of Motor Vehicle
70.080 Definitions
70.081 Violations authorizing impoundment
70.082 Seizure and impoundment
70.083 Administrative hearing
70.084 Disposition of impounded motor vehicle
70.085 Motor vehicle possession
70.086 Towing agency
70.087 Administrative fee
Abandoned Vehicles
70.100 Definitions
70.101 Abandonment
70.102 Possession of vehicle by other party; towing
70.103 Removal of motor vehicles or other vehicles; towing or hauling away
70.104 Police responsibilities
70.105 Unknown owner
70.106 State Police information
70.107 Public sale; reclamation
70.108 Disposal of unclaimed vehicles
70.109 Police record for disposed vehicle
70.110 Public sale proceeds
70.111 Liability of village, officers, agencies, and towing services
70.112 Authorization of bond fees
70.999 Penalty
2018 S-1
General Regulations 5
GENERALLY
§ 70.001 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning. For any terms not defined herein, the Illinois Vehicle
Code, 625 ILCS 5/1, entitled “Titles and Definitions” shall apply and supplement these definitions to
the extent that the Illinois Vehicle Code contains those terms.
ALLEY. A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of lots or buildings,
and not used for general traffic circulation.
(625 ILCS 5/1-102)
ARTERIAL STREET. Any U.S.- or state-numbered route, controlled-access highway or other
major radial or circumferential street or highway designated by local authorities within their
respective jurisdiction as part of a major arterial system of streets or highways.
(70 ILCS 1205/3-9)
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of village departments or
public service corporations as are designated or authorized by proper local authorities; police
vehicles; vehicles of the Fire Department; vehicles of a HazMat or technical rescue team authorized
by a county board under 55 ILCS 5/5-1127; ambulances; vehicles of the State Department of
Corrections; vehicles of the Illinois Department of Juvenile Justice; vehicles of the State Emergency
Management Agency; mine rescue and explosives emergency response vehicles of the Department of
Natural Resources; vehicles of the State Department of Public Health; vehicles of the State Toll
Highway Authority identified as Highway Emergency Lane Patrol; vehicles of the State Department
of Transportation identified as Emergency Traffic Patrol; and vehicles of a municipal or county
emergency services and disaster agency as defined by the State Emergency Management Act, 20
ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
(625 ILCS 5/1-105)
BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having
two tandem wheels, except scooters and similar devices.
(625 ILCS 5/1-106)
BUS. Every motor vehicle, other than a commuter van, designed for carrying more than ten
persons.
(625 ILCS 5/1-107)
BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when within 600
feet along the highway there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but
not limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy
at least 300 feet of frontage on one side, or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the highway.
(625 ILCS 5/1-108)
6 Swansea - Traffic Code
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property
in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-hire or not-for-hire, but not
including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement when being used for that
purpose or a recreational vehicle not being used commercially.
(625 ILCS 5/1-111.8)
CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street or roadway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the
same, except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority
having jurisdiction over the highway, street or roadway.
(625 ILCS 5/1-112)
CROSSWALK.
(1) The part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral
lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of
curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk on one side of a
highway, that part of the highway included within the extension of the lateral line of the existing
sidewalk to the side of the highway without the sidewalk, with the extension forming a right angle to
the centerline of the highway; and
(2) Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for
pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface, placed in accordance with the
provisions in the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation as authorized in 625 ILCS
5/11-301.
(625 ILCS 5/1-113)
DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/1-116)
ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE. A self-balancing, two non-tandem
wheeled device designed to transport only one person with an electric propulsion system that limits
the maximum speed of the device to 15 mph or less.
(625 ILCS 5/1-117.7)
FARM TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement for
drawing wagons, plows, mowing machines and other implements of husbandry, and every implement
of husbandry which is self-propelled excluding all-terrain vehicles and off-highway motorcycles as
defined in 625 ILCS 5.
(625 ILCS 5/1-120)
FIRE DEPARTMENT VEHICLE. Any vehicle, bicycle or electric personal assistive mobility
device that is designated or authorized by proper local authorities for Fire Department use.
(625 ILCS 5/1-120.7)
General Regulations 7
GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle, whether operated singly or in combination, without
load, plus the weight of load thereon.
(625 ILCS 5/1-125)
HEARING OFFICER. Person who shall be appointed by the Village Mayor for a term of one
year, and shall be confirmed by a simple majority vote of approval by the Village Board.
Compensation shall be determined by the Village Board upon the person's confirmation. Shall have
authority as described herein.
HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel or located on
public school property.
(625 ILCS 5/1-126)
IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY. Every vehicle designed and adapted exclusively for
agricultural, horticultural or livestock raising operations, including farm wagons, wagon trailers or
like vehicles used in connection therewith, or for lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry;
provided that, no farm wagon, wagon trailer or like vehicle having a gross weight of more than
36,000 pounds shall be included hereunder.
(625 ILCS 5/1-130)
IMPROVED HIGHWAY. Any roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam and crushed stone
or gravel.
(625 ILCS 5/1-131)
INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb
lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one
another at, or approximately at, right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon
different roadways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
(1) Where a highway includes two roadways 40 feet or more apart, then every crossing of
each roadway of the divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate
intersection.
(2) The junction of an alley with a street or highway does not constitute an
INTERSECTION.
(625 ILCS 5/1-132)
LANE-CONTROL SIGNAL. An official traffic- control device consisting of an electrically
controlled and illuminated signal of a square or rectangular design, and employing distinctive colors
or symbols used to control the direction of vehicular flow on the particular lane to which the
indication applies.
(625 ILCS 5/1-135)
8 Swansea - Traffic Code
LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for
vehicular traffic.
(625 ILCS 5/1-136)
LEASE. A written document vesting exclusive possession, use, control and responsibility of the
lessee during the periods the vehicle is operated by or for the lessee for a specific period of time.
(625 ILCS 5/1-137)
LICENSE TO DRIVE. Any driver's license or any other license or permit to operate a motor
vehicle issued under the laws of the state including:
(1) Any temporary license or instruction permit;
(2) The privilege of any person to drive a motor vehicle, whether or not the person holds a
valid license or permit; and
(3) Any non-resident's driving privilege, as defined herein.
(625 ILCS 5/1-138)
LIMOUSINE. Any privately owned First Division vehicle intended to be used for the
transportation of persons for-hire when the payment is not based on a meter charge, but is
prearranged for a designated destination.
(625 ILCS 5/1-139.1)
LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, city, village and other local board or body having
authority to enact laws relating to traffic under the constitution and laws of this state and each Road
District Highway Commissioner having that authority.
(625 ILCS 5/1-140)
LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLE. The term has the same meaning ascribed to it by § 38 of
the Consumer Product Safety Act (15 U.S.C. § 2085).
(625 ILCS 5/1-140.10)
LOW-SPEED GAS BICYCLE. A two- or three-wheeled device with fully operable pedals and a
gasoline motor of less than one horsepower, whose maximum speed on a paved level surface, when
powered solely by such a motor while ridden by an operator who weighs 170 pounds, is less than 20
mph.
(625 ILCS 5/1-140.15)
MAIL. To deposit in the United States mail properly addressed and with postage prepaid.
(625 ILCS 5/1-141)
General Regulations 9
MOPED. A motor-driven cycle, with or without optional power derived from manually operated
pedals, whose speed attainable in one mile is at least 20 mph, but not greater than 30 mph, and is
equipped with a motor that produces two brake horsepower or less. If an internal combustion engine
is used, the displacement shall not exceed 50 cubic centimeter displacement and the power drive
system shall not require the operator to shift gears.
(625 ILCS 5/1-148.2)
MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled
by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails, except for
vehicles moved solely by human power, motorized wheelchairs, low-speed electric bicycles and lowspeed
gas bicycles. For this section, MOTOR VEHICLES are divided into two divisions:
(1) FIRST DIVISION. Motor vehicles designed for carrying not more than ten persons;
and
(2) SECOND DIVISION. Motor vehicles designed for carrying more than ten persons,
those designed or used for living quarters, and those motor vehicles which are designed for pulling
or carrying freight or cargo, and those motor vehicles of the First Division remodeled for use and
used as motor vehicles of the Second Division.
(625 ILCS 5/1-146)
MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle and every motor scooter with less than 150 cubic
centimeter piston displacement, including motorized pedalcycles.
(625 ILCS 5/1-145.001)
MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider, and
designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding an
autocycle or tractor.
(625 ILCS 5/1-147)
MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self- propelled vehicle, including a three-wheeled vehicle,
designed for and used by a person with disabilities, that is incapable of a speed in excess of eight
mph on level ground.
(625 ILCS 5/1-148.3)
MULTIFUNCTION SCHOOL ACTIVITY BUS (MFSAB). A school bus manufactured for the
purpose of transporting 11 or more persons, including the driver, whose purposes do not include
transporting students to and from home or school bus stops. A MFSAB is prohibited from meeting
the special requirements for school buses in 625 ILCS 5/12-801, 5/12-803 and 5/12-805, and 625
ILCS Act 5/12-802(a).
(625 ILCS 5/l-148.3a-5)
NON-COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is not a commercial vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/1-151)
10 Swansea - Traffic Code
NOT-FOR-HIRE. Operation of a commercial vehicle in furtherance of any commercial or
industrial enterprise, but not-for-hire.
(625 ILCS 5/1-153)
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and devices which
conform with the state manual, and not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
(625 ILCS 5/1-154)
OWNER. A person who holds legal title of a motor vehicle, or in the event a motor vehicle is
the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon
performance of the conditions stated in the agreement, and with an immediate right of possession
vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of the motor vehicle is entitled
to possession, then the conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the
purpose of this title.
(625 ILCS 5/1-155)
PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than when
temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
(625 ILCS 5/1-156)
PASSENGER CAR. A motor vehicle of the First Division, including a multipurpose passenger
vehicle, that is designed for carrying not more than ten persons.
(625 ILCS 5/1-157)
PEACE OFFICER. Any person who by virtue of his or her public employment is vested by law
with a duty to maintain public order or to make arrests for offenses, whether that duty extends to all
offenses or is limited to specific offenses.
(625 ILCS 5/1-157.5)
PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot, including a person with a physical, hearing or visual
disability.
(625 ILCS 5/1-158)
PERSON WITH DISABILITIES. A natural person who, as determined by a licensed physician,
by a licensed physician assistant, or by a licensed advanced practice nurse:
(1) Cannot walk without the use of, or assistance from, a brace, cane, crutch, another person,
prosthetic device, wheelchair or other assistive device;
(2) Is restricted by lung disease to such an extent that his or her forced (respiratory) expiratory
volume for one second, when measured by spirometry, is less than one liter, or the arterial oxygen
tension is less than 60 mm/hg on room air at rest;
(3) Uses portable oxygen;
General Regulations 11
(4) Has a cardiac condition to the extent that the person's functional limitations are classified in
severity as class III or class IV, according to standards set by the American Heart Association;
(5) Is severely limited in the person's ability to walk due to an arthritic, neurological,
oncological or orthopedic condition;
(6) Cannot walk 200 feet without stopping to rest because of one of the above five conditions;
or
(7) Is missing a hand or arm or has permanently lost the use of a hand or arm.
(625 ILCS 5/1-159.1)
POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or to make arrests and
issue citations for violations of traffic regulations.
(625 ILCS 5/1-162)
POLICE VEHICLE. Any vehicle, bicycle or electric personal assistive mobility device that is
designated or authorized by proper local authorities for police use.
(625 ILCS 5/1 -162.3)
PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS. The place where any person transacts his or her principal
business, or where he or she makes up and approves his or her payroll, maintains a central file of
records, and maintains his or her principal executive offices. In the event that not all of these
functions are performed in one place, then that place where a majority of these functions are
performed, or the place where the person does in fact principally transact and control his or her
business affairs shall be considered as the PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS.
(625 ILCS 5/1-162.5)
PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership, and used for
vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but
not by other persons.
(625 ILCS 5/1-163)
RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon
stationary rails.
(625 ILCS 5/1-166)
RAILROAD-HIGHWAY GRADE CROSSING. The intersection of stationary rails owned or
used in the operation of a railroad corporation across a highway.
(625 ILCS 5/1-166.1)
RAILROAD SIGNS or SIGNAL. Any sign, signal or device, other than an official trafficcontrol
signal or device, erected in accordance with the laws governing the same, and intended to
give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train or railroad track
equipment.
(625 ILCS 5/1-167)
12 Swansea - Traffic Code
RAILROAD TRACK EQUIPMENT. All vehicles operated upon rails for the purpose of the
maintenance of railroads including, but not limited to, all hi-rail vehicles and on-track roadway
maintenance machines, as defined in 49 C.F.R. part 214.7.
(625 ILCS 5/1-167.5)
RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled
thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
(625 ILCS 5/1-168)
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Every camping trailer, motor home, mini motor home, travel
trailer, truck camper or van camper used primarily for recreational purposes, and not used
commercially nor owned by a commercial business.
(625 ILCS 5/1-169)
REGISTRATION. The registration certificate or certificates and registration plates issued under
the laws of the state pertaining to the registration of vehicles.
(625 ILCS 5/1-171)
REGISTRATION STICKER. A device to be attached to a registration plate that will renew the
registration and registration plate or plates for a predetermined period, not to exceed one registration
year.
(625 ILCS 5/1-171)
REMOVE. Includes removing, defacing, covering or destroying.
RESCUE SQUAD. A voluntary association of individuals, or a fire department, dedicated to
saving lives through the rescue of persons entrapped in wrecked vehicles or other hazardous
circumstances, and associated with some unit of government.
(625 ILCS 5/1-171.6)
RESCUE VEHICLE. Any publicly or privately owned vehicle which is specifically designed,
configured and equipped for the performance of access and extrication of persons from hazardous or
life-endangering situations, as well as for the emergency transportation of persons who are sick,
injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless.
(625 ILCS 5/1-171.8)
RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
(1) The territory contiguous to and including a highway, not comprising a business district,
when the property on the highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with
residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
General Regulations 13
(2) For purposes of establishing maximum speed limits, a RESIDENCE DISTRICT shall
be at least a quarter of a mile long with residences or residences and buildings in use for businesses
spaced no more than 500 feet apart.
(625 ILCS 5/1-172)
RETAIL SALE. The act or attempted act of selling vehicles or otherwise disposing of a vehicle
to a person for use as a consumer.
(625 ILCS 5/1-174)
REVOCATION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE. The termination by formal action of the Secretary,
of a person's license or privilege to operate a motor vehicle on the public highways, which
termination shall not be subject to renewal or restoration, except that an application for a new license
may be presented and acted upon by the secretary after the expiration of at least one year after the
date of revocation.
(625 ILCS 5/1-176)
RIGHT-OF-WAY. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in
preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed
and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision, unless one grants precedence to the other.
(625 ILCS 5/1-177)
ROAD TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles, and not
so constructed as to carry any load thereon, either independently or any part of the weight of a
vehicle or load so drawn.
(625 ILCS 5/1-178)
ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular
travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two or more separate
roadways, the term ROADWAY, as used herein, shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not
to all the roadways collectively.
(625 ILCS 5/1-179)
SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of
pedestrians, and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly
visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone.
(625 ILCS 5/1-181)
SCHOOL BUS.
(1) Every motor vehicle, except as provided in division (2) below, owned or operated by or
for any of the following entities for the transportation of persons regularly enrolled as students in
grade 12 or below in connection with any activity of the entity:
(a) A public or private primary or secondary school;
14 Swansea - Traffic Code
(b) A primary or secondary school operated by a religious institution; or
(c) Any public, private or religious nursery school.
(2) This definition does not include the following:
(a) A bus operated by a public utility, municipal corporation or common carrier
authorized to conduct local or interurban transportation of passengers when the bus is not traveling a
specific school bus route, but is:
1. On a regularly scheduled route for the transportation of other fare-paying
passengers;
2. Furnishing charter service for the transportation of groups on field trips or
other special trips or in connection with special events; or
3. Being used for shuttle service between attendance centers or other educational
facilities.
(b) A motor vehicle of the First Division; or
(c) A multi-function school-activity bus.
(625 ILCS 5/1-182)
SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, and so constructed its weight
and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/1-187)
SHOULDER. The portion of the highway adjacent to the roadway for accommodating stopped
vehicles or for emergency use.
(625 ILCS 5/1-187.1)
SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of roadway and
the adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians.
(625 ILCS 5/1-188)
SPEED-CHANGE LANE. An auxiliary lane, including tapered areas, primarily for the
acceleration or deceleration of vehicles entering or leaving the through traffic lanes.
(625 ILCS 5/1-193)
STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than when
temporarily and actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
(625 ILCS 5/1-194)
General Regulations 15
STATE. A state, territory or possession of the United States, the District of Columbia, the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or a province of the Dominion of Canada.
(625 ILCS 5/1-195)
STATE HIGHWAYS. Defined in the Illinois Highway Code as the same may from time to time
be amended.
(625 ILCS 5/1-196)
STATE POLICE. The Illinois State Police.
(625 ILCS 5/1-197)
STOP. The complete cessation from movement.
(625 ILCS 5/1-199)
STOP or STOPPING. Any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
(625 ILCS 5/1-200)
STREET. The entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
(625 ILCS 5/1-201)
SUBURBAN DISTRICT. The portion of any city, village or incorporated town, other than the
business and residence districts.
(625 ILCS 5/1-203)
THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given
preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways
is required by law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on the through highway in obedience to either
a stop sign or a yield sign, when those signs are erected as provided in this title.
(625 ILCS 5/1-205)
TOW TRUCK. Every truck designed or altered and equipped for and used to push, tow, carry
upon, or draw vehicles by means of a crane, hoist, towbar, towline or auxiliary axle, or carried upon
to render assistance to disabled vehicles, except for any truck tractor temporarily converted to a tow
truck by means of a portable wrecker unit attached to the fifth wheel of the truck tractor and used
only by the owner to tow a disabled vehicle also owned by him or her and never used for hire.
(625 ILCS 5/1-205.1)
TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances
either singly or together while using any highway for purposes of travel.
(625 ILCS 5/1-207)
16 Swansea - Traffic Code
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS. Any provision of this code or other regulatory ordinance the
purpose of which is to directly control or improve traffic and safety of both vehicles and pedestrians.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any official traffic-control device other than a railroad sign or
signal, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately
directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
(625 ILCS 5/1-208)
TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a pole trailer, designed
for carrying persons or property, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, and so constructed that no
part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/1-209)
TRAVEL TRAILER. A trailer, not used commercially, designed to provide living quarters for
recreational, camping or travel use, and of a size or weight not requiring an over-dimension permit
when towed on a highway.
(625 ILCS 5/1-210.01)
TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of
property.
(625 ILCS 5/1-211)
TRUCK CAMPER. A truck, not used commercially, when equipped with a portable unit
designed to be loaded onto the bed which is constructed to provide temporary living quarters for
recreational, travel or camping use.
(625 ILCS 5/1-211.01)
TRUCK TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other
vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and
load so drawn.
(625 ILCS 5/1-212)
URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street which is built up with
structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses, and situated at intervals of less than 100
feet for a distance of one-fourth of a mile or more.
(625 ILCS 5/1-214)
URBAN AREA. An urban area is any incorporated or unincorporated area developed primarily
for residential or business purposes.
(625 ILCS 5/1-214.8)
General Regulations 17
VEHICLE.
(1) Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon a highway or requiring a certificate of title under 625 ILCS 5/3-101(d), except devices
moved by human power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and snowmobiles
as defined in the Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act.
(2) For the purposes of this definition, unless otherwise prescribed, a device shall be
considered to be a VEHICLE until such time it either comes within the definition of a “junk
vehicle”, as defined under this section, or a junking certificate is issued for it.
(3) For this section, VEHICLES are divided into two divisions:
(a) First Division: those motor vehicles which are designed for the carrying of not
more than ten persons;
(b) Second Division: those vehicles which are designed for carrying more than ten
persons; those designed or used for living quarters; those which are designed for pulling or carrying
property, freight or cargo; those vehicles of the First Division remodeled for use and used as
vehicles of the Second Division; and those vehicles of the First Division used and registered as
school buses.
(625 ILCS 5/1-217)
§ 70.002 ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS STATE VEHICLE CODE.
(A) Pursuant to § 20-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/20-204), the Illinois Vehicle
Code, including any subsequent amendment thereto or revision thereof, is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out at length herein.
(B) Three copies of provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as adopted in division (A) above,
shall be on file in the office of the Village Clerk and there kept, available for public use, inspection
and examination during named business hours.
(C) In referring to a violation of any of the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as adopted in
division (A) above, except for provisions included in this code, the violation shall be noted by
referring to division (A) above, and then citing the appropriate chapter and section number of the
Illinois Vehicle Code as set forth therein.
(D) Words and phrases used in this title shall have the same meaning as that which is given to
them in the Illinois Vehicle Code unless a separate meaning has been set forth herein.
18 Swansea - Traffic Code
OBEDIENCE TO AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC LAWS
§ 70.015 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS.
(A) No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any
police officer, firefighter, person authorized by a local authority to direct traffic, or school crossing
guard invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.
(625 ILCS 5/11-203)
(B) The Fire Department officer in command, or any firefighter designated by him or her, may
exercise the powers and authority of a police officer in directing traffic at the scene of any fire or
where the Fire Department has responded to an emergency call for so long as fire department
equipment is on the scene in the absence of or in assisting the police.
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.016 PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC CODE;
EXCEPTIONS.
(A) The provisions of this traffic code applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the highways
shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, the state or any
county, city, town, district or any other political subdivision of the state, except as provided in this
section, and subject to specific exceptions as set forth in this title with reference to authorized
emergency vehicles.
(B) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call, or
when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when responding to but not upon
returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions herein stated.
(C) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
(1) Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this traffic code;
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be
required and necessary for safe operation;
(3) Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he or she does not endanger life or
property; and
(4) Disregard regulations governing the direction of movement or turning in specified
directions.
General Regulations 19
(D) The exceptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle, other than a police
vehicle, shall apply only when the vehicle is making use of either an audible signal when in motion,
or visual signals meeting the requirements of 625 ILCS 5/12-215.
(E) The foregoing provisions do not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from
the duty of driving with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor do these provisions protect the
driver from the consequences of his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(F) Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this traffic code shall not apply to
persons, motor vehicles and equipment while actually engaged in work upon the highway, but shall
apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from work.
(625 ILCS 5/11-205) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.017 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING
ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
Every person riding an animal or driving an animal-drawn vehicle upon a roadway shall be
granted all of the rights, and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle
by this chapter, except those provisions of this chapter which, by their very nature, can have no
application.
(625 ILCS 5/11-206) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.018 FLEEING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE POLICE OFFICER.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of a motor vehicle who, having been given a
visual or audible signal by a police officer directing the driver or operator to bring his or her vehicle
to a stop, willfully fails or refuses to obey that direction, increases his or her speed, extinguishes his
or her lights, or otherwise flees or attempts to elude the officer.
(B) The signal given by the police officer may be by hand, voice, siren or a red or blue light.
(C) However, the officer giving the signal shall be in police uniform and, if driving a vehicle,
the vehicle shall be marked showing it to be an official police vehicle.
Penalty, see § 70.999
20 Swansea - Traffic Code
TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
§ 70.030 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
(A) The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device
applicable thereto placed or held in accordance with this traffic code, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this
motor vehicle code.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to leave the roadway and travel across private property to
avoid an official traffic-control device.
(C) No provision of this traffic code, for which official traffic-control devices are required, shall
be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official
device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic-control devices are required, the
section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or in place.
(D) Whenever any official traffic-control device is placed or held in position approximately
conforming to the requirements of this traffic code, the device shall be presumed to have been so
placed or held by the official act or direction of lawful authority, and comply with the requirements
of this traffic code, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
(E) The driver of a vehicle approaching a traffic-control signal on which no signal light facing
the vehicle is illuminated shall stop before entering the intersection, in accordance with rules
applicable in making a stop at a stop sign.
(625 ILCS 5/11-305) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.031 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting different colored lights or
color lighted arrows, successively one at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and
yellow shall be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and the lights
shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
(A) Green indication.
(1) Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed straight through or turn
right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. Vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
General Regulations 21
(2) Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with
another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by
such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time.
Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
(3) Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, as provided in 625 ILCS 5/11-
307, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may
proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
(B) Steady yellow indication.
(1) Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal is thereby
warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited
immediately thereafter.
(2) Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal, unless otherwise
directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in 625 ILCS 5/11-307, are thereby advised that
there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no pedestrian
shall then start to cross the roadway.
(C) Flashing yellow arrow indication.
(1) Vehicular traffic facing a flashing yellow arrow indication may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by the arrow and shall yield the right-of-way to
other vehicles and pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time
the signal is exhibited.
(2) Pedestrians facing a flashing yellow arrow indication, unless otherwise directed by a
pedestrian-control signal as provided in 625 ILCS 5/11-307, may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk that crosses the lane or lanes used to depart the intersection by
traffic controlled by the flashing yellow arrow indication. Pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the flashing yellow arrow indication is first
displayed.
(D) Steady red indication.
(1) Except as provided in divisions (3) and (4), below, vehicular traffic facing a steady
circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if there is no such stop line,
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is no such crosswalk,
then before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is
shown.
(2) Except as provided in divisions (3) and (4), below, vehicular traffic facing a steady red
arrow signal shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow and, unless
entering the intersection to make a movement permitted by another signal, shall stop at a clearly
marked
22 Swansea - Traffic Code
stop line, but if there is no such stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if there is no such crosswalk, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain
standing until an indication permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is shown.
(3) Except when a sign is in place prohibiting a turn and local authorities by ordinance or
state authorities by rule or regulation prohibit any such turn, vehicular traffic facing any steady red
signal may cautiously enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a
one-way street, after stopping as required by divisions (1) and (2), above. After stopping, the driver
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within
the intersection or junction or roadways. Such driver shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk.
(4) In municipalities with less than 2,000,000 inhabitants, after stopping as required by
divisions (1) and (2), above, the driver of a motorcycle or bicycle, facing a steady red signal which
fails to change to a green signal within a reasonable period of time not less than 120 seconds because
of a signal malfunction or because the signal has failed to detect the arrival of the motorcycle or
bicycle due to the vehicle's size or weight, shall have the right to proceed, after yielding the right-ofway
to oncoming traffic facing a green signal, subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign as required by 625 ILCS 5/11-1204.
(5) Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in 625 ILCS 5/11-
307, pedestrians facing a steady circular red or red arrow signal alone shall not enter the roadway.
(E) Traffic-control signal located at other than in intersection. In the event an official trafficcontrol
signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any
stop required shall be at a traffic sign or a marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall
be made or, in the absence of such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
(F) Streetcar motorman. The motorman of any streetcar shall obey the above signals as
applicable to vehicles.
(625 ILCS 5/11-306) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.032 PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.
Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “Walk” or “Don't Walk” or
the illuminated symbols of a walking person or an upraised palm are in place, these signals shall
indicate as follows.
(A) “Walk” or walking person symbol. Pedestrians facing this signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal, and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all
vehicles.
General Regulations 23
(B) “Don’t Walk” or upraised palm signal. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the
direction of this signal, but any pedestrian who has partly completed his or her crossing on the
“Walk” signal or upraised palm symbol shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the “Don't
Walk” signal or upraised palm symbol is illuminated, steady or flashing.
(625 ILCS 5/11-307) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.033 LANE-CONTROL SIGNALS.
Whenever lane-control signals are used in conjunction with official signs, they shall have the
following meanings.
(A) Downward-pointing green arrow. A driver facing this indication is permitted to drive in the
lane over which the arrow signal is located. Otherwise, he or she shall obey all other traffic controls
present and follow normal safe driving practices.
(B) Red X symbol.
(1) A driver facing this indication shall not drive in the lane over which the signal is
located, and this indication shall modify accordingly the meaning of all other traffic controls present.
(2) Otherwise, he or she shall obey all other traffic controls, and follow normal safe driving
practices.
(C) Yellow X (steady). A driver facing this indication should prepare to vacate the lane over
which the signal is located in a safe manner to avoid, if possible, occupying that lane when a steady
red X is displayed.
(D) Flashing yellow arrow. A driver facing this indication may use the lane only for the purpose
of approaching and making a left turn.
(625 ILCS 5/11-308) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.034 FLASHING SIGNALS.
(A) Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in conjunction with a trafficcontrol
device, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows.
(1) Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent
flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at a point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before
entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making
a stop at a stop sign.
24 Swansea - Traffic Code
(2) Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past the signal only
with caution.
(B) This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings.
(625 ILCS 5/11-309) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.035 DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS, MARKINGS OR
ADVERTISING SIGNS.
(A) No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized
sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be, or is an imitation of, or resembles an official
traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic or the effectiveness of an official
traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.
(B) No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority permit, upon any highway
any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
(C) No tree, bush or foliage of any kind shall be so placed, maintained, allowed to remain or
displayed upon either public or private property in such a manner as to hide from view or interfere
with the movement of traffic or the effectiveness of any traffic-control devices, sign or signal.
(1) All such trees, bushes or foliage are hereby declared to be nuisances and may be
removed by any police officer or under his or her direction and supervision.
(D) It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate in view of any street or highway any flashing or
rotating beacon of light.
(E) Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance,
and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same, or
cause it to be removed without notice.
(F) No person shall sell or offer for sale any traffic-control device to be used on any street or
highway in the municipality which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter.
(G) This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to
highways of signs giving useful directional information, and of a type that cannot be mistaken for
official signs.
(H) This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection of State “Adopt-A-Highway” signs
by the village as provided in the State Adopt-A-Highway Act, 605 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
(625 ILCS 5/11-310) Penalty, see § 70.999
General Regulations 25
§ 70.036 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES OR
RAILROAD SIGNS OR SIGNALS.
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down
or remove any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield
or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof.
(625 ILCS 5/11-311) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.037 UNLAWFUL USE OR DAMAGE TO HIGHWAYS, APPURTENANCES AND
STRUCTURES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure or damage any public highway or street, or
any bridge or culvert, or to willfully damage, injure or remove any sign, signpost or structure upon
or used or constructed in connection with any public highway or street for the protection thereof, or
for the protection or regulation of traffic thereon, by any willfully unusual, improper or unreasonable
use thereof, or by willfully careless driving or use of any vehicle thereon, or by willful mutilation,
defacing, destruction or removal thereof.
(625 ILCS 5/11-312) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.038 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF HIGHWAY SIGN OR MARKER.
The Village Street Department, with reference to traffic-control signs, signals or markers owned
by the village, is authorized to indicate the ownership of the signs, signals, or markers in letters not
less than three-eighths inch, or more than three-fourths of an inch in height, by use of a metal stamp,
etching or other permanent means. Except for employees of the Village Street Department, police
officers, contractors and their employees engaged in a highway construction contract or work on the
highway approved by the village, it is unlawful for any person to possess a sign, signal or marker so
identified.
(625 ILCS 5/11-313) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.039 ZONES OF QUIET.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person operating a motor
vehicle within the zone shall sound the horn or other warning device, except in an emergency.
§ 70.040 NO-TURNING SIGNS AND TURNING MARKERS.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted no
driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the sign. When authorized marks, buttons or other
indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles, no
driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the indications.
26 Swansea - Traffic Code
§ 70.041 STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
(A) Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop signs or yield signs as
authorized in 625 ILCS 5/11-302.
(B) Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of
a vehicle and every motorman of a streetcar approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign
shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is
no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the
intersection roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection.
(C) The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to stop shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no
crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1204) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.042 POSTING SIGNS.
(A) The village shall place and maintain appropriate signs and traffic-control devices conforming
to the Illinois Department of Transportation Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices, at all
designated intersections and at all streets and alleys, so that the driver of any motor vehicle may be
aware of and obey the provisions of Chs. 77 and 78.
(B) No provision of Chs. 77 or 78 for which official traffic-control signs or devices are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the tie and place of the alleged violator if at the time
and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to
be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
(C) Whenever any official traffic-control sign or device is placed or held in position
approximately conforming to the requirements of the state statutes and purports to conform to the
lawful requirements pertaining to such device, such device shall be presumed to have been so placed
or held by the official act or direction of lawful authority, and comply with the requirements of the
state statutes unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
General Regulations 27
§ 70.043 SHOPPING CENTERS POWERS TO CONTRACT.
The village and the owner of any shopping center located within the village may, by contract,
authorize the village to regulate the parking of automobiles and the traffic at such shopping center
pursuant to the authority granted by the state.
(A) No such contract shall exceed a period of 20 years. No lessee of the shopping center shall
enter into such a contract for a longer period of time than the length of his or her lease.
(B) The contract, when entered into shall be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds
and the regulations made pursuant to the contract shall only become effective three days after the
contract is recorded.
(C) Thereafter, it shall be an offense for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform
any act required by such parking or traffic regulation and a violation of the regulation shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter.
(D) SHOPPING CENTER means premises having one or more stores or business
establishments in connection with which there is provided on privately-owned property an area of
land used by the public as the means of access to the egress from the stores and business
establishments on such premises and for the parking of motor vehicles of customers and patrons of
such stores and business establishments on such area.
ADMINISTRATION
§ 70.055 GENERALLY.
There is hereby established in the Police Department of the village a patrol division to be under
the control of a police officer appointed by and directly responsible to the Chief of Police.
§ 70.056 DUTY OF TRAFFIC DIVISION.
It shall be the duty of the traffic division with such aid as may be rendered by other members of
the Police Department to enforce the street traffic regulations of the municipality and of all the state
vehicle laws, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents, and to cooperate with the
Village Traffic Engineer, if one exists, and other officers of the municipality in the administration of
the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out
those duties specially imposed upon said division by this code and the traffic codes of the
municipality.
28 Swansea - Traffic Code
§ 70.057 RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
(A) Records of traffic violations.
(1) The Police Department or the Traffic Division thereof shall keep a record of all
violations of the traffic laws of the municipality or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has
been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record
shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. The record shall
accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on the record shall be maintained
complete for at least the most recent five-year period.
(2) All forms for records for violations and notice of violations shall be serially numbered.
For each month and year, a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal
of all such forms.
(3) All such records and reports shall be public records.
(B) Drivers' files to be maintained.
(1) The Police Department or the traffic division thereof shall maintain a suitable record of
all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints reported for each driver, which
shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned.
(2) The division shall study the cases of all such drivers charged with frequent or serious
violations of the traffic laws or involved in frequent traffic accidents or any serious accident, and
report such information to the Department of Motor Vehicles or other appropriate state agencies.
(3) Such records shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on
such records shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period.
§ 70.058 ACCIDENT INVESTIGATIONS.
It shall be the duty of the traffic division, assisted by other police officers of the Department, to
investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged
with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents.
§ 70.059 ACCIDENT STUDIES.
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the Traffic Division shall
cooperate with the Village Traffic Engineer, if one exists, in conducting studies of such accidents as
deemed appropriate and determining remedial measures if necessary.
General Regulations 29
§ 70.060 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
(A) The Traffic Division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports.
(B) Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location.
(C) Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the Village Traffic Engineer,
if one exists.
§ 70.061 ANNUAL TRAFFIC SAFETY REPORT.
(A) The Traffic Division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the
Mayor.
(B) Such report shall contain information on traffic matters in the municipality as follows: The
number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other
pertinent traffic accident data;
(C) The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities
of the police; and
(D) The plans and recommendations of the Division for future traffic safety activities.
§ 70.062 TRAFFIC ENGINEER.
(A) The Engineer shall serve as Traffic Engineer in addition to his or her other functions, and
shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this code.
(B) It shall be the general duty of the Village Traffic Engineer to determine the installation and
proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic
accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions
and to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of the municipality, and to cooperate
with other municipality officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions
and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by laws of the municipality.
(C) Nothing contained in this chapter shall require the appointment of a Traffic Engineer and
such person may hold concurrent employment in the village with another department and may
maintain separate titles. Appointment of a traffic engineer shall be made by the Mayor, with majority
approval by the board and shall serve a term of one calendar year.
30 Swansea - Traffic Code
§ 70.063 TRAFFIC-CONTROL REGULATIONS AND DEVICES.
(A) (1) The Chief of Police, by and with the approval of the Village Board, is hereby
empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic laws of the
municipality, and, in emergency circumstances, to make and enforce temporary or experimental
regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions.
(2) No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90
days.
(B) The Village Traffic Engineer may test traffic-control devices under actual conditions of
traffic.
(C) (1) The Chief of Police may authorize the temporary placing of official traffic-control
devices when required by an emergency.
(2) The Chief of Police shall notify the Village Board and Traffic Engineer of his or her
action as soon thereafter as is practicable.
§ 70.064 TRAFFIC COMMISSION.
(A) (1) There is hereby established a Traffic Commission to serve without compensation,
consisting of the Traffic Engineer, the Chief of Police or, in his or her discretion, as his or her
representative, the Chief of the Traffic Division, the municipality's Traffic Committee, and one
representative each from the Village Engineer's office and the Village Attorney's office, and such
number of other municipality officers and representatives of unofficial bodies as may be determined
and appointed by the Mayor with majority approval by the Village Board. Nothing in this section
requires the appointment of members of the Traffic Commission or requires the Traffic Commission
to perform any particular function.
(2) The Chairperson of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with a majority of
Village Board Approval and may be removed by the Mayor.
(B) It shall be the duty of the Traffic Commission, and to this end it shall have the authority
within the limits of the funds at its disposal, to coordinate traffic activities, to carry on educational
activities in traffic matters, to supervise the preparation and publication of traffic reports, to receive
complaints having to do with traffic matters, and to recommend to the legislative body of the
municipality and to the Traffic Engineer, the Chief of the Traffic Division and other municipality
officials ways and means for improving traffic conditions and the administration and enforcement of
traffic regulations.
General Regulations 31
IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLE
§ 70.080 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this subchapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings ascribed to them respectively.
BUSINESS DAY. Any day in which the offices of Swansea Government Center are open to the
public for a minimum of seven hours.
LEVEL I ADMINISTRATIVE FEE. Means and shall be $150.
LEVEL 2 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE. Means and shall be $300.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, except for vehicles moved solely by
human power, motorized wheelchairs, low-speed electric bicycles, and low-speed gas bicycles.
MOTOR VEHICLES include, but are not limited to, automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles and
motor scooters.
OWNER OF RECORD. The record title holder(s) of the motor vehicle as registered with the
Secretary of State, State of Illinois or the particular state where the motor vehicle is otherwise
registered. If the motor vehicle is not registered in any state, the OWNER OF RECORD shall be the
person who holds legal title of the motor vehicle. In the event the motor vehicle is the subject of an
agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of
the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of such vehicle is entitled to possession,
then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the OWNER OF RECORD for
the purpose of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1822, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 70.081 VIOLATIONS AUTHORIZING IMPOUNDMENT.
(A) Motor vehicle impoundment. Pursuant to Article II, Chapter 11 of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
625 ILCS 5/11-208.7, the Village of Swansea (the “village”) shall follow the procedures set forth
herein when impounding vehicles and imposing reasonable administrative fees, payable to and
collected by the village, related to its administrative and processing costs associated with the
investigation, arrest, and detention of offender, or the removal, impoundment, storage, and release
of the motor vehicle. The administrative fees imposed herein by the village shall be uniform for all
similarly situated vehicles and are in addition to any other fees or penalties that may be assessed by a
court of law for the underlying violations, or by a person, firm, or entity that tows and stores the
impounded motor vehicle.
2018 S-1
32 Swansea - Traffic Code
(B) For the purposes of this section:
(1) CANNABIS shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the Cannabis Control Act, 720
ILCS 550/1 et seq.
(2) CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES shall mean any substance as defined and included in
the schedules of Article II of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/201 et seq.
(3) DRIVING A VEHICLE BY PERSON SUBJECT TO WARRANT means operation or
use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant has been issued by a circuit clerk in
Illinois for failing to answer charges that the driver violated Section 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501, of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-101, 6-303, or 11-501).
(4) DRIVING ON A SUSPENDED OR REVOKED LICENSE, PERMIT, OR
PRIVILEGE TO OPERATE A MOTOR VEHICLE means any offense as defined in Section 6-303
of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-303); except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure
or impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or due to failure to
comply with emission testing.
(5) DRIVING ON AN EXPIRED LICENSE means operation or use of a motor vehicle
with an expired driver’s license, in violation of Section 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS
5/6-101), if the period of expiration is greater than one year.
(6) DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL, DRUGS, AND/OR
INTOXICATING COMPOUNDS means any offense as defined in Section 11-501 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-501).
(7) DRIVING WITHOUT A LICENSE OR PERMIT means operation or use of a motor
vehicle without ever having been issued a driver’s license or permit, in violation of Section 6-101 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 LLCS 5/6-101), or operating a motor vehicle without ever having
been issued a driver’s license or permit due to a person’s age.
(8) FELONY OFFENSE means any felony offense as defined by the Criminal Code of
1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012.
(9) FLEEING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE A POLICE OFFICER means any offense
as defined in Section 11-204.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-204.1).
(10) INTERESTED PERSON means the record title holder(s) or lienholder(s) of the motor
vehicle as registered with the Secretary of State for the State of Illinois or the particular state where
the motor vehicle is otherwise registered. If the motor vehicle is not registered in any state, an
INTERESTED PERSON shall be the person who holds legal title of the motor vehicle. In the event
the motor vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the
right of
2018 S-1
General Regulations 33
purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of
possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of such vehicle is
entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed an
INTERESTED PERSON for the purpose of this subchapter.
(11) MISDEMEANOR OFFENSE means any misdemeanor offense as defined by the
Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012.
(12) RECKLESS DRIVING means any offense as defined in Section 11-503 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-503).
(13) THEFT OFFENSE means any offense in violation of Article 16 or 16A of the Criminal
Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012.
(14) TRAFFIC VIOLATION means any offense as defined by the Illinois Vehicle Code (625
ILCS 5) or the Village of Swansea Code of Ordinances.
(15) Weapons offense means any of the following offenses contained within Article 24 of the
Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012: 720 ILCS 5/24-1, 24-1.1, 24-1.2, 24-1.25,
24-1.5, 24-1.6, 24-2.1, 24-2.2, 24-3, 24-3.1, 24-3.2, 24-3.3, 24-3.4, 24-3.5, 24-3.6, and 24-3A.
(C) Offenses subject to impoundment and administrative fees.
(1) A motor vehicle operated or used in commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an
offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled Substance Act, 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq., or the
Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq., shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under
this subchapter. The owner of record of such vehicle, or its agent, shall be liable to the village for a
Level 2 administrative fee of $300, in addition to fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle and
any other penalties assessed by a court of law for the underlying offense.
(2) A motor vehicle operated or used in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, a
weapons offense shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under this subchapter. The owner of
record of such vehicle, or its agent, shall be liable to the village for a Level 2 administrative fee of
$300, in addition to fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle and any other penalties assessed by
a court of law for the underlying offense.
(3) A motor vehicle operated or used in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, a
theft offense shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under this subchapter. The owner of record
of such vehicle, or its agent, shall be liable to the village for a Level 2 administrative fee of $300, in
addition to fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle and any other criminal penalties assessed by
a court of law for the underlying offense.
2018 S-1
34 Swansea - Traffic Code
(4) A motor vehicle operated or used in the commission of the offense of driving under the
influence of alcohol, drugs, and/or intoxicating compounds shall be subject to seizure and
impoundment under this subchapter. The owner of record of such vehicle, or its agent, shall be liable
to the village for a Level 2 administrative fee of $300, in addition to fees for the towing and storage
of the vehicle and any other penalties assessed by a court of law for the underlying offense.
(5) A motor vehicle operated or used in the commission of the offense of driving on a
suspended or revoked license, permit, or privilege to operate a motor vehicle shall be subject to
seizure and impoundment under this subchapter. The owner of record of such vehicle, or its agent,
shall be liable to the village for a Level 2 administrative fee of $300, in addition to fees for the
towing and storage of the vehicle and any other penalties assessed by a court of law for the
underlying offense.
(6) A motor vehicle operated or used in the commission of the offense of driving on an
expired license shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under this subchapter. The owner of
record of such vehicle, or its agent, shall be liable to the village for a Level 2 administrative fee of
$300, in addition to fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle and any other penalties assessed by
a court of law for the underlying offense.
(7) A motor vehicle operated or used in the commission of the offense of driving without a
license or permit shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under this subchapter. The owner of
record of such vehicle, or its agent, shall be liable to the village for a Level 2 administrative fee of
$300, in addition to fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle and any other penalties assessed by
a court of law for the underlying offense.
(8) A motor vehicle operated or used in the commission of the offense of fleeing or
attempting to elude a police officer shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under this
subchapter. The owner of record of such vehicle, or its agent, shall be liable to the village for a
Level 2 administrative fee of $300, in addition to fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle and
any other penalties assessed by a court of law for the underlying offense.
(9) A motor vehicle operated or used in the commission of the offense of driving a vehicle
by person subject to warrant shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under this subchapter. The
owner of record of such vehicle, or its agent, shall be liable to the village for a Level 2
administrative fee of $300, in addition to fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle and any other
penalties assessed by a court of law for the underlying offense.
(10) A motor vehicle operated or used in the commission of the offense of reckless driving:
(a) while the vehicle is part of a funeral procession; or (b) in a manner that interferes with a funeral
procession shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under this subchapter. The owner of record
of such vehicle, or its agent, shall be liable to the village for a Level 2 administrative fee of $300, in
addition to fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle and any other penalties assessed by a court
of law for the underlying offense.
2018 S-1
General Regulations 35
(11) A motor vehicle operated or used in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, a
misdemeanor offense not otherwise provided for in this subsection shall be subject to seizure and
impoundment under this subchapter. The owner of record of such vehicle, or its agent, shall be liable
to the village for a Level 1 administrative fee of $150, in addition to fees for the towing and storage
of the vehicle and any other penalties assessed by a court of law for the underlying offense.
(12) A motor vehicle operated or used in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, a
felony offense not otherwise provided for in this subsection shall be subject to seizure and
impoundment under this subchapter. The owner of record of such vehicle, or its agent, shall be liable
to the village for a Level 2 administrative fee of $300, in addition to fees for the towing and storage
of the vehicle and any other penalties assessed by a court of law for the underlying offense.
(13) A motor vehicle subject to seizure and/or impoundment pursuant to any Illinois state
statute, regulation, or law not otherwise provided herein shall also be subject to seizure and
impoundment under this subchapter. Unless otherwise stated for in this section, the owner of record
of such motor vehicle, or its agent, shall not be subject to the imposition of an administrative fee.
The owner of record of such motor vehicle, or its agent, however may still be subject to fees for the
towing and storage of the vehicle and any other penalties assess by a court of law for the underlying
offense.
(14) Where the police make a custodial arrest of the driver of a motor vehicle as the result of
a misdemeanor, traffic violation, or on a warrant where the driver’s vehicle is not considered an
instrumentality of the crime, the driver’s vehicle shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under
this subchapter as an exercise of the police officer’s community caretaking functions if the officer
determines that the driver is unable to remove the vehicle from a public location without continuing
its illegal operation; the location of the vehicle creates a need for the police to protect the vehicle
from theft or vandalization; or the location of the vehicle may jeopardize public safety and the
efficient movement of vehicular traffic. The arrestee may give custody of the vehicle to his or her
unarrested associates, who are present and capable of taking custody of the vehicle, in lieu of
impoundment, provided he or she has the capacity to make that decision.
(Ord. 1822, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 70.082 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT.
(A) Whenever a police officer has reason to believe that a motor vehicle is subject to seizure and
impoundment, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the motor vehicle to a facility
authorized by the village. This subchapter shall not apply if the motor vehicle used in the violation
was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours
after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered.
(B) At the time the vehicle is towed, the village shall notify, or make a reasonable attempt to
notify, the owner, lessee, or person identifying himself or herself as the owner or lessee of the motor
vehicle, or any person who is found to be in control of the motor vehicle at the time of the alleged
offense, if
2018 S-1
36 Swansea - Traffic Code
there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the motor vehicle owner’s or lessee’s right to
an administrative hearing.
(C) The village shall also provide notice that the motor vehicle will remain impounded pending
the completion of an administrative hearing, unless the owner or lessee of the motor vehicle or a
lienholder posts with the village a bond equal to the administrative fee as provided by this subchapter
and pays for all towing and storage charges.
(Ord. 1822, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 70.083 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
(A) Within ten days after a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this subchapter,
the village shall provide a notice of hearing by either personal service or by first class mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner, lessee, and any lienholder of record (collectively, “interested
person”), at the last known address of the interested person as registered with the Secretary of State.
The notice shall state the date, time, and location of the administrative hearing, as well as notify all
interested persons of their right to have the vehicle released to them upon payment of all
administrative fees and towing and storage fees. An initial hearing shall be scheduled and convened
no later than 45 days after the date of the mailing of the notice of hearing.
(B) All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing.
The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible.
The administrative hearings shall be conducted in compliance with 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(b)(4) and by
a hearing officer who is not an employee of the Village of Swansea and is an attorney licensed to
practice law in the state for a minimum of three years. The hearing shall be recorded, and the
hearing officer shall be empowered to administer oaths and to secure by subpoena both the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant books and papers. Persons
appearing at the hearing may be represented by counsel at their own expense. At the conclusion of
the administrative hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision either sustaining or
overruling the vehicle impoundment.
(C) If the administrative hearing officer sustains the basis for the vehicle impoundment, the
hearing officer shall enter a written order requiring any administrative fee posted to secure the
release of the vehicle to be forfeited to the village. Unless the administrative hearing officer
overturns the basis for the vehicle impoundment, no motor vehicle shall be released to the owner,
lessee, or lienholder of record until all administrative fees and towing and storage charges are paid.
All final decisions of the administrative hearing officer shall be subject to review under the
provisions of the Administrative Review Law.
(D) If the administrative hearing officer finds that the village exceeded its authority under this
subchapter or the Illinois Vehicle Code, the village shall be liable to the registered owner or lessee of
the vehicle for the cost of storage fees and reasonable attorney’s fees.
2018 S-1
General Regulations 36A
(E) (1) If a bond in the amount equal to the applicable administrative fee is posted with the
village, the impounded motor vehicle shall be released to the owner of record.
(2) The owner of the motor vehicle shall still be liable to the towing agent for any
applicable towing fees.
(F) (1) If an administrative fee is imposed for a violation of this subchapter, the bond will be
forfeited to the village; however, if the hearing officer overturns the basis for the vehicle
impoundment and no administrative fee is imposed for a violation of this subchapter, the bond will be
returned to the person posting the bond.
(2) All bond money posted pursuant to this subchapter shall be held by the village until the
hearing officer issues a decision or, if there is a review of that decision, until the court of jurisdiction
issues its orders.
(G) All decisions of the Hearing Officer shall be subject to review under the provisions of the
State Administrative Review Law.
(Ord. 1822, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 70.084 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED MOTOR VEHICLE.
(A) An administrative fee imposed pursuant to this subchapter shall constitute a debt due and
owing the village.
(B) A motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this subchapter shall remain impounded until:
(1) The administrative fee is paid to the village and all applicable towing and/or storage
fees are paid to the towing agent and/or storage facility, in which case the owner, lessee, or
lienholder of record shall be given possession of the motor vehicle;
(2) A bond in an amount equal to the applicable administrative fee is posted with the village
and all applicable towing and/or storage fees are paid to the towing agent and/or storage facility, at
which time the motor vehicle will be released to the owner, lessee, or lienholder of record;
(3) The administrative hearing officer overturns the basis for the vehicle impoundment; or
(4) The motor vehicle is deemed abandoned in which case the motor vehicle shall be
disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned motor vehicles.
(Ord. 1822, passed 5-7-2018)
2018 S-1
36B Swansea - Traffic Code
§ 70.085 MOTOR VEHICLE POSSESSION.
Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed or retrieved from the towing facility or storage facility
within 35 days after the administrative hearing officer issues a written decision shall be deemed
abandoned and may be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Article II of Chapter 4 of the
Illinois Motor Vehicle Code. (625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.).
(Ord. 1822, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 70.086 TOWING AGENCY.
(A) The administrative fee imposed by the village for impounded motor vehicles may be in
addition to any fees charged for the towing and storage, or both, of an impounded motor vehicle.
The towing or storage fees, or both, shall be collected by and paid to the person, firm, or entity that
tows and stores the impounded motor vehicle. The towing and/or storage company shall be entitled
to receive a reasonable fee from the owner or person entitled to possession of any such vehicle prior
to the release of the vehicle. The fee shall be to cover the cost of removing said vehicle and, in
addition, any fees for the cost of storage of the vehicle for each day or fraction thereof that said
motor vehicle shall have remained at their storage facility in compliance with their practices.
(B) It shall be the duty of the towing or storage company in possession of the motor vehicle to
obtain documentation issued by the Swansea Police Department confirming compliance with
foregoing requirements and to retain photocopies of that documentation in their files for a period of
not less than six months following release of the motor vehicle. The foregoing information shall be
made available to the authorities of the village for inspection and copying, upon their request, by the
towing or storage company. The towing or storage company is prohibited from releasing any motor
vehicle it may tow within the village until and unless it obtains the documentation noted above.
(Ord. 1822, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 70.087 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.
(A) The administrative fees established by this subchapter are to be paid by the registered
owner, or the agents of the registered owner, of the vehicle involved in the incident leading to
custodial arrest regardless of whether that person was operating the vehicle at the time of the
incident. Vehicles towed by the Swansea Police Department for any reason other than those listed
above shall be released to the registered owner with no administrative fee charged by the village. The
person purporting to be the registered owner must present proof of ownership, current proof of
insurance, and possess a valid driver’s license prior to release.
(B) For the purposes of this subchapter, the administrative fee shall be waived by the village:
2018 S-1
General Regulations 36C
(1) Upon verifiable proof that the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time it was
impounded; or
(2) If the vehicle was operating as a common carrier including, but not limited to taxicabs
or buses, and the violation occurred without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle.
(C) Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any administrative fee imposed under
this subchapter which remains unpaid in whole or in part after the expiration of the deadline for
seeking judicial review under the Administrative Review Law may be enforced in the same manner
as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(D) This subchapter incorporates Sections 4-201 through 4-214.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code
(625 ILCS 5/4-201 through 4-214.1) to the extent that they are consistent. Where a provision of this
subchapter differs from Sections 4-201 through 4-214.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, the provisions
of this subchapter shall be controlling. Enforcement and administration of this subchapter shall be
consistent with the policies and procedures of Section 4-201 through 4-215 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code (625 ILCS 5/4-201 through 4-215) to the extent that said policies and procedures do not
directly conflict with the provisions of this subchapter.
(E) In the event a judgment of “Not Guilty” is entered by a court of competent jurisdiction on
all underlying charges that could have resulted in the impoundment of a motor vehicle, then within
30 days of presentation of a certified copy of said judgment to the village, any administrative fees or
posted bonds obtained by the village shall be refunded to the paying party.
(Ord. 1822, passed 5-7-2018)
ABANDONED VEHICLES
§ 70.100 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings ascribed to them respectively.
ABANDONED VEHICLE. AH motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of disrepair,
rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition, or any motor vehicle or other vehicle
that has not been moved or used for seven consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
ANTIQUE VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle or other vehicle 25 years of age or older.
HIGHWAY. Any street, alley, public way within this municipality.
2018 S-1
36D Swansea - Traffic Code
MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but not limited to,
automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles and motor scooters.
OWNER OF RECORD. The record title holder(s) of the motor vehicle as registered with the
Secretary of State, State of Illinois; or if not registered in Illinois, the particular state where the
motor vehicle is registered.
§ 70.101 ABANDONMENT.
(A) Highway. The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on any highway in this
municipality is unlawful and subject to penalties as set forth herein this subchapter.
(B) Private property. The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on private or public
property, other than a highway, in view of the general public, anywhere in this municipality is
unlawful except on property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned vehicle.
2018 S-1
General Regulations 37
(C) Owner's property.
(1) Removal. A vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property, may be
authorized for removal by or upon the order of the Chief of Police of the municipality after a waiting
period of seven days or more has expired. Such vehicle may be removed immediately if determined
to be a hazardous dilapidated motor vehicle under § 11-40-3.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/11-40-3.1).
(2) Violations; administrative hearing. A violation of divisions (A), (B), or (C) of this
section is subject to penalties as set forth herein this subchapter.
(a) Within ten days after a motor vehicle is removed pursuant to division (C), the
village shall notify by personal service or by first class mail to the owner of record of the owner's
right to a hearing, along with the date, time and location of the hearing, to challenge whether a
violation of this subchapter has occurred. The hearing date must be scheduled and convened no later
than 45 days after the mailing of the notice, or issuance of the notice of hearing. All interested
persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The formal rules of
evidence shall not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible.
(b) If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of the
evidence that the motor vehicle was abandoned in violation of this subchapter, then the hearing
officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record of the motor vehicle liable to the municipality
for violating this chapter and subject to a penalty of a fine of up to $500.
(c) If, after the hearing, the hearing officer does not determine by a preponderance of
the evidence that the motor vehicle was abandoned in such a violation, the hearing officer shall enter
an order finding for the owner and for the return of the motor vehicle.
(d) (1) If owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the owner of record shall be
deemed to have waived his or her right to a hearing.
(2) If the owner of record pays such administrative fee and the motor vehicle is
returned to the owner, no default order need be entered if the owner was informed of his or her right
to a hearing, in which case an order of liability shall be deemed to have been made when the
municipality receives the written waiver.
(e) (1) If a bond in the amount equal to the applicable administrative fee is posted with
the Police Department, the towed motor vehicle shall be released to the owner of record.
(2) The owner of the motor vehicle shall still be liable to the towing agent for any
applicable towing fees.
38 Swansea - Traffic Code
(f) (1) If an administrative fee is imposed for a violation of this subchapter, the bond
will be forfeited to the municipality; however, if a violation of this subchapter is not proven by
preponderance of the evidence, the bond will be returned to the person posting the bond.
(2) All bond money posted pursuant to this subchapter shall be held by the
municipality until the hearing officer issues a decision or, if there is a judicial review, until the court
of jurisdiction issues its orders.
(g) All decisions of the hearing officer shall be subject to review under the provisions
of the State Administrative Review Law.
§ 70.102 POSSESSION OF VEHICLE BY OTHER PARTY; TOWING.
When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle comes into the temporary possession or
custody of a person in this municipality, not the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately
notify the Police Department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the municipality.
Upon receipt of such notification, the Chief of Police, or his designated representative, will authorize
a towing service to remove and take possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle.
The towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain a record of the tow
as set forth in Section 1§ 70.105 of this chapter for law enforcement agencies, until the vehicle is
claimed by the owner or any other person legally entitled to possession thereof, or until it is disposed
of as provided in this chapter.
(625 ILCS 5/4-202)
§ 70.103 REMOVAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES OR OTHER VEHICLES; TOWING OR
HAULING AWAY.
(A) When a vehicle is abandoned, or left unattended, on a toll highway, interstate highway, or
expressway for two hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized by the Police
Department.
(B) When a vehicle is abandoned or left unattended on a highway in an urban district ten hours
or more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized by the Police Department.
(C) When a vehicle is abandoned, or left unattended on a highway other than a toll highway,
interstate highway, or expressway, outside of an urban district for 24 hours or more, its removal by a
towing service may be authorized by the Police Department.
(D) When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled vehicle is creating
a traffic hazard because of its position in relation to the highway, or its physical appearance is
causing the impeding of traffic, its immediate removal from the highway or private property adjacent
to the highway by a towing service may be authorized by the Police Department.
General Regulations 39
(E) Whenever a peace officer reasonably believes that a person under arrest for a violation of §
11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-501) or § 76.02 of this motor vehicle code is
likely, upon release, to commit a subsequent violation of either of the aforementioned sections, the
arresting officer shall have the vehicle which the person was operating at the time of the arrest
impounded for a period of not more than 12 hours after the time of arrest. However, such vehicle
may be released by the arresting law enforcement agency prior to the end of the impoundment period
if:
(1) The vehicle was not owned by the person under arrest, and the lawful owner requesting
such release possesses a valid operator's license, proof of ownership, and would not, as determined
by the arresting law enforcement agency, indicate a lack of ability to operate a motor vehicle in a
safe manner, or who would otherwise, by operating such motor vehicle, be in violation of this motor
vehicle code or the Illinois Vehicle Code; or
(2) The vehicle is owned by the person under arrest, and the person under arrest gives
permission to another person to operate such vehicle, provided however, that the other person
possesses a valid operator's license and would not, as determined by the arresting Police Department,
indicate a lack of ability to operate a motor vehicle in a safe manner or who would otherwise, by
operating such motor vehicle, be in violation of this traffic code.
(F) Whenever a registered owner of a vehicle is taken into custody for operating the vehicle in
violation of § 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-501) or § 76.02 of this motor
vehicle code, or § 6-303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, a law enforcement officer may have the vehicle
immediately impounded for a period not less than:
(1) Twenty-four hours for a second violation of § 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625
ILCS 5/11-501) or a similar provision of a local ordinance or § 6-303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or
a combination of these offenses; or
(2) Forty-eight hours for a third violation of § 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625
ILCS 5/11-501) or a similar provision of a local ordinance or § 6-303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or
a combination of these offenses.
(G) The vehicle may be released sooner if the vehicle is owned by the person under arrest and
the person under arrest gives permission to another person to operate the vehicle and that other
person possesses a valid operator's license and would not, as determined by the arresting law
enforcement agency, indicate a lack of ability to operate a motor vehicle in a safe manner or would
otherwise, by operating the motor vehicle, be in violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code or this motor
vehicle code.
(H) Except as provided in this code, the owner or lessor of privately owned real property within
this Village, or any person authorized by such owner or lessor, or any law enforcement agency in the
case of publicly owned real property may cause any motor vehicle abandoned or left unattended upon
such property without permission to be removed by a towing service without liability for the costs of
removal, transportation or storage or damage caused by such removal, transportation or storage. The
towing or
40 Swansea - Traffic Code
removal of any vehicle from private property without the consent of the registered owner or other
legally authorized person in control of the vehicle is subject to compliance with the following
conditions and restrictions:
(1) Any towed or removed vehicle must be stored at the site of the towing service's place
of business. The site must be open during business hours, and for the purpose of redemption of
vehicles, during the time that the person or firm towing such vehicle is open for towing purposes.
(2) The towing service shall within 30 minutes of completion of such towing or removal,
notify the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction of such towing or removal, and the make,
model, color and license plate number of the vehicle, and shall obtain and record the name of the
person at the law enforcement agency to whom such information was reported.
(3) If the registered owner or legally authorized person entitled to possession of the vehicle
shall arrive at the scene prior to actual removal or towing of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be
disconnected from the tow truck and that person shall be allowed to remove the vehicle without
interference, upon the payment of a reasonable service fee of not more than one half the posted rate
of the towing service as provided in division (H)(6), below, for which a receipt shall be given.
(4) The rebate or payment of money or any other valuable consideration from the towing
service or its owners, managers or employees to the owners or operators of the premises from which
the vehicles are towed or removed, for the privilege of removing or towing those vehicles, is
prohibited. Any individual who violates this paragraph shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
(5) Except for property appurtenant to and obviously a part of a single-family residence,
and except for instances where notice is personally given to the owner or other legally authorized
person in control of the vehicle that the area in which that vehicle is parked is reserved or otherwise
unavailable to unauthorized vehicles and they are subject to being removed at the owner or operator's
expense, any property owner or lessor, prior to towing or removing any vehicle from private
property without the consent of the owner or other legally authorized person in control of that
vehicle, must post a notice meeting the following requirements:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in (H)(5)(b), below, the notice must be prominently
placed at each driveway access or curb cut allowing vehicular access to the property within five feet
from the public right-of-way line. If there are no curbs or access barriers, the sign must be posted
not less than one sign each one hundred feet of lot frontage.
(b) In a municipality with a population of less than 250,000, as an alternative to the
requirement of division (H)(5)(a), above, the notice for a parking lot contained within property used
solely for a two-family, three-family, or four-family residence may be prominently placed at the
perimeter of the parking lot, in a position where the notice is visible to the occupants of vehicles
entering the lot.
(c) The notice must indicate clearly, in not less than two-inch high light-reflective
letters on a contrasting background, that unauthorized vehicles will be towed away at the owner's
expense.
General Regulations 41
(d) The notice must also provide the name and current telephone number of the towing
service towing or removing the vehicle.
(e) The sign structure containing the required notices must be permanently installed
with the bottom of the sign not less than four feet above ground level, and must be continuously
maintained on the property for not less than 24 hours prior to the towing or removing of any vehicle.
(6) Any towing service that tows or removes vehicles and proposes to require the owner,
operator, or person in control of the vehicle to pay the costs of towing and storage prior to
redemption of the vehicle must file and keep on record with the local law enforcement agency a
complete copy of the current rates to be charged for such services, and post at the storage site an
identical rate schedule and any written contracts with property owners, lessors, or persons in control
of property which authorize them to remove vehicles as provided in this section. The towing and
storage charges, however, shall not exceed the maximum allowed by the Illinois Commerce
Commission under § 18a-200.
(7) No person shall engage in the removal of vehicles from private property as described in
this section without filing a notice of intent in each community where he intends to do such removal,
and such notice shall be filed at least seven days before commencing such towing.
(8) No removal of a vehicle from private property shall be done except upon express
written instructions of the owners or persons in charge of the private property upon which the vehicle
is said to be trespassing.
(9) Vehicle entry for the purpose of removal shall be allowed with reasonable care on the
part of the person or firm towing the vehicle. Such person or firm shall be liable for any damages
occasioned to the vehicle if such entry is not in accordance with the standards of reasonable care.
(10) Except as authorized by a law enforcement officer, no towing service shall engage in
the removal of a commercial motor vehicle that requires a commercial driver's license to operate by
operating the vehicle under its own power on a highway.
(11) When a vehicle has been towed or removed pursuant to this section, it must be released
to its owner or custodian within one-half hour after requested, if such request is made during
business hours. Any vehicle owner or custodian or agent shall have the right to inspect the vehicle
before accepting its return, and no release or waiver of any kind which would release the towing
service from liability for damages incurred during the towing and storage may be required from any
vehicle owner or other legally authorized person as a condition of release of the vehicle. A detailed,
signed receipt showing the legal name of the towing service must be given to the person paying
towing or storage charges at the time of payment, whether requested or not.
(a) This § 70.103 shall not apply to law enforcement, firefighting, rescue, ambulance,
or other emergency vehicles which are marked as such or to property owned by any governmental
entity.
42 Swansea - Traffic Code
(b) When an authorized person improperly causes a motor vehicle to be removed, such
person shall be liable to the owner or lessee of the vehicle for the cost or removal, transportation and
storage, any damages resulting from the removal, transportation and storage, attorney's fee and court
costs.
(c) Any towing or storage charges accrued shall be payable by the use of any major
credit card, in addition to being payable in cash.
(12) (a) Towing companies shall also provide insurance coverage for areas where vehicles
towed under the provisions of this chapter will be impounded or otherwise stored, and shall
adequately cover loss by fire, theft or other risks.
(b) Any person who fails to comply with the conditions and restrictions of division (H)
set forth above shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500.
(I) (1) When a vehicle is determined to be a hazardous dilapidated motor vehicle pursuant to §
11-40-3.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code or § 5-12002.1 of the Counties Code, its removal and
impoundment by a towing service may be authorized by a law enforcement agency with appropriate
jurisdiction.
(2) When a vehicle removal from either public or private property is authorized by a law
enforcement agency, the owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for all towing and storage charges.
(3) Vehicles removed from public or private property and stored by a commercial vehicle
relocator or any other towing service authorized by a law enforcement agency in compliance with
this section and § 70.101, or at the request of the vehicle owner or operator, shall be subject to a
possessor lien for services pursuant to the Labor and Storage Lien (Small Amount) Act. The
provisions of § 1 of that Act relating to notice and implied consent shall be deemed satisfied by
compliance with § 18a-302 and subsection (6) of § 18a-300 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS
5/18A-300; 5/18A-302). In no event shall such lien be greater than the rate or rates established in
accordance with subsection (6) of § 18a-200 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/18A-200(6)).
In no event shall such lien be increased or altered to reflect any charge for services or materials
rendered in addition to those authorized by this code or the Illinois Vehicle Code. Every such lien
shall be payable by use of any major credit card, in addition to being payable in cash.
(4) Any personal property belonging to the vehicle owner in a vehicle subject to a lien
under this division (I) shall likewise be subject to that lien, excepting only: child restraint systems as
defined in § 4 of the Child Passenger Protection Act and other child booster seats; eyeglasses; food;
medicine; perishable property; any operator's licenses; any cash, credit cards, or checks or
checkbooks; any wallet, purse, or other property containing any operator's license or other
identifying documents or materials, cash, credit cards, checks, or checkbooks; and any personal
property belonging to a person other than the vehicle owner if that person provides adequate proof
that the personal property belongs to that
General Regulations 43
person. The spouse, child, mother, father, brother, or sister of the vehicle owner may claim personal
property excepted under this division (I)(4) if the person claiming the personal property provides the
commercial vehicle relocator or towing service with the authorization of the vehicle owner.
(5) This division (I)(5) applies only in the case of a vehicle that is towed as a result of being
involved in an accident. In addition to the personal property excepted under division (I)(4), all other
personal property in a vehicle subject to a lien under this division (I) is exempt from that lien and
may be claimed by the vehicle owner if the vehicle owner provides the commercial vehicle relocator
or towing service with proof that the vehicle owner has an insurance policy covering towing and
storage fees. The spouse, child, mother, father, brother, or sister of the vehicle owner may claim
personal property in a vehicle subject to a lien under this division (I) if the person claiming the
personal property provides the commercial vehicle relocator or towing service with the authorization
of the vehicle owner and proof that the vehicle owner has an insurance policy covering towing and
storage fees. The regulation of liens on personal property and exceptions to those liens in the case of
vehicles towed as a result of being involved in an accident are exclusive powers and functions of the
State. A home rule unit may not regulate liens on personal property and exceptions to those liens in
the case of vehicles towed as a result of being involved in an accident. This division (I)(5) is a denial
and limitation of home rule powers and functions under subsection (h) of § 6 of Article VII of the
Illinois Constitution.
(6) No lien under this division (I) shall: exceed $2,000 in its total amount; or be increased
or altered to reflect any charge for services or materials rendered in addition to those authorized by
this act.
(J) Whenever a peace officer issues a citation to a driver for a violation of subsection (a) of §
11-506 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-506(a)) or § 76.05 of this code, the arresting
officer may have the vehicle which the person was operating at the time of the arrest impounded for
a period of five days after the time of arrest. An impounding agency shall release a motor vehicle
impounded under this division (J) to the registered owner of the vehicle under any of the following
circumstances:
(1) If the vehicle is a stolen vehicle;
(2) If the person ticketed for a violation of subsection (a) of § 11-506 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code (625 ILCS 5/11-506(a)) or § 76.05 of this code was not authorized by the registered owner of
the vehicle to operate the vehicle at the time of the violation;
(3) If the registered owner of the vehicle was neither the driver nor a passenger in the
vehicle at the time of the violation or was unaware that the driver was using the vehicle to engage in
street racing;
(4) If the legal owner or registered owner of the vehicle is a rental car agency; or
(5) If, prior to the expiration of the impoundment period specified above, the citation is
dismissed or the defendant is found not guilty of the offense.
44 Swansea - Traffic Code
(K) Except for vehicles exempted under subsection (b) of § 7-601 of the Illinois Vehicle Code
(625 ILCS 5/7-601(b)), whenever a law enforcement officer issues a citation to a driver for a
violation of § 3-707 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/3-707), and the driver has a prior
conviction for a violation of § 3-707 of that Code in the past 12 months, the arresting officer shall
authorize the removal and impoundment of the vehicle by a towing service.
(625 ILCS 5/4-203)
§ 70.104 POLICE RESPONSIBILITIES.
When a vehicle is authorized to be towed away as provided in §§ 70.102 and 70.104 of this
code:
(A) The authorization, any hold order, and any release shall be in writing, or confirmed in
writing, with a copy given to the towing service.
(B) The police headquarters or office of the law officer authorizing the towing shall keep and
maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's trade
name, manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number, license plate year and
number and registration sticker year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also
include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing and the
name of the officer authorizing the tow.
(C) The owner, operator, or other legally entitled person shall be responsible to the towing
service for payment of applicable removal, towing, storage, and processing charges and collection
costs associated with a vehicle towed or held under order or authorization of a law enforcement
agency. If a vehicle towed or held under order or authorization of a law enforcement agency is seized
by the ordering or authorizing agency or any other law enforcement or governmental agency and
sold, any unpaid removal, towing, storage, and processing charges and collection costs shall be paid
to the towing service from the proceeds of the sale. If applicable law provides that the proceeds are
to be paid into the treasury of the appropriate civil jurisdiction, then any unpaid removal, towing,
storage, and processing charges and collection costs shall be paid to the towing service from the
treasury of the civil jurisdiction. That payment shall not, however, exceed the amount of proceeds
from the sale, with the balance to be paid by the owner, operator, or other legally entitled person.
(D) Upon delivery of a written release order to the towing service, a vehicle subject to a hold
order shall be released to the owner, operator, or other legally entitled person upon proof of
ownership or other entitlement and upon payment of applicable removal, towing, storage, and
processing charges and collection costs.
General Regulations 45
§ 70.105 UNKNOWN OWNER.
(A) When a law enforcement agency authorizing the impounding of a vehicle does not know the
identity of the registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled person, that law enforcement
agency will cause the vehicle registration records of the State of Illinois to be searched by the
Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining the required ownership information.
(B) The law enforcement agency authorizing the impounding of a vehicle will cause the stolen
motor vehicle files of the State Police to be searched by a directed communication to the State Police
for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the State Police files are searched with
negative results, the information contained in the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) files
will be searched by the State Police. The information determined from these record searches will be
returned to the requesting law enforcement agency for that agency's use in sending a notification by
certified mail to the registered owner, lienholder and other legally entitled persons advising where
the vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be made and setting forth public sale information.
Notification shall be sent no later than ten business days after the date the law enforcement agency
impounds or authorizes the impounding of a vehicle, provided that if the law enforcement agency is
unable to determine the identity of the registered owner, lienholder or other person legally entitled to
ownership of the impounded vehicle within a ten business-day period after impoundment, then
notification shall be sent no later than two days after the date the identity of the registered owner,
lienholder or other person legally entitled to ownership of the impounded vehicle is determined.
Exceptions to a notification by certified mail to the registered owner, lienholder and other legally
entitled persons are set forth in § 70.108 of this Code.
(C) When ownership information is needed for a towing service to give notification as required
under this Code, the towing service may cause the vehicle registration records of the State of Illinois
to be searched by the Secretary of State, and in such case, the towing service also shall give notice to
all lienholders of record within the time period required for such other notices.
(1) The written request of a towing service, in the form and containing the information
prescribed by the Secretary of State by rule, may be transmitted to the Secretary of State in person,
by U.S. mail or other delivery service, by facsimile transmission, or by other means the Secretary of
State deems acceptable.
(2) The Secretary of State shall provide the required information, or a statement that the
information was not found in the vehicle registration records of the State, by U.S. mail or other
delivery service, facsimile transmission, as requested by the towing service, or by other means
acceptable to the Secretary of State.
(D) The Secretary of State may prescribe standards and procedures for submission of requests
for record searches and replies via computer link.
46 Swansea - Traffic Code
(E) Fees for services provided under this section shall be in amounts prescribed by the Secretary
of State under § 3-821.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/3-821.1). Payment may be made
by the towing service using cash, any commonly accepted credit card, or any other means of
payment deemed acceptable by the Secretary of State.
(625 ILCS 5/4-205)
§ 70.106 STATE POLICE INFORMATION.
When the registered owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled to the possession of a
vehicle cannot be identified from the registration files of the state or from the registration files of a
foreign state, if applicable, the Police Department shall notify the Illinois State Police, for the
purpose of identifying the vehicle owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of the
vehicle. The information obtained by the State Police will be immediately forwarded to the Police
Department having custody of the vehicle for notification purposes as set forth in this traffic code.
(625 ILCS 5/4-206)
§ 70.107 PUBLIC SALE; RECLAMATION.
At any time before a vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this
chapter, the owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled to its possession may reclaim the
vehicle by presenting to the Police Department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession
of the vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner, lienholder, or other person under this
section until all towing, storage, and processing charges have been paid.
(625 ILCS 5/4-207)
§ 70.108 DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
(A) New car.
(1) When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle seven years of age or newer
remains unclaimed by the registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled persons for a period
of 30 days after notice has been given as provided in §§ 70.105 and 70.106 of this Code, the Police
Department or towing service having possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public
auction to a person licensed as an automotive parts recycler, rebuilder, or scrap processor under
Chapter 5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or the towing operator which towed the vehicle. Notice of the
time and place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten days prior to the sale
on the premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At least ten days prior to the sale, the law
enforcement agency where the vehicle is impounded, or the towing service where the vehicle is
impounded, shall cause a notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by certified mail to the
registered owner, lienholder, or other legally
General Regulations 47
entitled persons. Notice as provided in §§ 70.105 and 70.106 of this code and as provided in this
division (A) shall state the time and place of sale and shall contain a complete description of the
vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/4-208(b))
(2) When the identity of the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled persons
of an abandoned, lost, or unclaimed vehicle of seven years of age or newer cannot be determined by
any means provided for in this chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided in this chapter without
notice to any person whose identity cannot be determined.
(625 ILCS 5/4-209(a))
(B) Old car. When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven years of age is impounded as
specified by this chapter, or when any such vehicle is towed at the request or with the consent of the
owner or operator and is subsequently abandoned, it will be kept in custody or storage for a
minimum of ten days for the purpose of determining the identity of the registered owner, lienholder,
or other legally entitled persons and contacting the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally
entitled persons by the U.S. Mail, public service, or in person for a determination of disposition;
and, an examination of the State Police stolen vehicle files for theft and wanted information. At the
expiration of the ten-day period, without the benefit of disposition information being received from
the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled persons, the vehicle may be disposed of in
either of the following ways:
(1) The Police Department will authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk or salvage.
(2) The towing service may sell the vehicle in the manner provided in § 70.108 of this
traffic code, provided that this division (B)(2) shall not apply to vehicles towed by order or
authorization of the Police Department.
(625 ILCS 5/4-209(b), 5/4-209(b)(l), 5/4-209(b)(2))
(C) Antique vehicle. A vehicle classified as an antique vehicle, expanded-use antique vehicle,
custom vehicle, or street rod may however be sold to a person desiring to restore it.
(625 ILCS 5/4-209(c))
(D) Dealer plates. If an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed vehicle displays dealer plates,
notice under this Section shall be sent to both the dealer and the registered owner, lienholder, or
other legally entitled persons.
(625 ILCS 5/4-208(c))
(E) Certified notice returned. In those instances where the certified notification specified in §§
70.105 and 70.106 of this traffic code has been returned by the postal authorities to the law
enforcement agency or towing service, the sending of a second certified notice will not be required.
(625 ILCS 5/4-208, 5/4-209)
48 Swansea - Traffic Code
§ 70.109 POLICE RECORD FOR DISPOSED VEHICLE.
When a vehicle in the custody of the Police Department is reclaimed by the registered owner,
lienholder, or other legally entitled person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise
disposed of as provided in this traffic code, a report of the transaction will be maintained by the
Police Department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal.
(625 ILCS 5/4-210)
§ 70.110 PUBLIC SALE PROCEEDS.
(A) When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of this municipality is authorized to be
towed away by the Chief of Police and disposed of as set forth in this traffic code, the proceeds of
the public sale or disposition after the deduction of towing, storage and processing charges shall be
deposited in the municipal treasury.
(B) The provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles disposed of or sold at public sale
under subsection (k) of § 4-107 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(625 ILCS 5/4-211(a), 5/4-211(c))
§ 70.111 LIABILITY OF VILLAGE, OFFICERS, AGENCIES, AND TOWING SERVICES.
(A) A law enforcement officer or agency, or a towing service owner, operator, or employee
shall not be held to answer to, or be liable for, damages in any action brought by the registered
owner, former registered owner, or his legal representative, lienholder, or any other person legally
entitled to the possession of a vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as
provided by this traffic code.
(B) A towing service, and any of its officers or employees, that removes or tows a vehicle as a
result of being directed to do so by a law enforcement officer or agency or a department of municipal
government or its officers or employees shall not be held to answer or be liable for loss of or
damages to any real or personal property that occurs in the course of the removal or towing of a
vehicle or its contents (1) on a limited access highway in a designated Incident Management Program
that uses fast lane clearance techniques as defined by the Department of Transportation or (2) at the
direction of a peace officer, a highway authority official, or a representative of local authorities,
under §§ 76.08 and 76.09 of this code.
(65 ILCS 5/11-40-3 and 625 ILCS 5/4-213)
General Regulations 49
§ 70.112 AUTHORIZATION OF BOND FEES.
The village may impose a fee up to $20 for bail processing against any person arrested for
violating a bailable municipal ordinance or a state or federal law. Such bond fee shall not be retained
by the police department, but should instead be ultimately deposited in the village's general fund.
(65 ILCS 5/1-2-12.1)
§ 70.999 PENALTY.
(A) Violations.
(1) Arrests; bail. Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of this title shall be
released upon proper bail being furnished as required by law.
(2) Compromise of parking violations.
(a) Any person accused of a violation of a law prohibiting parking a vehicle in a
designated area, or restricting the length of time a vehicle maybe there parked, or parking in a
metered area without putting a coin in the meter to cover the required time, may settle and
compromise the claim against him or her for such illegal parking by paying to the village $10 for
each such offense. Such payment may be made at the police station, and a receipt shall be issued for
all money so received, and such money shall be promptly turned over to the Village Clerk to be
credited to the general fund. The members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to refrain
from instituting a prosecution for the alleged offense involved once the same has been compromised.
(b) Provided that, this section shall not apply to persons parking a vehicle so as to
obstruct the entrance or exit of any place where Police or Fire Department apparatus or other
emergency equipment is kept or housed, or so as to block an emergency entrance to a hospital. Nor
shall this section apply to any person charged with parking a vehicle so as to entirely obstruct traffic
in any street or alley or parking in such a way as to reduce traffic on an arterial street to one-way
traffic only; nor to any person who refuses to move a vehicle illegally parked at the request of any
member of the Police Department.
(3) Prima facie proof. The fact that an automobile which is illegally parked or operated is
registered in the name of the person charged with a violation of this title shall be considered prima
facie proof that such person was in control of the automobile at the time of such violation.
50 Swansea - Traffic Code
(B) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided by ordinance or appropriate statutory penalty, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $750 for each and every violation thereof, and every day the violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(1) Traffic violations. Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for which another
penalty is not already otherwise provided by ordinance or by appropriate statutory penalty as
generally set forth in 625 ILCS 5/16-101 et seq., shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not
less than $50, nor more than $750, for each and every violation thereof.
(2) Parking violations. Any person accused of a violation of any provision of this traffic
code prohibiting parking a vehicle in a designated area, or restricting the length of time a vehicle
may be there parked, or parking in a metered area without putting a coin in the meter to cover the
required time, may settle and compromise the claim against him or her for the illegal parking by
paying to the village $3 for each such offense if paid within five days, or $10 if paid within 21 days.
This payment may be made at the police station, a receipt shall be issued for all money so received,
and the money shall be promptly turned over to the Village Treasurer to be credited to the general
fund. The members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to refrain from instituting a
prosecution for the alleged offense involved. This section shall not apply to persons parking a vehicle
so as to obstruct the entrance or exit of any place where Police or Fire Department apparatus or other
emergency equipment is kept or housed, or so as to block an emergency entrance in a hospital; nor
shall this section apply to any person charged with parking a vehicle so as to entirely obstruct traffic
in any street or alley, or parking in such a way as to reduce traffic on an arterial street to one-way
traffic only; nor to any person who refuses to move a vehicle illegally parked at the request of any
member of the Police Department.
(3) Obedience to police officers. Any person convicted of violating § 70.015 is guilty of a
petty offense and shall be subject to a mandatory fine of $150.
(4) Interference with traffic-control devices. Every person who is convicted of a violation of
§ 70.036 shall be punished by a fine of at least $250 in addition to any other penalties which may be
imposed.
(5) Damage to highways, appurtenances and structures. Every person who is convicted of a
violation of § 70.055 shall be punished by a fine of at least $250 in addition to any other penalty
which may be imposed.
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-203, 625 ILCS 5/11-311 and 625 ILCS 5/11-312
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC-CONTROL REGULATIONS
Section
Speed Restrictions
71.001 Speed limits
71.002 Special speed limits while passing schools
71.003 Maximum attainable operating speed
71.004 Minimum speed regulation
Turning and Starting; Signals
71.015 Required position and method of turning at intersections
71.016 Limitations on U-turns
71.017 Starting parked vehicle
71.018 When signal required
71.019 Signal by hand and arm or signal device
71.020 Method of giving hand and arm signals
Overtaking and Passing
71.035 Driving on right side of roadway; exceptions
71.036 Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions
71.037 Overtaking vehicles on the left
71.038 When overtaking on the right is permitted
71.039 Limitations on overtaking on the left
71.040 Meeting or overtaking school bus
71.041 One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands
71.042 No passing zones
71.043 Driving on roadways laned for traffic
Right-of-Way
71.060 Vehicles approaching or entering the intersection
71.061 Vehicle turning left
71.062 Vehicles entering stop crosswalk
71.063 Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection
51
52 Swansea - Traffic Code
71.064 Merging traffic
71.065 Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway
71.066 Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles
71.067 Funeral processions
Special Stops Required
71.080 Obedience to signal indicating approach of train or railroad track equipment
71.081 Certain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings
71.082 Emerging from alley, building, private road or driveway
71.083 Stop when traffic obstructed
Prohibitions
71.095 Backing
71.096 Following vehicle too closely
71.097 Obstruction of driver's view or driving mechanism
71.098 Opening vehicle doors
71.099 Coasting
71.100 Following fire apparatus; driving over fire hose
71.101 Driving upon sidewalk
71.102 Use of roller skates, coasters or similar devices
71.103 Putting glass or other hazardous materials on highway prohibited
71.104 Obstructing person in highways
71.105 Farm tractor operation
71.106 Driving on control led-access highways
71.107 Encroachments
71.108 Unattended draft animals
71.109 Riding on running boards
71.110 Processions
71.111 Trucks
Parades
71.125 Definitions
71.126 Permit required
71.127 Application for permit
71.128 Standards for issuance of permit
71.129 Notice of rejection of permit application
71.130 Appeal procedure when permit denied
71.131 Alternative permit
71.132 Notice to village and other officials when permit issued
71.133 Contents of permit
Traffic-Control Regulations 53
71.134 Duties of permittee
71.135 Public content during parades
71.136 Revocation of permit
Street Designations
71.150 Signs
71.151 Through streets
71.152 Yield streets
71.153 Closed streets
71.999 Penalty
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
§ 71.001 SPEED LIMITS.
(A) No vehicle may be driven upon any highway of this village at a speed which is greater than
is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic conditions and the use of the highway, or endangers
the safety of any person or property. The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the
applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when
approaching and crossing an intersection, approaching and going around a curve, when approaching
a hill crest, when traveling upon any nan-ow or winding roadway, or when special hazard exists with
respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. Speed must be
decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or entering the
highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
(B) No person may drive a vehicle upon any highway of this village at a speed which is greater
than the applicable statutory maximum speed limit established by divisions (C) through (F) of this
section, by 625 ILCS 5/11-605 or by a regulation or ordinance made under this chapter.
(C) Unless some other speed restriction is established under this chapter, the maximum speed
limit in an urban district for all vehicles is:
(1) Twenty-five miles per hour; and
(2) Fifteen miles per hour in an alley.
(D) Unless some other speed restriction is established under this chapter, the maximum speed
limit outside an urban district for any vehicle is 65 miles per hour for all highways under the
jurisdiction of the Illinois State Toll Highway Authority and for all or part of highways that are
designated by the
54 Swansea - Traffic Code
Department, have at least four lanes of traffic, and have a separation between the roadways moving
in opposite directions and 55 miles per hour for all other highways, roads and streets.
(E) Unless some lesser speed restriction is established under this chapter, the maximum speed
limit outside an urban district for a second division vehicle designed or used for the carrying of a
gross weight of 8,001 pounds or more (including the weight of the vehicle and maximum load) is 55
miles per hour.
(F) Unless some other speed restriction is established under this chapter, the maximum speed
limit outside an urban district for a bus is:
(1) Sixty-five miles per hour upon any highway which has at least four lanes of traffic and
of which the roadways for traffic moving in opposite directions are separated by a strip of ground
which is not surfaced or suitable for vehicular traffic, except that the maximum speed limit for a bus
on all highways, roads, or streets not under the jurisdiction of the Department or the Illinois State
Toil Highway Authority is 55 miles per hour; and
(2) Fifty-five miles per hour on any other highway.
Penalty, see § 71.999
Statutory reference:
Authority to regulate speed, see 65 ILCS 5/11-40-1 and 625 ILCS 5/11-604
Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-601
§ 71.002 SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS WHILE PASSING SCHOOLS.
(A) School zones.
(1) For the purpose of this section, a SCHOOL DAY shall begin at 7:00 a.m. and shall
conclude at 4:00 p.m.
(2) For the purpose of this section, SCHOOL means the following entities:
(a) A public or private primary or secondary school;
(b) A primary or secondary school operated by a religious institution; and/or
(c) A public, private or religious nursery school.
(3) On a school day when school children are present and so close thereto that a potential
hazard exists because of the close proximity of the motorized traffic, no person shall drive a motor
vehicle at a speed in excess of 20 mph while passing a school zone, or while traveling on a roadway
on public school property or upon any public thoroughfare where children pass going to and from
school.
Traffic-Control Regulations 55
(4) This section shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs are posted upon streets and
maintained by the village wherein the school zone is located. The signs shall give proper due warning
that a school zone is being approached, and shall indicate the school zone and the maximum speed
limit in effect during school days when school children are present. Nothing in this chapter shall
prohibit the use of electronic speed-detecting devices within 500 feet of signs within a special school
speed zone indicating the zone, as defined in this section, nor shall evidence obtained thereby be
inadmissible in any prosecution for speed, provided the use of the device shall apply only to the
enforcement of the speed limit in the special school speed zone.
(625 ILCS 5/11-605(a))
(5) Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of electronic speed-detecting devices
within 500 feet of signs within a special school speed zone indicating the zone, as defined in this
section, nor shall evidence obtained thereby be inadmissible in any prosecution for speeding,
provided the use of the device shall apply only to the enforcement of the speed limit in the special
school speed zone.
(625 ILCS 5/11-605(c))
(B) Special limit while traveling through highway construction or maintenance speed zones.
(1) (a) A person may not operate a motor vehicle in a construction or maintenance speed
zone at a speed in excess of the posted speed limit when workers are present.
(b) A person may not operate a motor vehicle in a construction or maintenance speed
zone at a speed in excess of the posted speed limit when workers are not present.
(2) Nothing in this chapter prohibits the use of electronic speed-detecting devices within
500 feet of signs within a construction or maintenance speed zone indicating the zone, as defined in
this section, nor shall evidence obtained by use of those devices be inadmissible in any prosecution
for speeding, provided the use of the device shall apply only to the enforcement of the speed limit in
the construction or maintenance speed zone.
(3) (a) As used in this section, a CONSTRUCTION or MAINTENANCE SPEED ZONE
is an area in which the Department, toll highway authority or a local agency has posted signage
advising drivers that a construction or maintenance speed zone is being approached, or in which the
Department, authority, or local agency has posted a lower speed limit with a highway construction or
maintenance speed zone special speed limit sign after determining that the preexisting established
speed limit through a highway construction or maintenance project is greater than is reasonable or
safe with respect to the conditions expected to exist in the construction or maintenance speed zone.
(b) If it is determined that the preexisting established speed limit is safe with respect to
the conditions expected to exist in the construction or maintenance speed zone, additional speed limit
signs which conform to the requirements of this division (B)(3) shall be posted.
(c) Highway construction or maintenance speed zone special speed limit signs shall be
of a design approved by the Department. The signs must give proper due warning that a construction
or
56 Swansea - Traffic Code
maintenance speed zone is being approached and must indicate the maximum speed limit in effect.
The signs must also state the amount of the minimum fine for a violation.
(625 ILCS 5/11-605.1)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.003 MAXIMUM ATTAINABLE OPERATING SPEED.
(A) No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle on any street or highway in the village
where the minimum allowable speed on that street or highway, as posted, is greater than the
maximum attainable operating speed of the vehicle.
(B) Maximum attainable operating speed shall be determined by the manufacturer of the vehicle
and clearly published in the manual of specifications and operation, or it shall be determined by
applicable rule and regulation promulgated by the Secretary of State.
(625 ILCS 5/11-611) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.004 MINIMUM SPEED REGULATION.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and
regular movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation of his or her
vehicle or in compliance with law.
(625 ILCS 5/11-606(a)) Penalty, see § 71.999
TURNING AND STARTING; SIGNALS
§ 71.015 REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
(A) The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows.
(1) Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practical to
the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(2) The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any intersection shall approach the
intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel
of such vehicle, and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being
entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left
of the center of the intersection.
Traffic-Control Regulations 57
(3) The State Department of Transportation and local authorities in their respective
jurisdictions may cause official traffic-control devices to be placed within or adjacent to intersections
and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by
vehicles turning at an intersection, and when such devices are so placed no driver of a vehicle shall
turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by those devices.
(B) Where a special lane for making left turns by drivers proceeding in opposite directions has
been indicated by official traffic-control devices.
(1) A left turn shall not be made from any other lane.
(2) A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane, except when preparing for or making a left
turn from or into the roadway or when preparing for or making a U-turn when otherwise permitted
by law.
(625 ILCS 5/11-801) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.016 LIMITATIONS ON U-TURNS.
(A) The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction
unless the movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic.
(B) No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or
upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where the vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of
any other vehicle approaching from either direction within 500 feet.
(625 ILCS 5/11-802) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.017 STARTING PARKED VEHICLE.
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked, unless and until the
movement can be made with reasonable safety.
(625 ILCS 5/11-803) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.018 WHEN SIGNAL REQUIRED.
(A) No person may turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon
the roadway as required in § 71.015 of this chapter, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or
driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course, or move right or left upon a roadway
unless and until the movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person may so turn any
vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
58 Swansea - Traffic Code
(B) A signal of intention to turn right or left when required must be given continuously during
not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning within a business or residence
district, and the signal must be given continuously during not less than the last 200 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning outside a business or residence district.
(C) No person may stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an
appropriate signal in the manner provided in this chapter to the driver of any vehicle immediately to
the rear when there is opportunity to give a signal.
(D) The electric turn signal device required in 625 ILCS 5/12-208, must be used to indicate an
intention to turn, change lanes or start from a parallel parked position, but must not be flashed on
one side only on a parked or disabled vehicle, or flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal to
operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear. However, signal devices may be flashed
simultaneously on both sides of a motor vehicle to indicate the presence of a vehicular traffic hazard
requiring unusual care in approaching, overtaking and passing.
(625 ILCS 5/11-804) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.019 SIGNAL BY HAND AND ARM OR SIGNAL DEVICE.
Any stop or turn signal, when required herein, shall be given either by means of the hand and
arm or by an electric turn signal device conforming to the requirements provided in 625 ILCS 5/12-
208.
(625 ILCS 5/11-805) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.020 METHOD OF GIVING HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
All signals given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the
following manner, and the signals shall indicate as follows:
(A) Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally;
(B) Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward; except that, a person operating a bicycle may
extend the right hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the bicycle; and
(C) Stop or decrease of speed. Hand and arm extended downward.
(625 ILCS 5/11-806) Penalty, see § 71.999
Traffic-Control Regulations 59
OVERTAKING AND PASSING
§ 71.035 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
(A) Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the
roadway, except as follows:
(1) When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under
the rules governing those movements;
(2) When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the
roadway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the
proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the roadway within such distance as to constitute
an immediate hazard;
(3) Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable
thereon;
(4) Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic; or
(5) Whenever there is a single-track paved road on one side of the public highway and two
vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the wider shoulder shall give the right-of-way on
the pavement to the other vehicle.
(B) Upon a two-lane roadway, providing for two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall be
driven in the right-hand lane available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or
edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway.
(C) Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic, and providing for two-way
movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center line of the roadway, except
when authorized by official traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the
center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or except as
permitted under division (A)(2) above. However, this division (C) shall not be construed as
prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or
driveway.
(D) (1) Upon an interstate highway or fully access-controlled freeway, a vehicle may not be
driven in the left lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle.
(2) Division (D)(1) above does not apply:
(a) When no other vehicle is directly behind the vehicle in the left lane;
60 Swansea - Traffic Code
(b) When traffic conditions and congestion make it impractical to drive in the right
lane;
(c) When snow and other inclement weather conditions make it necessary to drive in
the Left lane;
(d) When obstructions or hazards exist in the right lane;
(e) When a vehicle changes lanes to comply with 625 ILCS 5/11-907 and 5/11-908;
(f) When, because of highway design, a vehicle must be driven in the left lane when
preparing to exit;
(g) On toll highways when necessary to use I-Pass, and on toll and other highways
when driving in the left lane is required to comply with an official traffic-control device; or
(h) To law enforcement vehicles, ambulances and other emergency vehicles engaged in
official duties and vehicles engaged in highway maintenance and construction operation.
(625 ILCS 5/11-701) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.036 PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right and upon
roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give
to the other at least one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(625 ILCS 5/11-702) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.037 OVERTAKING VEHICLES ON THE LEFT.
The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same
direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and special rules otherwise stated in this chapter.
(A) The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall
pass to the left thereof at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway
until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. In no event shall the movement be made by driving off the
pavement or the main traveled portion of the roadway.
(B) Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken
vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal, and shall not
increase the speed of his or her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
Traffic-Control Regulations 61
(C) The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not, in passing upon the left of any vehicle
proceeding in the same direction, pass upon the right of any vehicle proceeding in the same direction
unless there is an unobstructed lane of traffic available to permit the passing maneuver safely.
(D) The operator of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle or individual proceeding in the same
direction on a highway shall leave a safe distance, but not less than three feet, when passing the
bicycle or individual and shall maintain that distance until safely past the overtaken bicycle or
individual.
(E) A person driving a motor vehicle shall not, in a reckless manner, drive the motor vehicle
unnecessarily close to, toward or near a bicyclist, pedestrian or a person riding a horse or driving an
animal drawn vehicle.
(625 , Act 5, § 11-703) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.038 WHEN OVERTAKING ON THE RIGHT IS PERMITTED.
(A) The driver of a vehicle with three or more wheels may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
(1) When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
(2) Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two or more lines
of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled by the overtaking vehicle; and
(3) Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one
direction of movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two
or more lines of moving vehicles.
(B) The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not pass upon the right of any other vehicle
proceeding in the same direction unless the unobstructed pavement to the right of the vehicle being
passed is of a width of not less than eight feet. This division does not apply to devices propelled by
human power.
(C) The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under
conditions permitting the movement in safety. This movement shall not be made by driving off the
roadway.
(625 ILCS 5/11-704) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.039 LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT.
(A) Passing on the left.
(1) No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and
passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless authorized by the provisions of this
62 Swansea - Traffic Code
chapter, and unless the left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with
the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction, or any vehicle overtaken.
(2) In every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as
soon as practicable, and in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for
vehicles approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction.
(625 ILCS 5/11-705)
(B) Conditions where passing on the left is prohibited.
(1) No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway under the following
conditions:
(a) When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in the highway where the
driver's view is obstructed within a distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might
approach from the opposite direction;
(b) When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad
grade crossing; and/or
(c) When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge,
viaduct or tunnel.
(2) The limitations in division (B)(1) above do not apply upon a one-way roadway, nor
upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two or more lanes of moving
traffic in each direction, nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road
or driveway when the movements can be made with safety.
(625 ILCS 5/11-706) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.040 MEETING OR OVERTAKING SCHOOL BUS.
(A) The driver of a vehicle shall stop the vehicle before meeting or overtaking, from either
direction, any school bus stopped at any location for the purpose of receiving or discharging pupils.
The stop is required before reaching the school bus when there is in operation on the school bus the
visual signals as specified in 625 ILCS 5/12-803 and 5/12-805. The driver of the vehicle shall not
proceed until the school bus resumes motion or the driver of the vehicle is signaled by the school bus
driver to proceed or the visual signals are no longer actuated.
(B) The stop signal arm required by 625 ILCS 5/12-803, shall be extended after the school bus
has come to a complete stop for the purpose of loading or discharging pupils and shall be closed
before the school bus is placed in motion again. The stop signal arm shall not be extended at any
other time.
Traffic-Control Regulations 63
(C) The alternately flashing red signal lamps of an eight-lamp flashing signal system required by
625 ILCS 5/12-805, shall be actuated after the school bus has come to a complete stop for the
purpose of loading or discharging pupils and shall be turned off before the school bus is placed in
motion again. The red signal lamps shall not be actuated at any other time except as provided in
division (D) below.
(D) (1) The alternately flashing amber signal lamps of an eight-lamp flashing signal system
required by 625 ILCS 5/12-805, shall be actuated continuously during not less than the last 100 feet
traveled by the school bus before stopping for the purpose of loading or discharging pupils within an
urban area, and during not less than the last 200 feet traveled by the school bus outside an urban
area. The amber signal lamps shall remain actuated until the school bus is stopped. The amber signal
lamps shall not be actuated at any other time.
(2) The alternately flashing headlamps permitted by 625 ILCS 5/12-805, may be operated
while the alternately flashing red or amber signal maps required by that section are actuated.
(E) The driver of a vehicle upon a highway having four or more lanes which permits at least
two lanes of traffic to travel in opposite directions need not stop the vehicle upon meeting a school
bus which is stopped in the opposing roadway; and need not stop the vehicle when driving upon a
controlled access highway when passing a school bus traveling in either direction that is stopped in a
loading zone adjacent to the surfaced or improved part of the controlled access highway where
pedestrians are not permitted to cross.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1414) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.041 ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
(A) Upon a roadway designated for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the
direction designated at all or such times as shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices.
(B) A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island must be driven only to the right of the
island.
(C) Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more roadways by leaving an
intervening space or by a physical barrier or a clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to
impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle must be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless
directed or permitted to use another roadway by official traffic-control devices or police officers. No
vehicle may be driven over, across or within any dividing space, barrier or section except through an
opening in the physical barrier, or dividing section, or space, or at a cross-over or intersection as
established by public authority.
(D) The driver of a vehicle may turn left across a paved non-curbed dividing space unless
prohibited by an official traffic-control device.
(625 ILCS 5/11-708) Penalty, see § 71.999
64 Swansea - Traffic Code
§ 71.042 NO-PASSING ZONES.
(A) The Village Board is authorized to determine those portions of any highway within the
village where overtaking and passing or driving on the left of the roadway would be especially
hazardous, and may by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway indicate the beginning and end
of the zones, and when signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant
person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof.
(B) Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone as set forth in division (A)
above, no driver may, at any time, drive on the left side of the roadway within the no-passing zone
or on the left side of any pavement striping designed to mark the no-passing zone throughout its
length.
(C) This section does not apply under the conditions described in § 71.035(A)(2) of this chapter,
nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road or driveway. The
pavement striping designed to mark the no-passing zone may be crossed from the left-hand lane for
the purpose of completing a pass that was begun prior to the beginning of the zone in the driver's
direction of travel.
(625 ILCS 5/11-707) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.043 DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic the
following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith shall apply.
(A) A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not
be moved from that lane until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety.
(B) Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for two-way movement of
traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane, except when overtaking and passing another
vehicle traveling in the same direction when the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or in preparation for making a left turn or where the center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to
traffic moving in the same direction that the vehicle is proceeding and the allocation is designated by
official traffic-control devices.
(C) Official traffic-control devices may be erected directing specific traffic to use a designated
lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the
center of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device. Drivers
must obey lane designation signing except when it is necessary to use a different lane to make a
turning maneuver.
(D) Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the changing of lanes on sections
of roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device.
(625 ILCS 5/11-709) Penalty, see § 71.999
Traffic-Control Regulations 65
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 71.060 VEHICLES APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION.
When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different roadways at approximately
the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left must yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the
right. This rule may be modified at through highways or streets and where otherwise inconsistent
with the provisions of this traffic code.
(625 ILCS 5/11-901) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.061 VEHICLE TURNING LEFT.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private
road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction
which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver, having so yielded, may
proceed as soon as a safe interval occurs.
(625 ILCS 5/11-902) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.062 VEHICLES ENTERING STOP CROSSWALK.
Where stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection, or flashing red signals
are in place at a plainly marked crosswalk between intersections, drivers of vehicles shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk, and pedestrians within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of the
roadway shall have the right-of-way over vehicles so stopped. Drivers of vehicles having so yielded
the right-of-way to pedestrians entering or within the nearest crosswalk at an intersection shall also
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians within any other crosswalk at the intersection.
(625 ILCS 5/11-903) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.063 VEHICLE ENTERING STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTION.
(A) Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop or yield signs.
(B) Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of
a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then at
the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another roadway, or which is
66 Swansea - Traffic Code
approaching so closely on the roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when the
driver is moving across or within the intersection, but the driver, having so yielded, may proceed as
soon as a safe interval occurs.
(C) The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience to the sign, slow down
to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, of if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view
of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield
the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection.
(D) If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or interferes with the movement of
other vehicles after driving past a yield right-of-way sign, the collision or interference shall be
deemed prima facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield right-of- way.
(625 ILCS 5/11-904) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.064 MERGING TRAFFIC.
Notwithstanding the right-of-way provision in § 71.060 of this chapter, at an intersection where
traffic lanes are provided for merging traffic, the driver of each vehicle on the converging roadways
is required to adjust his or her vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a collision with
another vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/11-905) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.065 VEHICLE ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an alley, building, private road or
driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the highway to be entered.
(625 ILCS 5/11-906) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.066 OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY
VEHICLES.
(A) Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible
and visual signals meeting the requirements of this chapter, or a police vehicle properly and lawfully
making use of an audible or visual signal, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-ofway
and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand
edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection, and shall, if necessary to permit the safe
passage of the emergency vehicle, stop and remain in that position until the authorized emergency
vehicle has passed, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
Traffic-Control Regulations 67
(B) This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from
the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway.
(625 ILCS 5/11-907(b)) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.067 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
(A) Funeral processions have the right-of-way at intersections when vehicles comprising the
procession have their headlights and hazard lights lighted, subject to the following conditions and
exceptions:
(1) Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the right-of-way upon the
approach of an authorized emergency vehicle giving an audible or visible signal;
(2) Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the right-of-way when directed
to do so by a traffic officer; and
(3) The operator of the leading vehicle in a funeral procession shall comply with stop signs
and traffic-control signals, but when the leading vehicle has proceeded across an intersection in
accordance with the signal or after stopping as required by the stop sign, all vehicles in the
procession may proceed without stopping, regardless of the sign or signal, and the leading vehicle
and the vehicles in procession shall proceed with due caution.
(B) The operator of a vehicle not in the funeral procession shall not drive his or her vehicle in
the funeral procession, except when authorized to do so by a traffic officer or when the vehicle is an
authorized emergency vehicle giving audible or visible signal.
(C) Operators of vehicles not a part of a funeral procession may not form a procession or
convoy and have their headlights or hazard lights or both lighted for the purpose of securing the
right-of-way granted by this section to funeral processions.
(D) The operator of a vehicle not in a funeral procession may overtake and pass the vehicles in
the procession if the overtaking and passing can be accomplished without causing a traffic hazard or
interfering with such procession.
(E) The lead vehicle in the funeral procession may be equipped with a flashing amber light
which may be used only when the vehicle is used as a lead vehicle in the procession. Vehicles
comprising a funeral procession may utilize funeral pennants or flags or windshield stickers or
flashing hazard warning signal flashers to identify the individual vehicles in such a procession.
(F) In the absence of law enforcement traffic- control assistance for a funeral procession, a
funeral director or his or her designee may direct traffic during a funeral procession.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1420) Penalty, see § 71.999
68 Swansea - Traffic Code
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
§ 71.080 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF TRAIN OR RAILROAD
TRACK EQUIPMENT.
(A) Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing where the
driver is not always required to stop, the person must exercise due care and caution as the existence
of a railroad track across a highway is a warning of danger, and under any of the circumstances
stated in this section, the driver shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail
of the railroad, and shall not proceed until the tracks are clear and he or she can do so safely. The
foregoing requirements shall apply when:
(1) A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate
approach of a railroad train or railroad track equipment;
(2) A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagger gives or continues to give a signal of the
approach or passage of a railroad train or railroad track equipment;
(3) A railroad train or railroad track equipment approaching a highway crossing emits a
warning signal and the train or railroad track equipment, by reason of its speed or nearness to the
crossing, is an immediate hazard;
(4) An approaching railroad train or railroad track equipment is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to the crossing; or
(5) A railroad train or railroad track equipment is approaching so closely that an
immediate hazard is created.
(B) Whenever a person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing where the driver
is not always required to stop but must slow down, the person must exercise due care and caution as
the existence of a railroad track across a highway is a warning of danger, and under any of the
circumstances stated in this section, the driver shall slow down within 50 feet, but not less than 15
feet, from the nearest rail of the railroad and shall not proceed until he or she checks that the tracks
are clear of an approaching train or railroad track equipment.
(C) No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a
railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
(D) When stop signs are erected at railroad grade crossings, the driver of any vehicle shall stop
within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad, and shall proceed only
upon exercising due care.
Traffic-Control Regulations 69
(E) At any railroad grade crossing provided with railroad crossbuck signs, without automatic,
electric or mechanical signal devices, crossing gates or a human flagger giving a signal of the
approach or passage of a train or railroad track equipment, the driver of a vehicle shall in obedience
to the railroad crossbuck sign, yield the right-of-way and slow down to a speed reasonable for the
existing conditions and shall stop, if required for safety, at a clearly marked stopped line, or if no
stop line, within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad and shall not
proceed until he or she can do so safely. If a driver is involved in a collision at a railroad crossing or
interferes with the movement of a train or railroad track equipment after driving past the railroad
crossbuck sign, the collision or interference is prima facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield
right-of-way.
(F) No person shall, while driving a commercial motor vehicle, fail to negotiate a railroadhighway
grade railroad crossing because of insufficient undercarriage clearance.
(G) It is unlawful to violate any part of this section.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1201) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.081 CERTAIN VEHICLES MUST STOP AT ALL RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS.
(A) The driver of any of the following vehicles shall, before crossing a railroad track or tracks
at grade, stop that vehicle within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet, from the nearest rail, and while so
stopped, shall listen and look for the approach of a train or railroad track equipment, and shall not
proceed until that movement can be made with safety:
(1) Any second division vehicle carrying passengers for hire;
(2) Any bus that meets all of the special requirements for school buses in 625 ILCS 5/12-
801, 5/12-803 and 5/12-805. The driver of the bus, in addition to complying with all other applicable
requirements of this division (A), must also turn off all noise-producing accessories, including heater
blowers, defroster fans, auxiliary fans and radios, and open the service door and driver's window,
before crossing a railroad track or tracks; and
(3) Any other vehicle which is required by federal or state law to be placarded when
carrying as a cargo or part of a cargo “hazardous material”, as defined in 430 ILCS 30/3. After
stopping as required in this section, the driver shall proceed only in a gear not requiring a change of
gears during the crossing, and the driver shall not shift gears while crossing the track or tracks.
(B) This section shall not apply:
(1) At any railroad grade crossing where traffic is controlled by a police officer or flagger;
(2) At any railroad grade crossing controlled by a functioning traffic-control signal
transmitting a green indication which, under law, permits the vehicle to proceed across the railroad
tracks without slowing or stopping, except that division (A) of this section shall apply to any school
bus;
70 Swansea - Traffic Code
(3) At any streetcar grade crossing within a business or residence district; or
(4) At any abandoned industrial or spur track railroad grade crossing designated as exempt
by the Illinois Commerce Commission and marked with an official sign as authorized in the State
Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1202) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.082 EMERGING FROM ALLEY, BUILDING, PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road or driveway within an
urban area shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving into the sidewalk area extending across
the alley, building entrance, road or driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at
the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon,
and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrians as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon
entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1205) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.083 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
(A) No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk, or drive onto any railroad grade
crossing unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection, crosswalk or railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to
proceed.
(B) No driver shall enter a highway rail grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on the
other side of the highway rail grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle being operated without
obstructing the passage of a train or other railroad equipment using the rails, notwithstanding any
traffic- control signal indication to proceed.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1425) Penalty, see § 71.999
PROHIBITIONS
§ 71.095 BACKING.
(A) The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless the movement can be made with
safety and without interfering with other traffic.
Traffic-Control Regulations 71
(B) The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same upon any shoulder or roadway of any
controlled-access highway.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1402) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.096 FOLLOWING VEHICLE TOO CLOSELY.
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable
and prudent, having due regard for the speed of the vehicles and the traffic upon and conditions of
the street or highway.
(625 ILCS 5/11-710) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.097 OBSTRUCTION OF DRIVER'S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM.
(A) No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such
number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the
vehicle, or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(B) No passenger in a vehicle or streetcar shall ride in a position as to interfere with the driver's
or motorman's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with his or her control over the driving
mechanism of the vehicle or streetcar.
(C) No passenger on a school bus may ride or stand in a position as to interfere with the driver's
view ahead or to the side or to the rear, or to interfere with his or her control of the driving
mechanism of the bus.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1406) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.098 OPENING VEHICLE DOORS.
No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and
until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done without interfering with the movement of other
traffic, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for
a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1407) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.099 COASTING.
(A) The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a down grade shall not coast with the
gears or transmission of the vehicle in neutral.
72 Swansea - Traffic Code
(B) The driver of a truck or bus when traveling upon a down grade shall not coast with the
clutch disengaged.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1410)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.100 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS; DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
(A) The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire
apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or stop the vehicle within 500 feet
of any fire apparatus stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1411)
(B) No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire Department when laid
down on any street, private road or driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the
consent of the Fire Department official in command.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1412)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.101 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK.
(A) No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area, except upon a
permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
(B) (1) This section does not apply to any vehicle moved exclusively by human power, to any
electric personal assistive mobility device, nor to any motorized wheelchair.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit or preempt the authority of any home
rule or non-home rule unit of the village from regulating or prohibiting the use of electric personal
assistive mobility devices.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1412.1)
(C) A person may not operate an electric personal assistive mobility device upon a public
sidewalk at a speed greater than eight mph.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1412.2)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.102 USE OF ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS OR SIMILAR DEVICES.
No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, skateboard or
similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and except
upon streets set aside as play streets when authorized by the traffic authority.
Penalty, see § 71.999
Traffic-Control Regulations 73
§ 71.103 PUTTING GLASS OR OTHER HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ON HIGHWAY
PROHIBITED.
(A) No person shall throw, spill or deposit upon any highway any bottle, glass, nails, tacks,
wire, cans or any litter, as defined in the Litter Control Act, 415 ILCS 105/3.
(B) Any person who violates division (A) above upon any highway shall immediately remove
the material or cause it to be removed.
(C) Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass
or other debris, except any hazardous substance as defined in 415 ILCS 5/3.215, hazardous waste as
defined in 415 ILCS 5/3.220, and potentially infectious medical waste as defined in 415 ILCS
5/3.360, dropped upon the highway from such vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1413) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.104 OBSTRUCTING PERSON IN HIGHWAYS.
No person shall willfully and unnecessarily hinder, obstruct or delay, or willfully and
unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder or obstruct any other person in lawfully driving or traveling
along or upon any highway within the village, or offer for barter or sale merchandise on the highway
so as to interfere with the effective movement of traffic.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1416) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.105 FARM TRACTOR OPERATION.
(A) No person shall operate a farm tractor on a highway in the village unless the tractor is being
used as an implement of husbandry in connection with farming operations.
(B) For the purpose of this section, the use of a farm tractor as an implement of husbandry in
connection with farming operations shall be deemed to include use of the tractor in connection with
the transportation of agricultural products and of farm machinery, equipment and supplies, as well as
the transportation of the implement of husbandry from its place of purchase to its place of storage, in
connection with the obtaining of repairs of the implement of husbandry, and the towing of a
registered truck of not more than 8,000 pounds for use as return transportation after the tractor is left
at the place of work or repair.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1418) Penalty, see §71.999
74 Swansea - Traffic Code
§ 71.106 DRIVING ON CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
No person may drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway, except at entrances
and exits established by public authority.
(625 ILCS 5/11-711) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.107 ENCROACHMENTS.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CONSTRUCTION EASEMENT AREA. The area lying between the project right-of-way
limits and the platted street limits which the village, by concurrence in the establishment of the
project right- of-way lines, will permit the state to enter to perform all necessary construction
operations.
ENCROACHMENT. Any building, fence, sign or any other structure or object of any kind
(with the exception of utilities and public road signs), which is placed, located or maintained in, on,
under or over any portion of the project right-of-way or the roadway right-of-way where no project
right- of-way line has been established.
PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENT. Any existing awning, marquee, advertising sign or
similar overhanging structure supported from a building immediately adjacent to the limits of the
platted street where there is a sidewalk extending to the building line and which does not impair the
free and safe flow of traffic on the highway; the permissive retention of overhanging signs is not to
be construed as being applicable to those signs supported from poles constructed outside the project
right-of-way line and not confined by adjacent buildings.
PROJECT RIGHT-OF-WAY. Those areas the project right-of-way lines established jointly
by the village and the state, which will be free of encroachments, except as herein defined.
ROADWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY. Those areas existing or acquired by dedication or by fee
simple for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by temporary easement during the time the
easement is in effect.
(B) Prohibition of encroachments. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
erect or cause to be erected, to retain or cause to be retained, any encroachment (hereinabove
defined) within the limits of the project right-of-way or roadway right-of-way where no project rightof-
way lines have been established.
(C) Right-of-way lines. Project right-of-way lines have been established as coincidental with the
right-of- way lines.
Traffic-Control Regulations 75
(D) Conflicts. This section is intended to and shall be in addition to all other ordinances, rules,
and regulations concerning encroachments and shall not be construed as repealing or rescinding any
other ordinance unless in direct conflict herewith.
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.108 UNATTENDED DRAFT ANIMALS.
It shall be unlawful to leave any horse or other draft animal unattended in any sheet without
having such animal securely fastened.
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.109 RIDING ON RUNNING BOARDS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, running board, bumpers, top or
outside step of any vehicle.
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.110 PROCESSIONS.
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand side of the
roadway as close as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as practical and safe.
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.111 TRUCKS.
It shall be unlawful to operate a truck upon any street where truck operation is prohibited by law
and where such signs of prohibition are posted; except that, a truck may be driven on such street for
not more than the minimum distance necessary for the purpose of making deliveries or picking up
loads.
Penalty, see § 71.999
76 Swansea - Traffic Code
PARADES
§ 71.125 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CRUISING. The repeated operation of two or more vehicles in a continuous or nearly
continuous flow through a parking lot.
PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind,
or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk, park or other public place in the village, or
CRUISING as defined above.
PARADE PERMIT. A permit required by this subchapter.
PARKING LOT. Any paved or unpaved area used by a place of business or shopping center for
the parking of vehicles of their customers, but shall not include those operated for hire.
§ 71.126 PERMIT REQUIRED.
(A) No person or persons shall engage or participate in, aid, form or start any parade unless a
parade permit has been obtained from the Chief of Police or other authorized village official.
(B) This subchapter shall not apply to:
(1) Funeral processions;
(2) Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities,
provided the conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school
authorities; and
(3) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.127 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
(A) Procedure. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the
Chief of Police or other authorized village official on forms provided by such officer.
(B) Filing period. The application for a parade permit shall be filed not less than five days, or
not more than 60 days, before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
Traffic-Control Regulations 77
(C) Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the parade;
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the
name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized
and responsible heads of the organization;
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade
chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;
(4) The date when the parade is to be conducted;
(5) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point;
(6) The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles which will constitute the
parade, the type of animals, if any, and the description of the vehicles;
(7) The hours when the parade will start and terminate;
(8) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of
the streets, sidewalk, park or other public place proposed to be traversed;
(9) The location by street of any assembly area for the parade;
(10) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area
or areas;
(11) The interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade;
(12) If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than
the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file a communication in writing from the person
authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf; and
(13) Any additional information reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a
permit should be issued.
(D) Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a parade permit a fee in an
amount as established by the Village Board from time to time.
78 Swansea - Traffic Code
§ 71.128 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
The Chief of Police or other authorized village official shall issue a permit when, from a
consideration of the application and from other information obtained, he or she finds that:
(A) The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of
other traffic contiguous to its route;
(B) The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police
officers of the village to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to
prevent normal police protection to the village;
(C) The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances
as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the village other than that to be occupied by
the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto;
(D) The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not
unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous
to the assembly areas;
(E) The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en
route to a fire;
(F) The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination
expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route;
(G) The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event,
and is not designated to be held purely for private profit; and
(H) The parade, if it takes the form of cruising, has the approval in writing of the owner or an
authorized agent of the owner for the use of the parking lot which is the site of the parade.
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.129 NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT APPLICATION.
(A) The Chief of Police or other authorized village official shall act on the application for a
parade permit within three days, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted, after filing thereof.
(B) If he or she disapproves the application, he or she shall mail to the applicant within the three
days, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted, after the date on which the application was filed, a
notice of his or her action stating the reasons for his or her denial of the permit.
Traffic-Control Regulations 79
§ 71.130 APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the Village
Board. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days after notice of denial. The Village Board shall act on
the appeal within 30 days after its receipt.
§ 71.131 ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.
The Chief of Police or other authorized village official, in denying an application for a parade
permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a
route different than that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit
shall file a written notice of his or her acceptance. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the
requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this subchapter.
§ 71.132 NOTICE TO VILLAGE AND OTHER OFFICIALS WHEN PERMIT ISSUED.
Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, a copy thereof shall be sent to the Mayor and
the Fire Chief.
§ 71.133 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
(A) Starting time;
(B) Minimum speed;
(C) Maximum speed;
(D) Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade;
(E) The portions of the street, sidewalk, park or other public place to be traversed that may be
occupied by the parade;
(F) The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; and
(G) Such other information as is reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this subchapter.
Penalty, see § 71.999
80 Swansea - Traffic Code
§ 71.134 DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all
applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading the
activity shall carry the parade permit on his or her person during the conduct of the parade.
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.135 PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.
(A) Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any
parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade.
(B) Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle, except a police car or other emergency
vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when those vehicles or
persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade.
(C) Parking on parade route. The Chief of Police or other authorized village official shall have
the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street
or other public thoroughfare or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. Signs shall be
posted to that effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle
in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street or other public thoroughfare
unless signs have been posted in accordance with this section.
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.136 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
The village shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder on application of
the standards for issuance as herein set forth.
STREET DESIGNATIONS
§ 71.150 SIGNS.
Appropriate signs shall be posted to show all through, stop and yield right-of-way streets; all
one-way streets and alleys; and all stop intersections.
Traffic-Control Regulations 81
§ 71.151 THROUGH STREETS.
The streets and parts of streets of the village designated by law as through streets are hereby
declared to be through streets.
Cross-references:
Through streets and stop intersections, see Ch. 77, Sch. IV
Through streets and yield right of way intersections, see Ch. 77, Sch. V
§ 71.152 YIELD STREETS.
(A) Any street designated by law as a yield right- of-way street and so posted is hereby declared
to be a yield right-of-way street.
(B) The driver of a vehicle in obedience to a yield right-of-way sign shall reduce the speed of
his or her vehicle to not more than 20 mph and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which
have entered the intersecting street either from the right or left or which are approaching so closely
on such intersection as to constitute a hazard; but the driver having so yielded may proceed at such
time as a safe interval occurs.
(C) If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or interferes with the movement of
other vehicles after driving past a yield right-of-way sign, such collision shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of the driver's failure to yield right-of-way.
Penalty, see § 71.999
Cross-reference:
Through streets and yield right of way intersections, see Ch. 77, Sch. V
§ 71.153 CLOSED STREETS.
No person shall drive any vehicle onto or across any road or intersection designated as a closed
road, except for such exceptions as may be provided therein. The Police Department, Village
Engineer, Traffic Engineer, Code Enforcement Department or other authorized personnel shall be
authorized to place signage, barricades or other traffic-control devices to effect this provision.
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.999 PENALTY.
(A) Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is otherwise
provided shall be fined as set forth in § 70.999 of this code.
82 Swansea - Traffic Code
(B) A first violation of § 71.001 of this chapter is a petty offense with a minimum fine of $150.
A second or subsequent violation of § 71.001 of this chapter is a petty offense with a minimum fine
of $300.
(C) (1) A first violation of § 71.002(A) of this chapter is a petty offense with a minimum fine
of $150. A second or subsequent violation of this section is a petty offense with a minimum fine of
$300.
(2) (a) When a fine for a violation of § 71.002(A) of this chapter is $150 or greater, the
person who violates § 71.002(A)(1) and (A)(2) of this chapter shall be charged an additional $50 to
be paid to the unit school district where the violation occurred for school safety purposes. If the
violation occurred in a dual school district, $25 of the surcharge shall be paid to the elementary
school district for school safety purposes and $25 of the surcharge shall be paid to the high school
district for school safety purposes. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the entire $50
surcharge shall be paid to the appropriate school district or districts.
(b) For purposes of this division (C)(2) of this chapter, SCHOOL SAFETY
PURPOSES include the costs associated with school zone safety education, the Safe Routes to
School Program under § 2705-317 of the Department of Transportation Law of the Civil
Administrative Code of the state, safety programs within the School Safety and Educational
Improvement Block Grant Program under 105 ILCS 5/2-3.51.5 of the School Code, and the
purchase, installation, and maintenance of caution lights which are mounted on school speed zone
signs.
(D) (1) A first violation of § 71.002(B) of this chapter is a petty offense with a minimum fine of
$250. A second or subsequent violation of division (B) of this section is a petty offense with a
minimum fine of $750.
(2) If a fine or violation of § 71.002(B) of this chapter is $250 or greater, the person who
violated § 71.002(B) of this chapter shall be charged an additional $125, which shall be deposited
into the Transportation Safety Highway Hire-Back Fund in the state treasury, unless the violation
occurred on a highway other than an interstate highway and a county police officer wrote the ticket
for the violation, in which case the $125 shall be deposited into that county's Transportation Safety
Highway Hire-Back Fund. In the case of a second or subsequent violation of § 71.002(B) of this
chapter, if the fine is $750 or greater, the person who violated § 71.002(B) of this chapter shall be
charged an additional $250, which shall be deposited into the Transportation Safety Highway Hire-
Back Fund in the state treasury, unless the violation occurred on a highway other than an interstate
highway and a county police officer wrote the ticket for the violation, in which case the $125 shall be
deposited into that county's Transportation Safety Highway Hire-Back Fund.
(3) The Transportation Safety Highway Hire-Back Fund, which was created by Pub. Act
No. 92-619, shall continue to be a special fund in the State Treasury. Subject to appropriation by the
General Assembly and approval by the Secretary, the Secretary of Transportation shall use all
moneys in the Transportation Safety Highway Hire-back Fund to hire off-duty Department of State
Police Officers to monitor construction or maintenance zones.
Traffic-Control Regulations 83
(4) For a second or subsequent violation of § 71.002(B) of this chapter within two years of
the date of the previous violation, the Secretary of State shall suspend the driver's license of the
violator for a period of 90 days.
(E) Every person convicted of § 71.037(E) of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
(F) In addition to the suspensions authorized by 625 ILCS 5/11-1414, any person convicted of
violating § 71.040 of this chapter or a similar provision of a local ordinance shall be subject to a
mandatory fine of $150 or, upon a second or subsequent violation, $500.
(G) (1) A violation of § 71.080 of this chapter is a petty offense for which a fine of $250 shall
be imposed for a first violation, and a fine of $500 shall be imposed for a second or subsequent
violation. The court may impose 25 hours of community service in place of the $250 fine for the first
violation.
(2) For a second or subsequent violation, the Secretary of State may suspend the driving
privileges of the offender for a minimum of six months.
(H) Any person found in violation of § 71.083(B) of this chapter shall be subject to a mandatory
fine of $500 or 50 hours of community service.
(I) Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is not otherwise
provided by this title or by appropriate statutory penalty as generally set forth in 625 ILCS 5/16-101
et seq., shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine as provided in § 70.999 of this code.
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-601, 625 ILCS 5/11-605(e), 625 ILCS 5/11-605(e-5),
625 ILCS 5/11-605(f), 625 ILCS 5/11-605.1, 625 ILCS 5/11-703, 625ILCS 5/11-1201, 625
ILCS 5/11-1414 and 625 ILCS 5/11-1425
Violation of § 71.037E) resulting in great bodily harm or permanent disability or
disfigurement to another; a Class 3 felony, see 625 ILCS 5/11-703
84 Swansea - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
Method of Parking
72.01 General parking regulations
72.02 Unattended motor vehicles
Restrictions on Stopping, Standing and Parking
72.15 Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places
72.16 Stopping, standing or parking outside business or residence district
72.17 Parking for persons with disabilities
72.18 Unauthorized use of parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities
72.19 Fire lanes
72.20 On-street parking
72.21 Limited parking
72.22 Vehicles for sale
72.23 Alleys
72.24 Cab and bus stands
72.25 Parking on private property
72.26 Signs
Snow Emergencies
72.40 Announcement of snow emergency
72.41 Termination of emergency
72.42 Snow emergency routes
Violations
72.55 Parking violations
72.56 Prima facie proof
72.57 Officers authorized to remove vehicles
72.58 Duty of lessor of vehicle on notice of violation of this chapter
72.99 Penalty
85
86 Swansea - Traffic Code
METHOD OF PARKING
§ 72.01 GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a twoway
roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right- hand wheels parallel to and within 12
inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
(B) Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one- way roadway shall be so stopped or parked
parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with its
right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge
of the right-hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of the left-hand curb or as
close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder.
(C) No angle parking shall be permitted, except as set forth by ordinance.
(D) No person shall park in violation of signs placed by and under the jurisdiction of the State
Department of Transportation which prohibit, limit or restrict the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles on any highway.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1304) Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.02 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES.
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without
stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the
brake thereon and, when standing upon any perceptible grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or
side of the highway.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1401) Penalty, see § 72.99
RESTRICTIONS ON STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
§ 72.15 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
(A) Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer, or an official traffic-control device, no person shall:
(1) Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
(a) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
Parking Regulations 87
(b) On a sidewalk;
(c) Within an intersection;
(d) On a crosswalk;
(e) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb
immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or
markings;
(f) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing
or parking would obstruct traffic;
(g) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure, upon a highway or within a highway
tunnel;
(h) On any railroad tracks;
(i) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
(j) On any controlled-access highway; and
(k) In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers.
(2) Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or
discharge passengers:
(a) In front of a public or private driveway;
(b) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
(c) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(d) Within 30 feet of any intersection or as otherwise approved by the Village Board;
(e) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a
street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance (when properly signposted);
and
(f) At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
(3) Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers:
(a) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; and
88 Swansea - Traffic Code
(b) At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
(B) No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control into any prohibited
area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(C) It is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time
longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers, in any place designated by the
Village Board as a loading zone and marked as such, or in any of the following designated places:
(1) At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb before the entrance to any hospital or
hotel at the time;
(2) At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb line before the entrance to a public
building between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Sunday; and
(3) Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time that the theater is open.
Penalty, see § 72.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-1303
§ 72.16 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING OUTSIDE BUSINESS OR RESIDENCE
DISTRICT.
(A) Outside a business or residence district, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any
vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the roadway when it is practicable to stop, park or so
leave the vehicle off the roadway, but in every event an unobstructed width of the highway opposite
a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of the stopped
vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon the highway.
(B) The village, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction or for the maintenance of which
it is responsible, may place signs prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles on any highway where, in its opinion, stopping, standing or parking is dangerous to those
using the highway, or where stopping, standing or parking vehicles would unduly interfere with the
free movement of traffic thereon. Any regulations adopted by the village regarding the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles upon any specific street, streets or highways become effective at the
time of the erection of appropriate signs indicating the regulations.
(C) This section, and § 72.15 and 625 ILCS 5/11-1304, shall not apply to the driver of any
vehicle which is disabled in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping
and temporarily leaving the vehicle in that position.
Parking Regulations 89
(D) Any Second Division vehicle used exclusively for the collection of garbage, refuse or
recyclable material may stop or stand on the road in a business, rural or residential district for the
sole purpose of collecting garbage, refuse or recyclable material. The vehicle, in addition to having
its hazard lights lighted at all time that it is engaged in stopping or standing, shall also use its amber
oscillating, rotating or flashing light or lights as authorized under 625 ILCS 5/12-215(b)(12), if so
equipped.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1301) Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.17 PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
(A) Special permits for physically handicapped parking. For purposes of this section, an Illinois
person with a Disability Identification Card issued pursuant to the Illinois Identification Card Act
indicating that the person thereon named has a disability shall be adequate documentation of such a
disability.
(B) Privileges of permit holder. The privileges granted by the possession of a person's own
Disability Identification Card are as follows: The bearer of the permit may display the permit
through the front windshield in the near center of any vehicle licensed as an automobile or truck with
Class ‘A’ or ‘B’ license. The permit authorizes the vehicle so identified to park in an authorized onstreet
parking space for as long as a no-parking prohibition does not exist. The permit does not waive
the requirement that money be placed in parking meters, keeping the meters from being expired
during the parking duration. This permit authorizes the vehicle displaying the permit to park in any
parking space specifically reserved for handicapped parking.
§ 72.18 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING SPACES RESERVED FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES.
(A) (1) It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not properly displaying
registration plates or decals issued to a person with disabilities, as defined by § 72.01, pursuant to
625 ILCS 5/3-616, 5/11-1301.1 or 5/11-1301.2, or to a veteran with a disability pursuant to 625
ILCS 5/3-609, as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a person with disabilities or a
veteran with a disability, in any parking place, including any private or public off- street parking
facility, specifically reserved, by the posting of an official sign as designated under 625 ILCS 5/11-
301, for motor vehicles displaying such registration plates. It shall be prohibited to park any motor
vehicle in a designated access aisle adjacent to any parking place specifically reserved for persons
with disabilities, by the posting of an official sign as designated under 625 ILCS 5/11-301, for motor
vehicles displaying such registration plates. When using the parking privileges for persons with
disabilities, the parking decal or device must be displayed properly in the vehicle where it is clearly
visible to law enforcement personnel, either hanging from the rearview mirror or placed on the
dashboard of the vehicle in clear view. Disability license plates and parking decals and devices are
not transferable from person to person. Proper usage of the disability license plate or parking decal
or device requires the authorized holder to be present and enter or exit the vehicle at the time the
parking privileges are being used. It is a violation of this section
90 Swansea - Traffic Code
to park in a space reserved for a person with disabilities if the authorized holder of the disability
license plate or parking decal or device does not enter or exit the vehicle at the time the parking
privileges are being used. Any motor vehicle properly displaying a disability license plate or a
parking decal or device containing the international symbol of access issued to persons with
disabilities by any local authority, state, district, territory or foreign country shall be recognized by
state and village authorities as a valid license plate or device and receive the same parking privileges
as residents of the state.
(2) An individual with a vehicle displaying disability license plates or a parking decal or
device issued to a qualified person with a disability under 625 ILCS 5/3-616, 5/11-1301.1 or 5/11-
1301.2, or to a veteran with a disability under 625 ILCS 5/3-609, is in violation of this section if:
(a) The person using the disability license plate or parking decal or device is not the
authorized holder of the disability license plate or parking decal or device or is not transporting the
authorized holder of the disability license plate or parking decal or device to or from the parking
location; and
(b) The person uses the disability license plate or parking decal or device to exercise
any privileges granted through the disability license plate or parking decals or devices under this
code.
(3) A driver of a vehicle displaying disability license plates or a parking decal or
device issued to a qualified person with a disability under 625 ILCS 5/3-616, 5/11-1301.1, or 5/11-
1301.2 or to a veteran with a disability under 625 ILCS 5/3-609 is in violation of this section if:
(a) The person to whom the disability license plate or parking decal or device was
issued is deceased; and
(b) The driver uses the disability license plate or parking decal or device to
exercise any privileges granted through a disability license plate or parking decal or device under this
code.
(B) Any person or local authority owning or operating any public or private off-street parking
facility may, after notifying the Police Department, remove or cause to be removed to the nearest
garage or other place of safety any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for use by a person
with disabilities which does not display person with disabilities registration plates or a special decal
or device as required under this section.
(C) (1) Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of division (A)(1) above shall be
fined as set forth in § 72.99 of this chapter in addition to any costs or charges connected with the
removal or storage of any motor vehicle authorized under this section. The village shall display signs
indicating the fine imposed, and if the amount of the fine is subsequently changed, the village shall
change the sign to indicate the current amount of the fine. It shall not be a defense to a charge under
this section that either the sign posted pursuant to this section or the intended accessible parking place
does not comply with the technical requirements of 625 ILCS 5/11-301, Department regulations, or
local ordinance if a reasonable person would be made aware by the sign or notice on or near the
parking place that the place is reserved for a person with disabilities.
Parking Regulations 91
(2) The Circuit Clerk shall distribute 50% of the fine imposed on any person who is found
guilty of or pleads guilty to violating this section, including any person placed on court supervision
for violating this section, to the law enforcement agency that issued the citation or made the arrest. If
more than one law enforcement agency is responsible for issuing the citation or making the arrest,
the 50% shall be shared equally.
(D) As used in this section, AUTHORIZED HOLDER means an individual issued a disability
license plate under 625 ILCS 5/3-616, an individual issued a parking decal or device under 625 ILCS
5/11-1301.2, or an individual issued a license plate for veterans with disabilities under 625 ILCS 5/3-
609.
(E) Any police officer may seize the parking decal or device from any person who commits a
violation of this section. Any police officer may seize the disability license plate upon authorization
from the Secretary of State. Any police officer may request that the Secretary of State revoke the
parking decal or device or the disability license plate of any person who commits a violation of this
section.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3) Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.19 FIRE LANES.
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand at any time in any area designated as a fire
lane by official signs, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.20 ON-STREET PARKING.
(A) Street cleaning. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street or portion
thereof in the village at any time when such street is being cleaned. Signs indicating such cleaning
shall be posted before the work is done.
(B) Snow removal. Refer to §§ 72.40 through 72.42 of this chapter.
(C) Parking of certain vehicles restricted. It shall be unlawful to park any commercial vehicle,
truck, except those commonly referred to as “pick-up” trucks, any motor vehicle having a gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds or GVWR of more than 12,000 pounds and/or an overall
length of more than 21 feet, trailer, semitrailer, travel trailers, or boats attached or unattached to
vehicles on any street, except during loading and unloading, and that any commercial vehicle parked
or stopped for the purpose of pick-up or delivery of residents and/or personal property for a period
not to exceed eight hours shall be exempt. Fire Department vehicles, ambulances, and vehicles
owned or used by the village are exempt.
Penalty, see § 72.99
92 Swansea - Traffic Code
§ 72.21 LIMITED PARKING.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a period of time in excess of the amount of time
designated by law and so posted.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.22 VEHICLES FOR SALE.
It is unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to
park any vehicle upon any street from which vehicle merchandise is peddled or sold.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.23 ALLEYS.
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley, except for the purpose of loading and unloading
merchandise and then in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten
feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any
abutting property.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.24 CAB AND BUS STANDS.
No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area designated by law as a cab
stand; and no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated as a bus loading zone.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.25 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property without the consent of the
owner of the property.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.26 SIGNS.
Appropriate signs shall be posted in all areas where parking is limited or prohibited, indicating
such limitations or prohibitions.
Parking Regulations 93
SNOW EMERGENCIES
§ 72.40 ANNOUNCEMENT OF SNOW EMERGENCY.
(A) Prohibited. Within the village, whenever there is an accumulation of three inches or more of
snow, no person, firm, or corporation shall park or allow any motor vehicle to remain parked, on
any designated snow route as listed in Chapter77, Schedule XIII of this code for a period of 24 hours
following said accumulation, or until said route has been sufficiently cleared of snow.
(B) Snow emergency. In lieu of the requirement of three inches or more of snow, this provision
may be called into effect by the Mayor of the Village with the service of the Village Engineer, Chief
of Police, Code Enforcement Department, Street Supervisor, or other authorized department
personnel. The Mayor shall announce a snow emergency to the local news media and that this
provision is in effect, and he or she shall also notify the Police Department. This announcement shall
be made between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., and all persons shall be given two hours
within which to comply with this provision. If a fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain occurs after 11:00
p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m., however, and the mayor has not announced prior to 11:00 p.m. that the
parking on snow emergency routes is to be prohibited after a specified time, a vehicle parked on a
snow emergency route may remain so parked until 7:00 a.m. following such fall. The Mayor shall
announce when the snow emergency shall cease, and notify the local news media and Police
Department.
(C) Impoundment of vehicles. An unattended vehicle standing, stopped, or parked or occupying
any portion of any street in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance, which may
be abated by any police officer by impounding such vehicle, by removing and conveying such
vehicle, or by causing such vehicle hereby moved and conveyed to a vehicle pound. A vehicle pound
is hereby declared to be any suitable place designated by the Police Department of the village as a
vehicle pound. The owner or operator of such vehicle may have the same removed from the
impoundment by paying the costs and expenses of the towing and impounding of such vehicle,
together with all fines and penalties.
(D) Right to impound; additional remedies. In all cases of violations herein referred to, the right
to impound shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by law, and the registered owner of the
vehicle, at the time of the violation, shall be presumed to be the violator, as well as the vehicle itself
and the actual operator thereof. Whenever any vehicle, while being used without the consent of the
owner shall be stopped, standing or parking in violation of any of the provisions of this section, such
owner shall not be subject to the penalty for such violations.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.41 TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY.
Whenever the Mayor shall find that some or all of the conditions which gave rise to the snow
emergency prohibition no longer exist, he or she is authorized to declare the termination of the
94 Swansea - Traffic Code
emergency, in part or in whole, effective immediately on announcement. If the announcement is
made other than between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., it shall be repeated between those hours.
§ 72.42 SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.
(A) (1) The term SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE shall mean any route as designated and listed
in Chapter 77, Schedule XIII of the village's code of ordinances.
(2) On such street or highway designated as a snow emergency route, special signs shall be
posted to this effect.
(B) (1) It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street or portion thereof
designated as a “Snow Emergency Route” in the village at any time when snow is being removed
from such street.
(2) This provision will take effect when the snow has reached a depth of two inches and it
is determined by the Mayor that a “Snow Emergency” is necessary. Signs indicating “Snow
Emergency Route”, as per Chapter 77, Schedule XIII of the Village's code of ordinances, shall be
posted before this provision takes effect.
Penalty, see § 72.99
VIOLATIONS
§ 72.55 PARKING VIOLATIONS.
(A) Any person accused of a violation of an ordinance prohibiting parking a vehicle in a
designated area or restricting the length of time a vehicle may be there parked, may settle and
compromise the claim against him or her for such illegal parking by paying to the village the sum of
$10 within five days of the time such alleged offense was committed. The penalty shall increase to
$15 after five days. Such payment may be made at the Police Department, and such money shall be
promptly turned over to the Village Treasurer. The members of the Police Department are hereby
authorized to refrain from instituting a prosecution for the alleged offense involved.
(B) The form shall be as follows:
PARKING VIOLATION
NO.
DATE:
TIME: A.M. P.M.
Parking Regulations 95
LOCATION:
LICENSE NO.:
VEHICLE:
YOU ARE CHARGED WITH THE VIOLATION BELOW:
( ) Fire Lane $10.00
( ) No Parking Zone $10.00
( ) Improper Parking $10.00
( ) Blocking Driveway $10.00
( ) Other
IF PAID WITHIN FIVE DAYS
PENALTY-------After 5 days the fine increases to FIFTEEN DOLLARS ($15.00)
You may deposit fine in an envelope and mail it to Swansea Police Department
Village of Swansea
1400 North Illinois
Swansea, IL 62220
FAILURE TO PAY FINE WITHIN 10 DAYS WILL RESULT IN A WARRANT FOR YOUR ARREST
(C) Provided that this section shall not apply to persons parking a vehicle so as to obstruct the
entrance or exit of any place where Police or Fire Department apparatus or other emergency
equipment is kept or housed, or so as to block an emergency entrance in a hospital. Nor shall this
section apply to any person charged with parking a vehicle so as to entirely obstruct traffic in any
street or alley, or parking in such a way as to reduce traffic on an arterial street to one-way traffic
only; nor to any person who refuses to move a vehicle illegally parked at the request of any member
of the Police Department.
§ 72.56 PRIMA FACIE PROOF.
The fact that an automobile, which is illegally parked or operated, is registered in the name of a
person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was in control of the automobile at the
time of such violation.
§ 72.57 OFFICERS AUTHORIZED TO REMOVE VEHICLES.
(A) Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle in violation of any of the provisions of § 72.16
of this chapter or any other applicable section of this traffic code or ordinance of the village, the
officer is authorized to move the vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the
vehicle to move the same, to a position off the roadway.
96 Swansea - Traffic Code
(B) Any police officer is authorized to remove or cause to be removed to a place of safety any
unattended vehicle illegally left standing upon any highway, bridge, causeway or in a tunnel, or in a
position or under circumstances as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic.
(C) Any police officer is authorized to remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or
other place of safety any vehicle found upon a highway when:
(1) Report has been made that the vehicle has been stolen or taken without the consent of its
owner;
(2) The person or persons in charge of the vehicle are unable to provide for its custody or
removal;
(3) The person driving or in control of the vehicle is arrested for an alleged offense for
which the officer is required by law to take the person arrested before a proper magistrate without
unnecessary delay; or
(4) The registration of the vehicle has been suspended, cancelled, or revoked.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1302)
(D) The Police Department and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty are hereby
authorized to remove and tow away or have removed and towed away by commercial towing service:
(1) Any car, boat, trailer, or other vehicle illegally parked in any place where such parked
vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant, or obstructs or may
obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle;
(2) Any vehicle which has been parked in any public street for a period of 24 consecutive
hours; or
(3) Any vehicle parked on a designated snow route after a snow emergency has been
declared by the Chief of Police.
(E) Vehicles impounded shall be stored on any village property or in an authorized public
garage or parking lot and shall be restored to the owner or operator thereof after payment of the
expense incurred by the Village of Swansea in impounding, removing, and/or storing such vehicles.
§ 72.58 DUTY OF LESSOR OF VEHICLE ON NOTICE OF VIOLATION OF THIS
CHAPTER.
Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered pursuant to law and who leases the vehicle to
others, after receiving written notice of a violation of this chapter involving the vehicle, shall upon
request provide such police officers as have authority of the offense, and the court having jurisdiction
Parking Regulations 97
thereof, with a written statement of the name and address of the lessee at the time of the offense and
the identifying number upon the registration plates and registration sticker or stickers of the vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1305)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
(A) Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is otherwise
provided shall be fined as set forth in § 70.999 of this title.
(B) A violation of any part of § 72.15(A)(1)(h) of this chapter shall result in a mandatory fine of
$500 or 50 hours of community service.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1303)
(C) (1) Whoever violates § 72.18(A)(1) of this chapter shall be fined up to $350, in addition to
any costs or charges connected with the removal or storage of the motor vehicle. Signs shall be
displayed indicating the fine imposed.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3(c))
(2) (a) 1. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of § 72.18(A)(2) of this
chapter shall be fined $600 for a first offense.
2. Any person found guilty of violating § 72.18(A)(2) of this chapter a second or
subsequent time shall be fined $1,000.
(b) Any person who violates § 72.18(A)(3) is guilty of a violation of this chapter and
shall be fined $2,500.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3(c-1))
98 Swansea - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 73: BICYCLES, TOY VEHICLES, AND MOTORCYCLES
Section
Bicycles
73.01 Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles
73.02 Riding on bicycles
73.03 Clinging to vehicles
73.04 Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
73.05 Carrying articles
73.06 Lamps and other equipment on bicycles
Motorcycles and Mopeds
73.20 Riding on motorcycles
73.21 Special equipment for persons riding motorcycles
73.22 Required equipment on motorcycles
73.23 Operating motorcycle on one wheel
73.24 Lamps on mopeds
73.25 Riding on mopeds
73.26 Clinging to vehicles
BICYCLES
§ 73.01 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a highway shall be granted all of the rights, and shall be
subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this traffic code, except as to
special regulations in this traffic code, and except as to those provisions of this traffic code which, by
their nature, can have no application.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1502) Penalty, see § 70.999
99
100 Swansea - Traffic Code
§ 73.02 RIDING ON BICYCLES.
(A) A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and
regular seat attached thereto.
(B) No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is
designed and equipped; except that, an adult rider may carry a child securely attached to his or her
person in a backpack or sling.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1503) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 73.03 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the
same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1504) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 73.04 RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
(A) Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a roadway at less than the
normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall ride as close
as practicable and safe to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except under the following
situations:
(1) When overtaking and passing another bicycle, motorized pedalcycle or vehicle
proceeding in the same direction;
(2) When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway;
(3) When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not limited to, fixed or
moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, bicycles, motorized pedalcycles, pedestrians, animals,
surface hazards or substandard width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb
or edge. For purposes of this division (A)(3), a SUBSTANDARD WIDTH LANE means a lane that
is too narrow for a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle and a vehicle to travel safely side by side within
the lane; or
(4) When approaching a place where a right turn is authorized.
(B) Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a one-way highway with two
or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway as
practicable.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1505)
(C) (1) Persons riding bicycles or motorized pedalcycles upon a roadway shall not ride more
than two abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for their exclusive use.
Bicycles, Toy Vehicles and Motorcycles 101
(2) Persons riding two abreast shall not impede the normal and reasonable movement of
traffic and, on a laned roadway, shall ride within a single lane subject to the provisions of divisions
(A) and (B) above.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1505.1) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 73.05 CARRYING ARTICLES.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the use
of both hands in the control and operation of the bicycle. A person operating a bicycle shall keep at
least one hand on the handlebars at all times.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1506) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 73.06 LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.
(A) Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which
shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front, and with a red
reflector on the rear of a type approved by the State Department of Transportation which shall be
visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
(B) A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, any siren.
This division (B) does not apply to a bicycle that is a police vehicle or Fire Department vehicle.
(C) Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will adequately control movement of
and stop and hold the bicycle.
(D) No person shall sell a new bicycle or pedal for use on a bicycle that is not equipped with a
reflex reflector conforming to specifications prescribed by the State Department of Transportation,
on each pedal, visible from the front and rear of the bicycle during darkness from a distance of 200
feet.
(E) No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not equipped with side reflectors.
The reflectors shall be visible from each side of the bicycle from a distance of 500 feet, and shall be
essentially colorless or red to the rear of the center of the bicycle and essentially colorless or amber
to the front of the center of the bicycle. The requirements of this division may be met by reflective
materials which shall be at least three-sixteenths inch wide on each side of each tire or rim to indicate
as clearly as possible the continuous circular shape and size of the tires or rims of the bicycle, and
which reflective materials may be of the same color on both the front and rear tire or rim. The
reflectors shall conform to specifications prescribed by the State Department of Transportation.
102 Swansea - Traffic Code
(F) No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not equipped with an essentially
colorless front-facing reflector.
(625ILCS 5/11-1507) Penalty, see § 70.999
MOTORCYCLES AND MOPEDS
§ 73.20 RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES.
(A) A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat
attached thereto, and the operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on
a motorcycle unless the motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a
passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon another
seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear or side of the operator.
(B) A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the seat, facing forward,
with one leg on each side of the motorcycle.
(C) No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebars higher than the height of the
shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the normal driving position astride that
portion of the seat or saddle occupied by the operator.
(D) The operator of any motorcycle shall keep at least one hand on a handlebar grip at all times
the motorcycle is in motion.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1403) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 73.21 SPECIAL EQUIPMENT FOR PERSONS RIDING MOTORCYCLES.
The operator and every passenger of a motorcycle shall be protected by glasses, goggles or a
transparent shield. This equipment shall meet the requirements based upon those set forth in Vehicle
Equipment Safety Commission Regulation VESC-8, Minimum Requirements for Motorcyclists' Eye
Protection.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1404) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 73.22 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT ON MOTORCYCLES.
Any motorcycle carrying a passenger, other than in a sidecar or enclosed cab, shall be equipped
with footrests for the passenger.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1405) Penalty, see § 70.999
Bicycles, Toy Vehicles and Motorcycles 103
§ 73.23 OPERATING MOTORCYCLE ON ONE WHEEL.
Any person who operates a motorcycle, motor driven cycle or moped on one wheel is guilty of
reckless driving, as defined in § 76.01 of this code.
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
Operating on one wheel prohibited see 625 ILCS 5/11-1403.2
§ 73.24 LAMPS ON MOPEDS.
Every moped, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall
emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front, and with a red reflector on
the rear of a type approved by the State Department of Transportation which shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when in front of lawful, low-powered beams of
headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1507.1) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 73.25 RIDING ON MOPEDS.
(A) The operator of a moped shall ride only astride the permanent and regular seat attached
thereto, and shall not permit two persons to ride thereon at the same time, unless the moped is
designed to carry two persons. Any moped designed for two persons must be equipped with a
passenger seat and footrests for use of a passenger.
(B) Neither the operator nor any passenger on a moped shall be required to wear any special
goggles, shield, helmet or glasses.
(C) The provisions of §§ 73.01 through 73.06 and 73.24 of this chapter shall be applicable to
the operation of mopeds, except for those provisions which by their nature can have no application to
moped.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1403.1) Penalty, see § 70.999
Cross-reference:
Operating on one wheel, see § 72.23
§ 73.26 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
It shall be unlawful for any person on any street riding a motorcycle to cling to or attach himself
or herself or his or her vehicle to any moving motor vehicle or wagon.
Penalty, see § 70.999
104 Swansea - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 74: PEDESTRIANS
Section
74.01 Pedestrian obedience to traffic-control devices and traffic regulations
74.02 Pedestrian right-of-way at crosswalks; school zones
74.03 Crossing at other than crosswalks
74.04 Drivers to avoid colliding with pedestrians
74.05 Blind, hearing-impaired or physically handicapped pedestrian right-of-way
74.06 Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks
74.07 Pedestrians soliciting rides or business
74.08 Pedestrians walking on highways
74.09 Right-of-way on sidewalks
74.10 Pedestrians yield to authorized emergency vehicles
74.11 Pedestrians under influence of alcohol or drugs
74.12 Bridge and railroad signals
74.13 Motorized wheelchairs
74.14 Electric personal assistive mobility devices
74.15 Standing or loitering
74.99 Penalty
§ 74.01 PEDESTRIAN OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS.
(A) A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device specifically
applicable to him or her, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
(B) Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic and pedestrian-control signals provided in §§ 70.031
and 70.032 of this traffic code; but at all other places, pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges
and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1001) Penalty, see § 74.99
105
106 Swansea - Traffic Code
§ 74.02 PEDESTRIAN RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS; SCHOOL ZONES.
(A) (1) When traffic-control signals are not in place, or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle
shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when
the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the
pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger.
(2) No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety, and walk or run into
the path of a moving vehicle which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard.
(3) Division (A)(1) of this section shall not apply under the condition stated in § 74.03(B)
of this chapter.
(4) Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk
at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle
approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
(5) Whenever stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection or at a plainly
marked crosswalk between intersections, drivers shall yield right-of-way to pedestrians as set forth in
§ 71.062 of this code.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1002)
(B) For the purpose of this division (B), SCHOOL has the meaning ascribed to that term in
625ILCS 5/11-605.
(1) On a school day when school children are present and so close thereto that a potential
hazard exists because of the close proximity of the motorized traffic and when traffic-control signals
are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the
roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from
the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger.
(2) For the purpose of this division (B), a school day shall begin at 7:00 a.m. and shall
conclude at 4:00 p.m.
(3) This division (B) shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs are posted in
accordance with 625 ILCS 5/11-605.
Penalty, see § 74.99
Pedestrians 107
§ 74.03 CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS.
(A) Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk, or
within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the
roadway.
(B) Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead
pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(C) Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians
shall not cross at any place, except in a marked crosswalk.
(D) No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by official
traffic-control devices; and, when authorized to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in
accordance with the official traffic-control devices pertaining to the crossing movements.
(E) Pedestrians with disabilities may cross a roadway at any point other than within a marked
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk where the intersection is physically inaccessible to them,
but they shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1003) Penalty, see §74.99
§ 74.04 DRIVERS TO AVOID COLLIDING WITH PEDESTRIANS.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due
care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian, or any person operating a bicycle or other device
propelled by human power and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any obviously confused, incapacitated or
intoxicated person.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1003.1) Penalty, see §74.99
§ 74.05 BLIND, HEARING-IMPAIRED OR PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PEDESTRIAN
RIGHT-OF-WAY.
The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any blind, heating-impaired or physically
handicapped pedestrian carrying a clearly visible white cane or accompanied by a support or guide
dog.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1004) Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.06 PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALKS.
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1005) Penalty, see § 74.99
108 Swansea - Traffic Code
§ 74.07 PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS.
(A) No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of
any vehicle.
(B) No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment or business
from the occupant of any vehicle.
(C) No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting contributions from the
occupant of any vehicle, unless expressly permitted by this code. Solicitation on highways within the
village shall be allowed only at intersections where all traffic is required to come to a full stop. Any
person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be 16 years of age or more and shall be wearing a high
visibility vest. The soliciting agency shall be:
(1) Registered with the Attorney General as a charitable organization as provided by an Act
to Regulate Solicitation and Collection of Funds for Charitable Purposes, Providing for Violations
Thereof, and Making an Appropriation Therefor, approved 7-26-1963, as amended;
(2) Engaged in a statewide fund raising activity; and
(3) Liable for any injuries to any person or property during the solicitation which is
casually related to an act of ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent.
(D) No person shall stand on or in the proximity of a roadway for the purpose of soliciting the
watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1006) Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.08 PEDESTRIANS WALKING ON HIGHWAYS.
(A) Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be unlawful for any
pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
(B) Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walling along and upon a highway shall
walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the edge of the roadway.
(C) Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian walking along and upon
a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an outside edge of a roadway and, if on a two-way
roadway, shall walk only on the left side of the roadway.
(D) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any pedestrian upon a roadway shall yield the
right-of- way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(625 ILCS /11-1007) Penalty, see § 74.99
Pedestrians 109
§ 74.09 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALKS.
The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrians on a sidewalk.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1008) Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.10 PEDESTRIANS YIELD TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of an audible
signal and visual signals meeting the requirements of 625 ILCS 5/12-217, or of a police vehicle
properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, every pedestrian shall yield the right-ofway
to the authorized emergency vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1009) Penalty, see § 74.10
§ 74.11 PEDESTRIANS UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug to a degree which renders
himself or herself a hazard shall not walk or be upon a highway, except on a sidewalk.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1010) Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.12 BRIDGE AND RAILROAD SIGNALS.
(A) No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach thereto beyond the bridge
signal, gate or barrier after a bridge operation signal indication has been given.
(B) No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or barrier at a
railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
(C) No pedestrian shall enter, remain upon or traverse over a railroad grade crossing or
pedestrian walkway crossing a railroad track when an audible bell or clearly visible electric or
mechanical signal device is operational giving warning of the approach of a railroad train or railroad
track equipment.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1011) Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.13 MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS.
Every person operating a motorized wheelchair upon a sidewalk or roadway shall be granted all
the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to a pedestrian.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1004.1)
110 Swansea - Traffic Code
§ 74.14 ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
Every person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device upon a sidewalk or
roadway has all the rights and is subject to all the duties applicable to a pedestrian. Nothing in this
section shall be deemed to limit or preempt the authority of any home rule or non-home rule unit of
local government from regulating or prohibiting the use of electric personal assistive mobility
devices.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1005.1)
§ 74.15 STANDING OR LOITERING.
(A) No person shall stand or loiter in a street or roadway other than a safety zone.
(B) It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any sidewalk, except as near as
reasonably possible to the building line or curb line, if such standing interferes with the use of the
sidewalk by other pedestrians.
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is provided shall
be subject to the terms of § 70.99 of this code.
(B) (1) A first violation of § 74.02(B) of this chapter is a petty offense with a minimum fine of
$150. A second or subsequent violation of § 74.02(B) of this chapter is a petty offense with a
minimum fine of $300.
(2) (a) When a fine for a violation of § 74.02(B)(1) of this chapter is $150 or greater, the
person who violates § 74.02(B)(1) of this chapter shall be charged an additional $50 to be paid to the
unit school district where the violation occurred for school safety purposes. If the violation occurred
in a dual school district, $25 of the surcharge shall be paid to the elementary school district for
school safety purposes and $25 of the surcharge shall be paid to the high school district for school
safety purposes. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the entire $50 surcharge shall be paid
to the appropriate school district or districts.
(b) For purposes of this division (B)(2), SCHOOL SAFETY PURPOSES has the
meaning ascribed to that term in 625 ILCS 5/11-605.
(C) (1) A violation of § 74.12 of this chapter is a petty offense for which a $250 fine shall be
imposed for a first violation, and a $500 fine shall be imposed for a second or subsequent violation.
The court may impose 25 hours of community service in place of the $250 fine for a first violation.
Pedestrians 111
(2) A fine shall be imposed as established in division (C)(1) above for pedestrians who fail
to obey signals indicating the presence, approach, passage or departure of a train or railroad track
equipment.
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-1002.5, 625 ILCS 5/11-1011
112 Swansea - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 75: VEHICLE CONDITIONS, EQUIPMENT, AND LOADS
Section
Condition and Equipment of Vehicles
75.01 Generally
75.02 Scope and effect of equipment requirements
75.03 Gas and smoke
75.04 Noise
75.05 Mufflers, prevention of noise
75.06 Excessive engine braking noise prohibited
Size, Weight and Loads
75.20 Scope and effect of size, weight, and load regulations
75.21 Projecting loads on passenger vehicles
75.22 Protruding members of vehicles
75.23 Spilling loads prohibited
75.24 Covers or tarpaulins required for certain loads
75.25 Pushing of disabled vehicles
75.26 Limited load streets
Overweight and Oversized Vehicle Permits
75.40 Definitions
75.41 Permits
75.42 Applications for and issuance of permit
75.43 Police escorts
75.44 Bonds, indemnification and insurance
75.45 Denial, suspension and reinstatement
75.46 Permit fee
113
114 Swansea - Traffic Code
CONDITION AND EQUIPMENT OF VEHICLES
§ 75.01 GENERALLY.
As set forth in § 70.002 of this code, the Illinois State Vehicle Code has been adopted herein.
Pursuant to that adoption, the provisions relating to the requisite condition and equipment of
vehicles, (625 ILCS 5/12-101 et seq.) are applicable herein as though fully set forth hereunder.
Additional and specific provisions are set out below.
§ 75.02 SCOPE AND EFFECT OF EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the owner to cause or knowingly
permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in an
unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property, or which does not contain those parts or is
not at all times equipped with the lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as
required in 625 ILCS 5/12-101 et seq. and this code, or which is equipped in any manner in violation
of 625 ILCS 5/12-101 et seq. and this code, or for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required under this code and 625 ILCS 5/12-101 et seq.
(B) The provisions of 625 ILCS 5/12-101 et seq. and this code, with respect to equipment on
vehicles shall not apply to implements of husbandry, road machinery, road rollers or farm tractors,
or to farm-wagon type trailers having a fertilizer spreader attachment permanently mounted thereon,
having a gross weight of not to exceed 36,000 pounds and used only for the transportation of bulk
fertilizer, or to farm-wagon type tank trailers of not to exceed 2,000-gallons’ capacity, used during
the liquid fertilizer season as field-storage “nurse tanks”, supplying the fertilizer to a field applicator
and highways only for bringing the fertilizer to a field applicator from a local source of supply to the
farm or field or from one farm or field to another.
(625 ILCS 5/12-101) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 75.03 GAS AND SMOKE.
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits dense smoke or such an amount of smoke
or fumes as to be dangerous to the health of persons or to endanger the drivers of other vehicles.
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 75.04 NOISE.
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which makes unusually loud or unnecessary noise.
Penalty, see § 70.999
Vehicle Conditions, Equipment and Loads 115
§ 75.05 MUFFLERS, PREVENTION OF NOISE.
Every motor vehicle driven or operated upon the highways of this village shall at all times be
equipped with an adequate muffler or exhaust system in constant operation and properly maintained
to prevent any excessive or unusual noise. No such muffler or exhaust system shall be equipped with
a cutout, bypass or similar device. No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle in a
manner which will amplify or increase the noise of such vehicle above that emitted by the muffler
originally installed on the vehicle, and such original muffler shall comply with all the requirements of
this section.
(625 ILCS 5/12-602) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 75.06 EXCESSIVE ENGINE BRAKING NOISE PROHIBITED.
(A) The driver of a commercial vehicle, as defined in § 70.001 of this code, is prohibited from
operating or actuating any engine braking system that emits excessive noise. Signs shall be posted
indicating the prohibition.
(B) The sign shall state, “EXCESSIVE ENGINE BRAKING NOISE PROHIBITED”. The State
Department of Transportation shall adopt rules providing for the erection and placement of these
signs.
(C) This section does not apply to the use of an engine braking system that has an adequate
sound muffling system in proper working order that prevents excessive noise.
(D) It is a defense to this section that the driver used an engine braking system that emits
excessive noise in an emergency to avoid a collision with a person or another vehicle on the
highway.
(E) A violation of this section is an equipment violation punishable as provided in § 70.999.
(625 ILCS 5/12-602.1) Penalty, see § 70.999
SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOADS
§ 75.20 SCOPE AND EFFECT OF SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD REGULATIONS.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to be in control of, to drive, to park, or move on, upon, or
across, or for the owner to cause to knowingly permit to be parked, driven or moved on, upon, or
across any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size and weight exceeding the
limitations stated in 625 ILCS 5/15-101 et seq., or otherwise in violation of 625 ILCS 5/15-101 et
seq.
116 Swansea - Traffic Code
(B) The provisions of 625 ILCS 5/15-101 et seq. governing size, weight and load do not apply
to fire apparatus or equipment for snow and ice removal operations owned or operated by the village,
or to implements of husbandry, as defined in § 70.001, temporarily operated or towed in a
combination upon a highway provided such combination does not consist of more than three vehicles
or, in the case of hauling fresh, perishable fruits or vegetables from farm to the point of first
processing, not more than three wagons being towed by an implement of husbandry, or to a vehicle
operated under the terms of a special permit.
(C) The provisions of 625 ILCS 5/15-101 et seq., governing size, weight and load do not apply
to any snow and ice removal equipment that is no more than 12 feet in width, if the equipment
displays flags at least 18 inches square mounted on the driver's side of the snow plow. These
vehicles must be equipped with an illuminated rotating, oscillating or flashing amber light or lights,
or a flashing amber strobe light or lights, mounted on the top of the cab and of sufficient intensity to
be visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight. If the load on the transport vehicle blocks the visibility of
the amber lighting from the rear of the vehicle, the vehicle must also be equipped with an illuminated
rotating, oscillating or flashing amber light or lights, or a flashing amber strobe light or lights,
mounted on the rear of the load and of sufficient intensity to be visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight.
(625 ILCS 5/15-101)
(D) No person shall use the highways under the jurisdiction of the village in violation of weight
and location restrictions and commercial vehicle restrictions set forth in any applicable ordinance.
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
Power of village to regulate loads, see 65 ILCS 5/11-40-1
§ 75.21 PROJECTING LOADS ON PASSENGER VEHICLES.
No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on any street with any load carried thereon
extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of the vehicle, nor extending more than six
inches beyond the line of the fenders on the right side thereof.
(625 ILCS 5/15-105) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 75.22 PROTRUDING MEMBERS OF VEHICLES.
No vehicle with boom, arm, drill rig or other protruding component shall be operated upon any
highway in this village unless the protruding component is fastened so as to prevent shifting,
bouncing or moving in any manner.
(625 ILCS 5/15-106) Penalty, see § 70.999
Vehicle Conditions, Equipment and Loads 117
§ 75.23 SPILLING LOADS PROHIBITED.
(A) No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street unless the vehicle is so constructed or
loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, shifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom;
except that, sand may be dropped for the purpose of seeming traction, or water or other substance
may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the roadway.
(B) No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load unless the load and any
covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent the covering or load from becoming loose,
detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the highway.
(C) The State Department of Transportation shall adopt those rules and regulations it deems
appropriate which require the securing of steel rolls and other objects on flatbed trucks so as to
prevent injury to users of highways and damage to property. Any person who operates a flatbed
truck on any highway in violation of the rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department
of Transportation under this division (C) shall be punished as provided in § 70.999 of this code.
(625 ILCS 5/15-109) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 75.24 COVERS OR TARPAULINS REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN LOADS.
(A) No person shall operate or cause to be operated, on a highway, any second division vehicle
loaded with dirt, aggregate, garbage, refuse, or other similar material, when any portion of the load
is falling, sifting, blowing, dropping or in any way escaping from the vehicle.
(B) No person shall operate or cause to be operated, on a highway, any second division vehicle
having a gross vehicle weight rating of 8,000 pounds or more loaded with dirt, aggregate, garbage,
refuse, or other similar material in or on any part of the vehicle other than in the cargo area. In
addition, no person shall operate on any highway, such vehicle unless the tailgate on the vehicle is in
good repair and operating condition and closes securely so as to prevent any load, residue, or other
material from escaping.
(C) This section shall not apply to the operation of highway maintenance vehicles engaged in
removing snow and ice from the roadway, nor to implements of husbandry or other farm vehicles
while transporting agricultural products to or from the original place of production.
(D) For the purpose of this section AGGREGATE shall include all ores, minerals, sand, gravel,
shale, coal, clay, limestone or any other ore or mineral which may be mined.
(E) Notwithstanding any other penalty, whenever a police officer determines that the operator of
a vehicle is in violation of this section, as evidenced by the issuance of a citation for a violation of §
74.24, above, or where a police officer determines that a dangerous condition exists whereby any
portion of the load may fall, sift, blow, drop, or in any way escape or fall from the vehicle, the
police
118 Swansea - Traffic Code
officer shall require the operator to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and keep such vehicle
stationary until the load has either been reduced, secured, or covered with a cover or tarpaulin of
sufficient size to prevent any further violation of this section.
(F) Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be a petty offense punishable as provided
in § 70.999.
(625 ILCS 5/15-109.1) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 75.25 PUSHING OF DISABLED VEHICLES.
It is unlawful under any circumstances for any vehicle to push any other vehicle on or along any
highway outside an urban area in the village, except in an extreme emergency, and then the vehicle
shall not be pushed farther than is reasonably necessary to remove it from the roadway or from the
immediate hazard that exists.
(625 ILCS 5/15-114) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 75.26 LIMITED LOAD STREETS.
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street in the village when the gross weight on
the surface of the road through any axle of such vehicles exceeds 16,000 pounds. Where lower limits
are imposed by law and signs indicating such limitations are posted, it shall be unlawful to operate a
vehicle in excess of such weight on such street, except for the purpose of making delivery or picking
up a load, in which case such vehicle may be driven on such street for not more than the minimum
distance necessary for the purpose.
Penalty, see § 70.999
OVERWEIGHT AND OVERSIZED VEHICLE PERMITS
§ 75.40 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ANNUAL PERMIT. A permit issued to a single truck, truck-tractor power unit, or piece of
special mobile equipment which is valid for unlimited moves for a period not to exceed one year
from the date of issuance.
Vehicle Conditions, Equipment and Loads 119
NON-DIVISIBLE. A vehicle and load will be considered non-divisible when further separating
or dismantling the vehicle or load:
(1) Would require more than eight work hours to dismantle using appropriate equipment.
The applicant has the burden of proof as to the number of work hours required to dismantle the load.
(2) Will compromise or destroy the intended use of the load only. A load can be either
permanently mounted or temporarily secured equipment. Any parts, fluids, or material necessary to
the operation of only the power unit portion of the vehicle shall be deemed non-divisible.
(3) Would prohibit the vehicle from hauling one attachment that is necessary to the
operation of the load. To be considered non-divisible, the attachment must be securely mounted to
the load in the manner it is to be used and not carried as a separate object on the hauling vehicle. It is
the duty of the applicant to declare such an attachment in the permit application.
ONE-WAY or SINGLE TRIP PERMIT. One move from the point of origin to the point of
destination. Any additional stops between the point of origin and the point of destination are
expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are valid for five consecutive days from the date of issuance
unless otherwise directed by the Police Department.
QUARTERLY PERMIT. A permit issued to a single truck, truck-tractor power unit, or piece of
special mobile equipment which is valid for unlimited moves for a period not to exceed three months
from the date of issuance.
ROUND-TRIP MOVEMENT. Two trips over the same route in opposite directions. Round-trip
permits are valid for ten consecutive days from the date of issuance.
§ 75.41 PERMITS.
(A) (1) A permit shall be required for the movement of any vehicle or combinations of
vehicles, that is non-divisible or is carrying a load that is non-divisible, while operating on roadways
and bridges within the jurisdiction of the village which exceeds the following limits:
(a) Maximum gross weight of more than 80,000 pounds;
(b) Maximum single axle weight of more than 20,000 pounds;
(c) Maximum tandem axle weight of more than 34,000 pounds.
(d) Axle weights or series of axle weights that exceed the maximum limits set forth in
625 ILCS 5/15-111(a).
(e) Maximum overall length of 42 feet for single vehicles;
120 Swansea - Traffic Code
(f) Maximum overall length of more than 55 feet for tractor-semitrailer combinations;
(g) Maximum overall length of more than 60 feet for all other combinations;
(h) Maximum overall width of more than eight feet, six inches;
(i) Maximum overall height of more than 13 feet, six inches;
(2) Exempt from permits are the following:
(a) Fire Department vehicles;
(b) Those vehicles operating under an emergency declaration;
(c) Village owned vehicles engaged in emergency utility repair;
(d) Equipment used for snow and ice removal, owned or operated by any governmental
body.
(B) Permits shall be issued only in the name of a person, film, business, or corporation that
owns and operates the transporting vehicle or that operates the vehicle under a bona fide lease
agreement.
(C) Permits for vehicles that are both overweight and/or oversize are valid only a half hour
before sunrise until a half hour after sunset, on any day which a permit issued by the Illinois
Department of Transportation is valid.
(D) Permits are non-transferable and apply only to the permittee.
(E) The village may issue revisions to permits:
(1) To correct an error attributed to the village;
(2) To correct an error attributed to the applicant, discovered before the move.
(3) To adjust weights, dimension or routes as issued on the permit, before the move is
made.
(F) The permit, when issued, constitutes an agreement between the permittee and the village
that the move described in the application will take place only as described. The permittee has the
responsibility to report to the Police Department any inaccuracies or errors on the part of either the
village or the permittee before starting any move. Undertaking the move is prima facie evidence of
acceptance of the permit as issued and its terms.
Vehicle Conditions, Equipment and Loads 121
(G) The routing prescribed in the permit constitutes the sole extent of the authority granted by
the permit for the use of roads under the jurisdiction of the village, and any vehicle and/or load
found to be off route will be considered off route and without a permit. Permits shall be in the
driver's possession at all times unless otherwise directed by the Police Department and presented
upon demand to any and all police officers for the purpose of inspection.
(H) Any vehicle(s) and/or load found to be divisible will render the permit null and void. The
entire gross weight and axles weights of the vehicle(s) with the load are subject to legal weights. It is
the duty of the applicant to verify the non-divisibility of the vehicle(s) before making application for
the permit. The permit application itself is prima facie evidence that the applicant confirmed the
vehicle(s) and/or load were non-divisible.
(I) If required, arrangement shall be made by the permittee to have the proper utilities notified,
property moved, bridge or highway analysis performed and completed in advance of any permit
movement.
(J) All movements under the permit shall be made in accordance with all applicable federal,
state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
(K) Permits are null and void if altered for the purpose of deception. The permits issued under
this section constitute the giant of a privilege by the village and may be denied or suspended for such
reasons as the village may deem rationally related to its governmental interests including, but not
limited to:
(1) A permittee knowingly providing incorrect information in an application for a permit;
(2) A permittee, its agents, or employees operating on a permit which has been altered for
purposes of deception;
(3) Non-compliance by permittee, its agents or employees with federal, state, or local
ordinances pertaining to the transport of goods or operation of a vehicle engaged in the transport of
goods;
(4) Moving on village streets without a valid permit as required under this section.
(L) All single-trip or round-trip permits are limited to movements on assigned routes only.
(M) (1) All quarterly or annual overweight permits are restricted to the following maximum
limitations and routing:
(a) Twelve feet in width;
(b) Thirteen feet, six inches in height;
(c) One-hundred and fifteen feet in length;
122 Swansea - Traffic Code
(d) May not move across bridges or structures that are posted or listed as such on the
village truck route map.
(e) May not move on a “no-truck” route that is posted or listed as such on the village
truck route map, without written permission from a member of the Police Department.
(f) May not use any village street as a cut-thru to avoid using a state, county, or
township highway.
(2) These permits are subject to all standards of application set forth in § 75.42, except that
the load may be interchanged provided none of the above listed maximum weight and size
dimensions are exceeded. Quarterly and annual permits shall list the registration number and state for
the power unit, and vehicle identification number (VIN). The serial number of the power unit and/or
owner applied number shall also be listed, if applicable.
(3) Any violation of these terms will render the permit null and void, and subject the
driver, firm, business, or corporation that owns the vehicle to legal weight and dimension laws. The
arresting police officer will immediately confiscate the permit.
§ 75.42 APPLICATIONS FOR AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
(A) The village with respect to any roadway under its jurisdiction may upon application to the
Police Department issue a permit to move an oversized and/or overweight vehicle, and/or load. All
applications for permits shall be given full consideration. Permits for proposed moves may be issued:
(1) When the village roadways and bridges will not be unduly damaged; and
(2) When the safety of the traveling public will be adequately protected.
(B) The following information shall be included on the permit:
(1) Company name, address, fax and telephone numbers.
(2) Applicant name and contact number.
(3) Whether the permit is for a single trip, round trip, or for multiple moves.
(4) Description of hauling vehicle or power unit, including registration number, state and
year.
(5) Description of load to be moved and if the load is carrying an attachment.
(6) Maximum dimensions, gross weight, and axle weights of vehicle including load.
Vehicle Conditions, Equipment and Loads 123
(7) Roads under the jurisdiction of the village to be traveled, including points of origin and
destination.
(8) Any special conditions.
(9) Permit number.
§ 75.43 POLICE ESCORTS.
Police escorts are required for certain vehicles and loads as indicated in subsection herein. The
total number of officers necessary to provide for a safe move shall be determined by the Police
Department, based upon the size and weight of the permit move. Fees for escorts shall be in addition
to the permit fees set forth herein. Escort fees shall provide for a minimum of two hours of service
calculated by the most current overtime rate established by the Police Department.
§ 75.44 BONDS, INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE.
(A) The permittee shall assume total liability for any and all damages to streets, bridges, village
owned appurtenances and private or public property while engaged in a permit move. The measure
of liability is the cost for all repairs or replacement of property damaged by the permittee.
(B) The permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the village or members of the Police
Department from any costs, judgments or settlements, including attorneys' fees, arising from
physical injuries, including loss of life, or damage to or loss of property related to acts or omissions
by permittee, its officers, agents, or employees pursuant to the permit.
(C) Upon application for a permit each applicant shall provide evidence of a valid
comprehensive general liability insurance policy, with an insurance company approved by the
village, for protection against personal injury or property damage in the amount of $ 1,000,000.00
per occurrence. The village shall be listed as a certificate holder on the policy.
§ 75.45 DENIAL, SUSPENSION AND REINSTATEMENT.
(A) Suspension of a current permit shall be for the time determined appropriate by the Police
Department; however, reinstatement may be made upon conditions determined by the village and
payment of all outstanding settlements or judgments.
(B) The Chief of Police or their designee shall administer and enforce §§ 75.40 to 75.46 and
shall have the authority to grant, deny, suspend, or reinstate permits. Any applicant or permittee
denied a permit or who has had a permit suspended, upon request, shall be given a hearing before the
Chief of Police and, if applicant or permittee desires, may appeal the decision to the Hearing Officer.
124 Swansea - Traffic Code
(C) No permits shall be issued to an applicant or company who has outstanding fees or payments
due to the village.
§ 75.46 PERMIT FEE.
(A) The village with respect to highways under its jurisdiction shall collect an appropriate fee, as
determined by the Chief of Police, from applicants for the issuance of a permit to operate or move an
overweight or oversized vehicle or combination of vehicle(s) and/or loads.
(B) The Police Department is responsible for the billing, invoicing, and collection of permit
fees. The Police Department, in their discretion, may make rules and regulations as to acceptable
methods of payment and due dates. Any unpaid permit fees will be turned over to a collection agency
under contract of the village.
CHAPTER 76: MOTOR VEHICLE OFFENSES
Section
76.01 Reckless driving
76.02 Intoxicated driving
76.03 Chemical and other tests
76.04 Adoption of other specific statutes
76.05 Street racing
76.06 Accidents involving death or personal injuries
76.07 Duty to give information and render aid
76.08 Accident involving damage to vehicle
76.09 Duty upon damaging unattended vehicle or other property
76.10 Duty to report accident
76.11 False reports
76.12 When driver fails to report
76.99 Penalty
§ 76.01 RECKLESS DRIVING.
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the village in a careless, reckless, negligent, or
wanton manner, or carelessly so as to endanger life or property. A person commits reckless driving
if he or she:
(A) Drives any vehicle with a willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property;
or
(B) Knowingly drives a vehicle and uses an incline in a roadway, such as a railroad crossing,
bridge approach or hill, to cause the vehicle to become airborne.
(625 ILCS 5/11-503(a)) Penalty, see § 76.99
§ 76.02 INTOXICATED DRIVING.
(A) Prohibited. A person shall not drive or be in actual physical control of any vehicle within
the village while:
(1) The alcohol concentration in the person's blood, other bodily substance, or breath is
0.08 or more based on the definition of blood and breath units in § 11-501.2 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code;
125
126 Swansea - Traffic Code
(2) Under the influence of alcohol;
(3) Under the influence of any intoxicating compound or combination of intoxicating
compounds to a degree that renders the person incapable of driving safely;
(4) Under the influence of any other drug or combination of drugs to a degree that renders
the person incapable of safely driving;
(5) Under the combined influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, or intoxicating
compound or compounds to a degree that renders the person incapable of safely driving;
(6) There is any amount of a drug, substance, or compound in the person's breath, blood,
other bodily substance, or urine resulting from the unlawful use or consumption of a controlled
substance listed in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, an intoxicating compound listed in the Use
of Intoxicating Compounds Act, or methamphetamine as listed in the Methamphetamine Control and
Community Protection Act; or
(7) The person has, within two hours of driving or being in actual physical control of a
vehicle, a tetrahydrocannabinol concentration in the person's whole blood or other bodily substance
as defined in§ 11-501.2(a), paragraph 6 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. Subject to all other
requirements and provisions under this section, this division (A)(7) does not apply to the lawful
consumption of cannabis by a qualifying patient licensed under the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Pilot Program Act who is in possession of a valid registry card issued under that Act,
unless that person is impaired by the use of cannabis.
(B) Violation of section; defense. The fact that any person charged with violating this section is
or has been legally entitled to use alcohol, cannabis under the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Pilot Program Act, other drug or drugs, or intoxicating compound or compounds, or any
combination thereof, shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this section.
(C) Penalties.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Section, any person convicted of violating division
(A), above, is guilty of a violation of this section.
(2) A person who violates division (A) or a similar provision a second time shall be
sentenced to a mandatory minimum term of either five days of imprisonment or 240 hours of
community service in addition to any other criminal or administrative sanction.
(3) A person who violates division (A) is subject to six months of imprisonment, an
additional mandatory minimum fine of $1,000, and 25 days of community service in a program
benefiting children if the person was transporting a person under the age of 16 at the time of the
violation.
Motor Vehicle Offenses 127
(4) A person who violates division (A) a first time, if the alcohol concentration in his or her
blood, breath, or urine was 0.16 or more based on the definition of blood, breath, or urine units in
§11-501.2 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, shall be subject, in addition to any other penalty that may be
imposed, to a mandatory minimum of 100 hours of community service and a mandatory minimum
fine of $500.
(5) A person who violates division (A) a second time, if at the time of the second violation
the alcohol concentration in his or her blood, breath, or other bodily substance, or urine was 0.16 or
more based on the definition of blood, breath, other bodily substance, or urine units in § 11-501.2 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, shall be subject, in addition to any other penalty that may be imposed, to a
mandatory minimum of two days of imprisonment and a mandatory minimum fine of $1,250.
(D) Aggravated intoxicated driving. Aggravated driving under the influence of alcohol, other
drug or drugs, or intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof.
(1) Every person convicted of committing a violation of this section shall be guilty of
aggravated driving under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, or intoxicating compound or
compounds, or any combination thereof if:
(a) The person committed a violation of division (A) or a similar provision for the third
or subsequent time;
(b) The person committed a violation of division (A) while driving a school bus with
one or more passengers on board;
(c) The person in committing a violation of division (A) was involved in a motor
vehicle accident that resulted in great bodily harm or permanent disability or disfigurement to
another, when the violation was a proximate cause of the injuries;
(d) The person committed a violation of subsection (A) and has been previously
convicted of violating § 9-3 of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012 or a similar
provision of a law of another state relating to reckless homicide in which the person was determined
to have been under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, or intoxicating compound or
compounds as an element of the offense or the person has previously been convicted under division
(D)(a)(c) or (f);
(e) The person, in committing a violation of division(A) while driving at any speed in a
school speed zone at a time when a speed limit of 20 miles per hour was in effect under the
provisions of this code, was involved in a motor vehicle accident that resulted in bodily harm, other
than great bodily harm or permanent disability or disfigurement, to another person, when the
violation of subsection (A) was a proximate cause of the bodily harm;
(f) The person, in committing a violation of division (A), was involved in a motor
vehicle, snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle, or water-craft accident that resulted in the death of another
person, when the violation of division (A) was a proximate cause of the death;
128 Swansea - Traffic Code
(g) The person committed a violation of division (A) during a period in which the
defendant's driving privileges are revoked or suspended, where the revocation or suspension was for
a violation of division (A) or a similar provision, § 11-501.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS
5/11-501.1), paragraph (b) of § 11-401 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-401(b)), § 11-
804 of this code, or for reckless homicide as defined in § 9-3 of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the
Criminal Code of 2012;
(h) The person committed the violation while he or she did not possess a driver's
license or permit or a restricted driving permit or a judicial driving permit or a monitoring device
driving permit;
(i) The person committed the violation while he or she knew or should have known
that the vehicle lie or she was driving was not covered by a liability insurance policy;
(j) The person in committing a violation of division (A) was involved in a motor
vehicle accident that resulted in bodily harm, but not great bodily harm, to the child under the age of
16 being transported by the person, if the violation was the proximate cause of the injury;
(k) The person in committing a second violation of subsection (A) or a similar
provision was transporting a person under the age of 16; or
(l) The person committed a violation of division (A) of this section while transporting
one or more passengers in a vehicle for-hire.
(2) (a) Penalty. Except as provided otherwise, a person convicted of aggravated driving
under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, or intoxicating compound or compounds, or any
combination thereof is guilty of a Class 4 felony under Illinois State law and/or subject to maximum
penalties for ordinance violations.
(b) Third violation of section. A third violation of this section or a similar provision is
a Class 2 felony and a violation of this chapter. If at the time of the third violation the alcohol
concentration in his other blood, breath, other bodily substance, or urine was 0.16 or more based on
the definition of blood, breath, or urine units in § 11-501.2 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, a mandatory
minimum of 90 days of imprisonment and a mandatory minimum fine of $2,500 shall be imposed in
addition to any other criminal or administrative sanction. If at the time of the third violation, the
defendant was transporting a person under the age of 16, a mandatory fine of $25,000 and 25 days of
community service in a program benefiting children shall be imposed in addition to any other
criminal or administrative sanction.
(c) Fourth violation of section. A fourth violation of this section or a similar provision
is a Class 2 felony, and a violation of this chapter, for which a sentence of probation or conditional
discharge may not be imposed. If at the time of the violation, the alcohol concentration in the
defendant's blood, breath, other bodily substance, or urine was 0.16 or more based on the definition
of blood, breath, other bodily substance, or urine units in § 11-501.2 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, a
mandatory
Motor Vehicle Offenses 129
minimum fine of $5,000 shall be imposed in addition to any other criminal or administrative
sanction. If at the time of the fourth violation, the defendant was transporting a person under the age
of 16 a mandatory fine of $25,000 and 25 days of community service in a program benefiting
children shall be imposed in addition to any other criminal or administrative sanction.
(d) Fifth violation of section. A fifth violation of this section or a similar provision is a
Class 1 felony, and a violation of this chapter, for which a sentence of probation or conditional
discharge may not be imposed. If at the time of the violation, the alcohol concentration in the
defendant's blood, breath, other bodily substance, or urine was 0.16 or more based on the definition
of blood, breath, other bodily substance, or urine units in § 11-501.2 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, a
mandatory minimum fine of $5,000 shall be imposed in addition to any other criminal or
administrative sanction. If at the time of the fifth violation, the defendant was transporting a person
under the age of 16, a mandatory fine of $25,000, and 25 days of community service in a program
benefiting children shall be imposed in addition to any other criminal or administrative sanction.
(e) Sixth or subsequent violation of this section. A sixth or subsequent violation of this
section or similar provision is a Class X felony and a violation of this chapter. If at the time of the
violation, the alcohol concentration in the defendant's blood, breath, other bodily substance, or urine
was 0.16 or more based on the definition of blood, breath, other bodily substance, or urine units in §
11-501.2 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, a mandatory minimum fine of $5,000 shall be imposed in
addition to any other criminal or administrative sanction. If at the time of the violation, the defendant
was transporting a person under the age of 16, a mandatory fine of $25,000 and 25 days of
community service in a program benefiting children shall be imposed in addition to any other
criminal or administrative sanction.
(f) Violation of (D)(1)(c), above. For a violation of division (D)(1)(c), above, the
defendant, if sentenced to a term of imprisonment, shall be sentenced to not less than one year nor
more than 12 years.
(g) Violation of (D)(1)(f), above. A violation division (D)(1)(f) is a Class 2 felony, for
which the defendant, unless the court determines that extraordinary circumstances exist and require
probation, shall be sentenced to: (i) a term of imprisonment of not less than three years and not
more than 14 years if the violation resulted in the death of one person; or (ii) a term of imprisonment
of not less than six years and not more than 28 years if the violation resulted in the deaths of two or
more persons.
(h) Violation of (D)(1)(j), above. For a violation of division (D)(1)(j), a mandatory fine
of $2,500, and 25 days of community service in a program benefiting children shall be imposed in
addition to any other criminal or administrative sanction.
(i) Violation of (D)(1)(k), above. A violation of division (D)(1)(k) is a Class 2 felony
and a mandatory fine of $2,500, and 25 days of community service in a program benefiting children
shall be imposed in addition to any other criminal or administrative sanction. If the child being
transported
130 Swansea - Traffic Code
suffered bodily harm, but not great bodily harm, in a motor vehicle accident, and the violation was
the proximate cause of that injury, a mandatory fine of $5,000 and 25 days of community service in
a program benefiting children shall be imposed in addition to any other criminal or administrative
sanction.
(j) Violation of (D)(1)(k), above. A violation of division (D)(1)(d) is a Class 3 felony,
for which a sentence of probation or conditional discharge may not be imposed.
(3) Any person sentenced under this subsection (D) who receives a term of probation or
conditional discharge must serve a minimum term of either 480 hours of community service or ten
days of imprisonment as a condition of the probation or conditional discharge in addition to any other
criminal or administrative sanction.
(E) Prior violation. Any reference to a prior violation of division (A) or a similar provision
includes any violation of a provision of a local ordinance or a provision of a law of another state or
an offense committed on a military installation that is similar to a violation of division (A) of this
section.
(F) Mandatory term of imprisonment or community service. The imposition of a mandatory term
of imprisonment or assignment of community service for a violation of this section shall not be
suspended or reduced by the court.
(G) Driving with revoked license. Any penalty imposed for driving with a license that has been
revoked for a previous violation of division (A) of this section shall be in addition to the penalty
imposed for any subsequent violation of division (A).
(H) Certified copy of driving abstract. For any prosecution under this section, a certified copy of
the driving abstract of the defendant shall be admitted as proof of any prior conviction.
(625 ILCS 5/11-501)
§ 76.03 CHEMICAL AND OTHER TESTS.
(A) Upon the trial of any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising out of an arrest for an
offense as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-501, or as defined and set forth in §§
76.02 in this code, or proceedings pursuant to § 2-118.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/2-
118.1), evidence of the concentration of alcohol, other drug or drugs, or intoxicating compound or
compounds, or any combination thereof in a person's blood or breath at the time alleged, as
determined by analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath or other bodily substance, shall be
admissible. Where such test is made the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Chemical analyses of the person's blood, urine, breath or other bodily substance to be
considered valid under the provisions of this section shall have been performed according to
standards promulgated by the Department of State Police by a licensed physician, registered nurse,
trained phlebotomist, licensed paramedic, or other individual possessing a valid permit issued by that
Department for this purpose. The Director of State Police is authorized to approve satisfactory
Motor Vehicle Offenses 131
techniques or methods, to ascertain the qualifications and competence of individuals to conduct such
analyses, to issue permits which shall be subject to termination or revocation at the discretion of that
Department and to certify the accuracy of breath testing equipment. The Department of State Police
shall prescribe regulations as necessary to implement this section.
(2) (a) When a person in this village shall submit to a blood test at the request of a law
enforcement officer under the provisions of § 11-501.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-
501.1), only a physician authorized to practice medicine, a licensed physician assistant, a licensed
advanced practice nurse, a registered nurse, trained phlebotomist, or licensed paramedic, or other
qualified person approved by the Department of State Police may withdraw blood for the purpose of
determining the alcohol, drug, or alcohol and drug content therein. This limitation shall not apply to
the taking of breath, other bodily substance, or urine specimens.
(b) When a blood test of a person who has been taken to an adjoining state for medical
treatment is requested by an Illinois law enforcement officer, the blood may be withdrawn only by a
physician authorized to practice medicine in the adjoining state, a licensed physician assistant, a
licensed advanced practice nurse, a registered nurse, a trained phlebotomist acting under the
direction of the physician, or licensed paramedic. The law enforcement officer requesting the test
shall take custody of the blood sample, and the blood sample shall be analyzed by a laboratory
certified by the Department of State Police for that purpose.
(3) The person tested may have a physician, or a qualified technician, chemist, registered
nurse, or other qualified person of their own choosing administer a chemical test or tests in addition
to any administered at the direction of a law enforcement officer. The failure or inability to obtain an
additional test by a person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the test or tests
taken at the direction of a law enforcement officer.
(4) Upon the request of the person who shall submit to a chemical test or tests at the request
of a law enforcement officer, full information concerning the test or tests shall be made available to
the person or such person's attorney.
(5) Alcohol concentration shall mean either grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood or
grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath.
(6) Tetrahydrocannabinol concentration means either five nanograms or more of delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol per milliliter of whole blood or ten nanograms or more of delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol per milliliter of other bodily substance.
(B) Law enforcement officials may use standardized field sobriety tests approved by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration when conducting investigations of a violation of §
11 -501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or another similar provision provided in this code by drivers
suspected of driving under the influence of cannabis. The General Assembly finds that standardized
field sobriety tests approved by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration are divided
attention tasks that are intended to determine if a person is under the influence of cannabis. The
purpose of these tests is to
132 Swansea - Traffic Code
determine the effect of the use of cannabis on a person's capacity to think and act with ordinary care
and therefore operate a motor vehicle safely. Therefore, the results of these standardized field
sobriety tests, appropriately administered, shall be admissible in the trial of any civil or criminal
action or proceeding arising out of an arrest for a cannabis-related offense as defined in § 11 -501 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, a similar provision under this code, or proceedings under §§ 2-118.1 or 2-
118.2 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/2-118.1 and 5/2-118.2). Where a test is made the
following provisions shall apply:
(1) The person tested may have a physician, or a qualified technician, chemist, registered
nurse, or other qualified person of their own choosing administer a chemical test or tests in addition
to the standardized field sobriety test or tests administered at the direction of a law enforcement
officer. The failure or inability to obtain an additional test by a person does not preclude the
admission of evidence relating to the test or tests taken at the direction of a law enforcement officer.
(2) Upon the request of the person who shall submit to a standardized field sobriety test or
tests at the request of a law enforcement officer, full information concerning the test or tests shall be
made available to the person or the person's attorney.
(3) At the trial of any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising out of an arrest for an
offense as defined in § 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, or a similar provision in this code, or
proceedings under §§ 2-118.1 or 2-118.2 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/2-118.1 and 5/2-
118.2) in which the results of these standardized field sobriety tests are admitted, the cardholder may
present and the trier of fact may consider evidence that the card holder lacked the physical capacity
to perform the standardized field sobriety tests.
(C) Upon the trial of any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to
have been committed by any person while driving or in actual physical control of a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol, the concentration of alcohol in the person's blood or breath at the
time alleged as shown by analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath, or other bodily substance
shall give rise to the following presumptions:
(1) if there was at that time an alcohol concentration of 0.05 or less, it shall be presumed
that the person was not under the influence of alcohol.
(2) If there was at that time an alcohol concentration in excess of 0.05 but less than 0.08,
such facts shall not give rise to any presumption that the person was or was not under the influence
of alcohol, but such fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining whether
the person was under the influence of alcohol.
(3) If there was at that time an alcohol concentration of 0.08 or more, it shall be presumed
that the person was under the influence of alcohol.
(4) The foregoing provisions of this section shall not be construed as limiting the
introduction of any other relevant evidence bearing upon the question whether the person was under
the influence of alcohol.
Motor Vehicle Offenses 133
(D) Upon the trial of any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to
have been committed by any person while driving or in actual physical control of a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicated compound or compounds or any
combination thereof, the concentration of the concentration of cannabis in the person's whole blood
or other bodily substance at the time alleged as shown by analysis of the person's blood or other
bodily substance at the time alleged as shown by analysis of the person's blood or other bodily
substance shall give rise to the following presumptions:
(1) If there was a tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of five nanograms or more in whole
blood or ten nanograms or more in an other bodily substance as defined in this section, it shall be
presumed that the person was under the influence of cannabis.
(2) If there was at that time a tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of less than five
nanograms in whole blood or less than ten nanograms in an other bodily substance, such facts shall
not give rise to any presumption that the person was or was not under the influence of cannabis, but
such fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining whether the person was
under the influence of cannabis.
(E) (1) If a person under arrest refuses to submit to a chemical test under the provisions of §
11-501.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar provision in this code, evidence of refusal shall be
admissible in any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have been
committed while the person under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, or intoxicating
compound or compounds, or any combination thereof was driving or in actual physical control of a
motor vehicle.
(2) (a) Notwithstanding any ability to refuse under this code or the Illinois Vehicle Code to
submit to these tests or any ability to revoke the implied consent to these tests, if a law enforcement
officer has probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle driven by or in actual physical control of a
person under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, or intoxicating compound or compounds,
or any combination thereof has caused the death or personal injury to another, the law enforcement
officer shall request, and that person shall submit, upon the request of a law enforcement officer to a
chemical test or tests of his or her blood, breath, other bodily substance, or urine for the purpose of
determining the alcohol content thereof or the presence of any other drug or combination of both.
(b) This provision does not affect the applicability of or imposition of driver's license
sanctions under §11-501.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar provision under this code.
(3) For purposes of this section, a personal injury includes any Type A injury as indicated
on the traffic accident report completed by a law enforcement officer that requires immediate
professional attention in either a doctor's office or a medical facility. A Type A injury includes
severe bleeding wounds, distorted extremities, and injuries that require the injured party to be carried
from the scene.
134 Swansea - Traffic Code
(F) If a person refuses standardized field sobriety tests under § 11-501.9 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code or a similar provision of this code, evidence of refusal shall be admissible in any civil or
criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts committed while the person was driving or in actual
physical control of a vehicle and alleged to have been impaired by the use of cannabis.
(G) Department of State Police compliance with the changes in the amendatory Act as set forth
in § 11-501.2 of the Illinois Vehicle Code concerning testing of other bodily substances and
tetrahydrocannabinol concentration by Department of State Police laboratories is subject to
appropriation and until the Department of State Police adopt standards and completion validation.
Any laboratories that test for the presence of cannabis or other drugs under this code or the Illinois
Vehicle Code, the Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act, or the Boat Registration and Safety Act
must comply with ISO/IEC 17025:2005.
(625 ILCS 5/11-501.2)
§ 76.04 ADOPTION OF OTHER SPECIFIC STATUTES.
The provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, regarding standards for chemical
analysis, the reporting of such analysis results, and the evidentiary use thereof shall be adopted and
observed.
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-501.4, 5/11-501.4-1, 5/11-501.5, 5/11-501.6,
5/11-501.9
§ 76.05 STREET RACING.
(A) No person shall engage in street racing on any street or highway of the state.
(B) No owner of any vehicle shall acquiesce in or permit his or her vehicle to be used by
another for the purpose of street racing.
(C) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ACQUIESCE or PERMIT. Actual knowledge that the motor vehicle was to be used for the
purpose of street racing.
STREET RACING.
(a) The operation of two or more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating
speeds in a competitive attempt to outdistance each other;
Motor Vehicle Offenses 135
(b) The operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected course, each
starting at the same point, for the purpose of comparing the relative speeds or power of acceleration
of such vehicle or vehicles within a certain distance or time limit;
(c) The use of one or more vehicles in an attempt to outgain or outdistance another
vehicle;
(d) The use of one or more vehicles to prevent another vehicle from passing;
(e) The use of one or more vehicles to arrive at a given destination ahead of another
vehicle or vehicles; or
(f) The use of one or more vehicles to test the physical stamina or endurance of drivers
over long-distance driving routes.
(D) Every person convicted of committing a violation of division (A) above shall be guilty of
aggravated street racing if the person, in committing a violation of division (A) above was involved
in a motor vehicle accident that resulted in great bodily harm or permanent disability or
disfigurement to another, where the violation was a proximate cause of the injury.
(625 ILCS 5/11-506) Penalty, see § 76.99
§ 76.06 ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURIES.
(A) The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident resulting in personal injury to
or death of any person shall immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of the accident, or as close
thereto as possible, and shall then forthwith return to, and in every event shall remain at the scene of
the accident until the requirements of § 76.07 of this chapter have been fulfilled. Every such stop
shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
(B) For purposes of this section, PERSONAL INJURY shall mean any injury requiting
immediate professional treatment in a medical facility or doctor's office.
(625 ILCS 5/11-401) Penalty, see § 76.99
§ 76.07 DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION AND RENDER AID.
(A) The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident resulting in injury to or death
of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give the
driver's name, address, registration number and owner of the vehicle the driver is operating, and
shall upon request and if available, exhibit the driver's license to the person struck or the driver or
occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with, and shall render to any person injured in
the accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying or the making of arrangements for the
carrying of the person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment, if it is
apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person.
136 Swansea - Traffic Code
(B) If none of the persons entitled to information pursuant to this section is in condition to
receive and understand the information and no police officer is present, the driver, after rendering
reasonable assistance, shall forthwith report the accident at the Police Department, disclosing the
information required by this section.
(625 ILCS 5/11-403) Penalty, see § 76.99
§ 76.08 ACCIDENT INVOLVING DAMAGE TO VEHICLE.
(A) The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident resulting only in damage to a
vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of
the motor vehicle accident or as close thereto as possible, but shall forthwith return to and in every
event shall remain at the scene of the motor vehicle accident until the requirements of § 76.07 of this
chapter have been fulfilled. A driver does not violate this section if the driver moves the vehicle as
soon as possible off the highway to the nearest safe location on an exit ramp shoulder, a frontage
road, the nearest suitable cross street, or other suitable location that does not obstruct traffic and
remains at that location until the driver has fulfilled the requirements of § 76.07 of this chapter.
(B) Every stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
(C) If a damaged vehicle is obstructing traffic lanes, the driver of the vehicle must make every
reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have it moved so as not to block the traffic lanes.
(625 ILCS 5/11-402) Penalty, see § 76.99
§ 76.09 DUTY UPON DAMAGING UNATTENDED VEHICLE OR OTHER PROPERTY.
The driver of any vehicle which collides with or is involved in a motor vehicle accident with any
vehicle which is unattended, or other property, resulting in any damage to such other vehicle or
property shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or
owner of such vehicle or other property of the driver's name, address, registration number, and
owner of the vehicle the driver was operating or shall attach securely in a conspicuous place on or in
the vehicle or other property struck a written notice giving the driver's name, address, registration
number, and owner of the vehicle the driver was driving and shall without unnecessary delay notify
the Police Department and shall make a written report of such accident when and as required in §
76.10 of this chapter. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary. If a damaged vehicle is obstructing traffic lanes, the driver of the vehicle must make every
reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have it moved so as not to block the traffic lanes.
(625 ILCS 5/11-404) Penalty, see §76.99
Motor Vehicle Offenses 137
§ 76.10 DUTY TO REPORT ACCIDENT.
(A) The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident within the village,
resulting in injury to or death of any person or in which damage to the property of any one person,
including himself or herself, in excess of $1,500 (or $500 if any of the vehicles involved in the
accident is subject to 625 ILCS 5/7-601, but is not covered by a liability insurance policy in
accordance with 625 ILCS 5/7-601) is sustained, shall, as soon as possible but not later than ten days
after the accident, file with the Police Department a copy of the written report required to be filed
with the state under 625 ILCS 5/11l-406(a).
(B) Whenever a school bus is involved in an accident in the village, caused by a collision, a
sudden stop or otherwise, resulting in any property damage, personal injury or death, and whenever
an accident occurs within 50 feet of a school bus in the village resulting in personal injury to or the
death of any person while awaiting or preparing to board the bus or immediately after exiting the
bus, the driver shall as soon as possible, but not later than ten days after the accident, file with the
Police Department a copy of the written report required to be filed with the state under 625 ILCS
5/11-406(b). If a report is also required under division (A) above, that report and the report required
by this division (B) shall be submitted on a single form.
(C) The Chief of Police may require any driver occupant or owner of a vehicle involved in an
accident of which report must be made as provided in this section or § 76.12 of this chapter to file
supplemental reports whenever the original report is insufficient in the opinion of the Chief of Police
and may require witnesses of the accident to submit written reports. The report may include
photographs, charts, sketches and graphs.
(D) Should the Police Department learn through other reports of accidents required by law of the
occurrence of an accident reportable under this chapter and the driver, owner or witness has not
reported as required under divisions (A) through (C) above or § 76.12 of this chapter within the time
specified, the person is not relieved of the responsibility and the Police Department shall notify the
person by first class mail directed to his or her last known address of his or her legal obligation.
However, the notification is not a condition precedent to impose the penalty for failure to report as
provided in division (E) below.
(E) The Secretary of State shall suspend the driver's license or any non-resident’s driving
privilege of any person who fails or neglects to make report of a traffic accident as herein required or
as required by any other law of the state.
(625 ILCS 5/11-406)
Statutory reference:
Authorization for village to require accident reports, see 625 ILCS 5/11-415
138 Swansea - Traffic Code
§ 76.11 FALSE REPORTS.
Any person who provides information in an oral or written report required by this chapter with
knowledge or reason to believe that the information is false shall be fined as provided in § 76.99 of
this chapter.
(625 ILCS 5/11-409)
§ 76.12 WHEN DRIVER FAILS TO REPORT.
Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making a required written accident
report and if there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the motor vehicle accident
capable of making a written report, the occupant shall make or cause the written report to be made.
If the driver fails for any reason to make the report the owner of the vehicle involved in the motor
vehicle accident shall, as soon as practicable, make the report to the Police Department.
(625 ILCS 5/11-410)
§ 76.99 PENALTY.
(A) Generally. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided shall be subject to the terms of § 70.999 of this code.
(B) Reckless driving. Every person convicted of reckless driving, per § 76.01 of this chapter,
shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, except as provided under 625 ILCS 5/11-503, for felony
offenses and shall also have violated this chapter.
(625 ILCS 5/11-503)
(C) Street racing.
(1) Any person who is convicted of a violation of § 76.05(A) of this code shall be guilty of
a Class A misdemeanor for the first offense, shall have violated this chapter, and shall be subject to a
minimum fine of $250. The driver's license of any person convicted of § 76.05(A) of this chapter
shall be revoked in the manner provided by 625 ILCS 5/6-205.
(2) Any person who is convicted of a violation of § 76.05(B) of this code shall be guilty of
a Class B misdemeanor. Any person who is convicted of § 76.05(B) of this code for a second or
subsequent time shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and shall have violated this chapter.
(625 ILCS 5/11-506)
Motor Vehicle Offenses 139
(D) Accidents.
(1) Upon conviction of a violation of § 76.08 of this code, the court shall make a finding as
to whether the damage to a vehicle is in excess of $1,000, and in such case a statement of this finding
shall be reported to the Secretary of State with the report of conviction.
(2) If any peace officer or highway authority official finds either a vehicle standing upon a
highway or toll highway in violation of a prohibition, limitation or restriction on stopping, standing
or parking imposed under this traffic code, or a disabled vehicle that obstructs the roadway of a
highway or toll highway, the peace officer or highway authority official is authorized to move the
vehicle or to require the operator of the vehicle to move the vehicle to the shoulder of the road, to a
position where parking is permitted, or to public parking or storage premises. The removal may be
performed by, or under the direction of, the peace officer or highway authority official or may be
contracted for by local authorities. After the vehicle has been removed, the peace officer or highway
authority official shall follow appropriate procedures, as provided in section § 70.103 of this code or
625 ILCS 5/4-203.
140 Swansea - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 77: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
I. Traffic-control signal locations
II. School traffic-control signal locations
III. Stop intersection locations
IV. Through streets and stop intersections
V. Through streets and yield right-of-way intersections
VI. Load limit streets
VII. One-way streets and alleys
VIII. No U-turn zones
IX. Speed limit zones
X. School speed zones
XI. Pedestrian crosswalks
Cross-reference:
Posting signs, see § 70.042
SCHEDULE I. TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LOCATIONS.
(A) Except when directed otherwise by a police officer, the driver of any vehicle shall obey all
traffic-control signals within the village in accordance with the 625 ILCS 5/11-306.
(B) Traffic-control signal locations are designated as follows.
Locations
17th Street at North Belt West
Boul Avenue at North Illinois Street
Drake Road at North Illinois Street
Fullerton Road at North Illinois Street
Green Haven Drive at North Illinois Street
Huntwood Road at North Illinois Street
Illinois Route 161 at North Illinois Street
Josephine Drive at Illinois Route 161
Metro Drive at North Illinois Street
141
142 Swansea - Traffic Code
Locations
North Belt West and Fullerton Road at Illinois Route 161
Old Collinsville Road at Frank Scott Parkway
Rosewood Village Drive at North Illinois Street
(Prior Code, § 11-301)
Traffic Schedules 143
SCHEDULE II. SCHOOL TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LOCATIONS.
Except when directed otherwise by a police officer, the driver of any vehicle shall obey all
school traffic-control signal locations within the village in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/11-306(d).
School traffic-control signal locations are designated as follows.
None designated.
144 Swansea - Traffic Code
Traffic Schedules 145
SCHEDULE III. STOP INTERSECTION LOCATIONS.
Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a
vehicle approaching a stop intersection, indicated by a stop sign, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; or, if none, then before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or, if none,
then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic
on the intersecting roadway, but before entering the intersection. After having stopped, the driver
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another roadway
or which is approaching so closely on the roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when the driver is moving across or within the intersection, but said driver, having so yielded,
may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.
(A) Four-way stop intersection locations are designated as follows.
Street Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Banbury Place At Lyonshall Boulevard
Barrett Lake Drive At Smelting Works Road 1701 4-7-2014
Barteau Drive At Smelting Works Road 1701 4-7-2014
Big Bend Boulevard At Goldenrod Lane
Big Bend Boulevard At Green Haven Drive
Big Bend Boulevard At Homestead Avenue
Biverton Drive At Ramsfield Drive 1388 11-1-2004
Bourdelais Drive At Beau-Gon Avenue
Brackett Street At North 1st Street
Brackett Street At North 2nd Street
Britanna Drive At Mary Jo Drive
Caseyville Avenue At Gilbert Street
Caseyville Avenue At Morgan Street
Cunningham Drive At Deerfield Drive
Fullerton Road At Jared Drive
Fullerton Road At Rand Lane
Gilbert Street At North 1st Street
Gilbert Street At North 2nd Street
Green Haven Drive At Mimosa Avenue
146 Swansea - Traffic Code
Street Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Helen Street At Anna Street
Helen Street At E. Caroline Street
Huntwood Road At Old Caseyville Road 1478 12-18-2006
Kinsella Avenue At Gilbert Street
Marla Kay Drive At Mary Jo Drive
Morgan Street At Boul Avenue
Morgan Street At Kinsella Avenue
North 17th Street At Kingsbury and North 28th Street
Old Caseyville Road At Foxtrotter Drive/Baron Drive 1459 7-17-2006
Olroyd Drive At Rand Lane 1460 7-17-2006
Roger Street At Caseyville Avenue
Roger Street At North 15th Street
Roger Street At North 16th Street
St. Sabre Drive At Goldenrod Lane
(B) Three-way stop intersection locations.
Street Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Arley Hill Drive At Bristol Hill Drive/Wesleyan Drive
Arundel Place At Lyonshall Boulevard
Bassen Drive At Naughton Way 1459 7-17-2006
Baxton Court At Gentry Lane 1459 7-17-2006
Bennington Drive At Baron Drive
Biverton Drive At Copperton Drive
Bobbie Drive At Brian Drive
Britanna Drive At Bobbie Drive
Brougham Place At Lyonshall Boulevard
Caleb Court At Rand Lane
Caseyville Avenue (northwest
bound)
At Kinsella Avenue
Caseyville Avenue At Kinsella Avenue (westbound)
Traffic Schedules 147
Street Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Corporate Drive At Smelting Works Road
Cunningham Drive At Leighigh Drive
Foxtrotter Drive At Appaloosa Drive 1459 7-17-2006
Goldenrod Lane At Papillon Drive
Greystoke Place At Lyonshall Boulevard
Grimmig Road At Smelting Works Road
Homestead Avenue At Michael John Drive
Huntwood Court At Huntwood Road
Jardin Drive At Old Caseyville Road
Kenwood Drive At Kingsbury Drive
Lake Lorraine Drive At Lake Lorraine Cove
Leawood Drive At Twin Lake Drive
Lyonshall Boulevard At Old Collinsville Road
Lyonshall Boulevard At Smelting Works Road
Maria Kay Drive At Bobbie Drive
Mary Jo Drive At Castellano Drive
Merganser Boulevard At Steinberg Farm Road 1460 7-17-2006
Merganser Boulevard At Wood Duck Drive 1460 7-17-2006
Michael John Drive At Cunningham Drive
Munie Road At Smelting Works Road
Olroyd Drive At Wood Duck Drive 1460 7-17-2006
Polo Run Drive At Bridle Lane
Rand Lane At Jared Drive 1424 7-5-2005
Renoir Avenue At Pascal Place 1459 7-17-2006
Renoir Avenue At Pasteur Lane 1459 7-17-2006
Renoir Avenue At Rodin Avenue 1459 7-17-2006
Steinberg Farm Road At Rand Lane
Steinberg Farm Road At William Lane
Tanbark Drive At Green Haven Drive
Timber Waters Court At Lake Lorraine Drive
148 Swansea - Traffic Code
Street Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Twin Lake At Huntwood Road
Whitfield Drive At Green Haven Drive
Woodridge Drive At Persimmon
Wood Duck Drive At Rand Lane 1460 7-17-2006
(C) Stop intersection locations.
Street Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Caseyville Avenue At crosswalk (north and south bound lanes),
50 feet south of Miller Lane
Huntwood Road (west and east
bound)
At the west entrance of Wolf Branch Middle
School, 410 Huntwood Road
Shawn Drive At Kinsella Avenue
(Prior Code, § 11-303)
Traffic Schedules 149
SCHEDULE IV. THROUGH STREETS AND STOP INTERSECTIONS.
(A) Except when directed otherwise by a police officer, the driver of any vehicle shall stop at
the entrance to a through street and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered
the intersection or which are approaching so close on a through street as to constitute an immediate
hazard.
(B) Stop intersections at through streets are designated as follows.
Stop Street Through Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Abinger Place At Lyonshall Boulevard
Adam Drive (eastbound) At Abby Lane
Addiston Drive At Ramsfield Drive 1388 11-1-2004
Allen Drive (northbound) At Morgan Street
Ambrose Terrace Drive At Llewellyn Drive
Anna Rose Drive (southbound) At Jay Avenue
Anna Rose Drive (southbound) At Morgan Street
Anna Rose Drive (westbound) At North 16th Street
Anna Street (westbound) At North Illinois Street
Aragon Court At Renoir Avenue 1459 7-17-2006
Barbary Way At Dalton Drive
Barrett Drive (eastbound) At Smelting Works Road
Barrett Lake Drive (eastbound) At Smelting Works Road
Bassen Drive At Naughton Way 1459 7-17-2006
Beau-Gon Avenue (eastbound) At North Illinois Street
Beechmont Circle At Whispering Walk Way 1478 12-18-2006
Belle Street (eastbound) At North 15th Street
Belle Street (eastbound) At North 16th Street
Belle Street (westbound) At North 16th Street
Belle Street (westbound) At North 17th Street
Bennington Drive (northbound) At Green Haven Drive
Bettina Drive (southbound) At Lakeland Boulevard
Betty Jewell Court At Old Caseyville Road 1478 12-18-2006
150 Swansea - Traffic Code
Stop Street Through Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Biltmore Terrace (southbound) At Morgan Street
Biltmore Terrace (northbound) At North Belt West
Bond Avenue (westbound) At Kinsella Avenue
Botanical Drive (southbound) At Green Haven Drive
Boul Avenue (northbound) At North Belt West
Boulevard of the Chateaux At Munie Road
Bourdelais Drive (northbound) At Goldenrod Lane
Bourdelais Drive (southbound) At Goldenrod Lane
Brackett Street (eastbound) At Caseyville Avenue
Brackett Street (eastbound) At Kinsella Avenue
Brackett Street (eastbound) At North Illinois Street
Brackett Street (westbound) At Caseyville Avenue
Bronze Pointe Boulevard At North Illinois Street (eastbound)
Buckland Court At Scotsdale Drive 1478 12-18-2006
Calais Court (northbound) At Goldenrod Lane
Caroline Street (westbound) At North Illinois Street
Caroline Street (eastbound) At North Illinois Street
Caseyville Avenue (northbound) At North Belt West
Castle Court (southbound) At North Belt East
Castle Drive (northbound) At Maria Kay Drive
Castle Drive (westbound) At Castle Court
Catherine Court (eastbound) At Old Fullerton Road
Caulfield Drive At Redfield Drive 1388 11-1-2004
Charlton Place At Lyonshall Boulevard
Chesterfield Court At Rand Lane 1460 7-17-2006
Clara Street (eastbound) At Helen Street
Clifton Way Court At Bristol Hill Drive 1665 10-15-2012
Colby Court (northbound) At Fullerton Road
Colby Court (southbound) At Fullerton Road
Traffic Schedules 151
Stop Street Through Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Comer Avenue (eastbound) At North 15th Street
Comer Avenue (eastbound) At North 16th Street
Copperton Drive At Biverton Drive 1388 11-1-2004
Creekside Drive Road At Old Collinsville Road
Crestwood Drive (westbound) At Big Bend Boulevard
Dalecrest Drive (westbound) At North 17th Street
Deerfield Court (eastbound) At Big Bend Boulevard
Deerfield Drive (westbound) At Big Bend Boulevard
Duncan Avenue (southbound) At Caseyville Avenue
Duncan Avenue (westbound) At Kinsella Avenue
Duncan Avenue (northbound) At Morgan Street
Duncan Avenue (southbound) At Morgan Street
Ednick Drive (eastbound) At North Illinois Street
Eiffel Boulevard At Munie Road 1459 7-17-2006
Englewood Drive (eastbound) At Caseyville Avenue
Executive Woods Court At North Illinois Street (westbound)
Fawn Meadows (southbound) At Lake Lorraine Drive
Fournie Drive (eastbound) At Mary Jo Drive
Fournie Drive (westbound) At Mary Jo Drive
Fullerton Court At Fullerton Road
Garden Street (eastbound) At North Illinois Street
Garden Street (northbound) At North Belt West
Garden Street (southbound) At North Belt West
Gebhardt (eastbound) At North Illinois Street
Gilbert Street (eastbound) At North Illinois Street
Goldenrod Lane (eastbound) At Botanical Drive 1667 11-5-2012
Green Haven Drive (eastbound) At North Illinois Street
Grimmig Road (westbound) At North Illinois Street
Grimmig Road At Smelting Works Road
152 Swansea - Traffic Code
Stop Street Through Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Heatherwood Drive (southbound) At Baron Drive
Helen Street (northbound) At North Belt East
Helen Street (southbound) At North Belt East
Helen Street (southbound) At Service Street
Iris Drive (westbound) At Kinsella Avenue
Jamestown Road (westbound) At North 17th Street
Jardin Drive (northbound) At Beau-Gon Avenue
Jared Drive At Rand Lane
Jay Avenue (eastbound) At Caseyville Avenue
Jay Avenue (eastbound) At North 16th Street
Jay Avenue (westbound) At North 16th Street
Jay Avenue (westbound) At North 17th Street
Joel Drive At Rand Lane
Josephine Drive (southbound) At North Belt East
Karin Drive (eastbound) At North 15th Street
Kendra Ann Drive (southbound) At Michael John Drive
Kendra Ann Drive (westbound) At Old Caseyville Road
Keswick Court (westbound) At Bridle Lane
Kings Court At Englewood Drive
Kingsbury Drive (westbound) At North 17th Street
Kinsella Avenue (southbound) At Caseyville Avenue
Kinsella Avenue (northbound) At Roger Street
Kinsella Avenue (northwest bound) At Caseyville Avenue
Lake Lorraine Drive (northbound) At Fawn Meadows
Lake Lorraine Drive At Hunters Point
Lake Lorraine Drive (eastbound,
both)
At Old Collinsville Road
Lakefront Drive (northbound) At Morgan Street
Lakeland Boulevard (eastbound) At North Illinois Street
Traffic Schedules 153
Stop Street Through Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Leawood Drive (westbound) At Twin Lake Drive (near 525 Leawood)
Leighigh Court (westbound) At Big Bend Boulevard
Leighigh Drive (westbound) At Old Caseyville Road
Leighigh Drive (eastbound) At Big Bend Boulevard
Llewellyn Road (eastbound) At Old Caseyville Road
Llewellyn Road (westbound) At Sullivan Drive
Marilyn Avenue (southbound) At Caseyville Avenue
Marilyn Avenue (eastbound) At Kinsella Avenue
Marilyn Avenue (northbound) At Morgan Street
Marilyn Avenue (southbound) At Morgan Street
Martingale Court (westbound) At Bridle Lane
Melinda Court (northbound) At Britanna Drive
Meta Drive (westbound) At North 17th Street
MetroLink parking lot exit At Metro Way
Michael John Drive (northbound) At Kendra Ann Drive
Michael John Drive (westbound) At Whitfield Drive
Miller Lane (eastbound) At Caseyville Avenue
Miller Lane (westbound) At Kinsella Avenue
Moorgate Court At Huntrwood Road
Morgan Street (eastbound) At North Belt West
Morgan Street (westbound) At North 17th Street
Narrow Leaf Lane At Whispering Walk Way 1478 12-18-2006
Naughton Way At Barbary Way
North 15th Street (northbound) At Jay Avenue
North 15th Street (southbound) At Jay Avenue
North 15th Street (northbound) At Morgan Street
North 15th Street (southbound) At Morgan Street
North 15th Street (northbound) At North Belt West
North 16th Street (southbound) At Morgan Street
154 Swansea - Traffic Code
Stop Street Through Street Ord. No. Date Passed
North 16th Street (northbound) At North Belt West
North 1st Street (northbound) At Pawnee Drive
North 1st Street (southbound) At Pawnee Drive
North 1st Street (southbound) At West “J” Street
North 2nd Street (southbound) At West “J” Street
Old Fullerton Road (northbound) At Fullerton Road
Old Fullerton Road At Metro Way
Old Fullerton Road (eastbound) At North Illinois Street
Papillon Drive (northbound) At Beau-Gon Avenue
Papillon Drive (southbound) At Beau-Gon Avenue
Papillon Drive (southbound) At Jardin Court
Papillon Drive (northbound) At Jardin Court
Parkway Drive (westbound, both) At North Illinois Street
Pawnee Drive (eastbound) At North 2nd Street
Pawnee Drive (eastbound) At North Illinois Street
Pawnee Drive (westbound) At North 2nd Street
Pelham Point (westbound) At Bridle Lane
Penrose Drive (northbound) At Kingsbury Drive
Pensoneau Drive (westbound, both) At Caseyville Avenue
Persimmon Drive (southbound) At Fullerton Road
Philecia (southbound) At Bobbie Drive
Philecia Drive (northbound) At Marla Kay Drive
Pine Street (northbound) At Morgan Street
Polo Court (northbound) At Polo Run Drive
Polo Run Drive (westbound) At Old Caseyville Road
Ramsfield Drive At Redfield Drive 1388 11-1-2004
Ramsfield Drive At Smelting Works Road 1388 11-1-2004
Redcastle Place At Lyonshall Boulevard
Redfield Drive At Copperton Drive
Traffic Schedules 155
Stop Street Through Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Renoir Avenue At Eiffel Boulevard 1459 7-17-2006
Roclare Drive (westbound) At Kinsella Avenue
Roger Avenue (westbound) At North 17th Street
Roger Street (eastbound) At North Belt West
Sarah Lane At Merganser Boulevard 1460 7-17-2006
Sarah Lane (northbound) At William Lane
Sarah Lane (southbound) At William Lane
Sawyer Court At Sarah Lane
Schae-Fries Drive (westbound) At Caseyville Avenue
Schulte Drive (northbound) At Gilbert Street
Scoter Court At Steinberg Farm Road 1460 7-17-2006
Scotsdale Drive At Huntrwood Road 1478 12-18-2006
Service Street (westbound) At North Illinois Street
Sheffield Court At Copperton Drive
Shireton Court At Biverton Drive
Short Street (southbound) At Gilbert Street
Smelting Works Road (northbound) At Drake Road
Smelting Works Road At Fullerton Road
Smelting Works Road (northbound) At McDonald Boulevard
Smelting Works Road (southbound) At McDonald Boulevard
Smelting Works Road (westbound) At North Illinois Street
Sosa Court At Rand Lane
St. Clair Lake Drive (westbound) At North 17th Street
St. James Drive (northbound) At Caseyville Avenue
St. Sabre Drive (northbound) At Beau-Gon Avenue
St. Sabre Drive (southbound) At Beau-Gon Avenue
St. Sabre Drive (northbound) At Goldenrod Lane
Switala Lane (southbound) At North Belt West
Thouvenot Lane Road At Old Collinsville Road
156 Swansea - Traffic Code
Stop Street Through Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Timberlake Drive (northbound) At Green Haven Drive
Twilight Drive (eastbound) At North Illinois Street
Urban Way (southbound) At Lakeland Boulevard 1667 11-5-2012
Viburnum Drive (northbound) At Bettina Drive and Big bend
Viburnum Drive (southbound) At Bettina Drive and Big Bend
Victoria Square Court (eastbound) At Bristol Hill Drive 1665 10-15-2012
Village Drive (northbound) At Lakeland Boulevard
Village Drive (southbound) At Green Haven Drive
Warwick Place At Lyonshall Boulevard
West “H” Street (eastbound) At Catawba Avenue
West “H” Street (westbound) At North 17th Street
West “J” Street (westbound) At North 17th Street
Western Avenue (northbound) At Gilbert Street
Western Avenue (southbound) At Gilbert Street
Westgate Drive (southbound) At Kingsbury Drive
Whitfield Drive (southbound) At Baron Drive
Wild Cherry Lane (northbound) At Pine Dale Drive
Wild Cherry Lane (southbound) At Pine Dale Drive
Winchester Court At Bristol Hill Drive 1665 10-15-2012
Windward Way Drive At Narrow Leaf Lane 1478 12-18-2006
Woodridge Drive (southbound) At Fullerton Road
(Prior Code, § 11-304)
Traffic Schedules 157
SCHEDULE V. THROUGH STREETS AND YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY INTERSECTIONS.
(A) Except when directed otherwise by a police officer, the driver of any vehicle approaching a
yield sign shall in obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing
conditions and, if required for safety, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if none, then before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or
approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such
driver is moving across or within the intersection.
(B) Yield right-of-way intersections at through streets are designated as follows.
Yield Right-of-Way Through Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Abby Lane At Adam Drive 1368 4-19-2004
Adam Drive (northwest bound) At Woodview Drive
Adam Drive (southeast bound) At Woodridge Drive
Alhambra Court (eastbound) At Penrose Drive
Amber Meadows At Barteau Drive 1702 4-7-2014
Arbor Drive (eastbound) At Botanical Drive
Arbor Drive (westbound) At Big Bend Boulevard
Aspen Place (northbound) At Persimmon Drive
Aspen Place (southbound) At Pine Dale
Barrett Court (southbound) At Barrett Drive
Barrett Crossing (southbound) At Barrett Drive
Barrett Crossing (northbound) At Barrett Lake Drive
Brian Drive (northwest bound) At Mary Jo Drive
Brian Drive (southeast bound) At Mary Jo Drive
Castle Drive (southbound) At Philecia Drive
Castle Pines Court At Barteau Drive 1702 4-7-2014
Chavant Court (southbound) At Beau-Gon Avenue
Cheltenham Court At Arley Hill Drive 1665 10-15-2012
Colston Court At Bristol Hill Drive 1665 10-15-2012
Crestwood Drive (eastbound) At Big Bend Boulevard
158 Swansea - Traffic Code
Yield Right-of-Way Through Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Crestwood Drive (westbound) At Mimosa Avenue
Derbyshire Drive (eastbound) At Bobbie Drive
Derbyshire Drive (eastbound) At Mary Jo Drive
Derbyshire Drive (westbound) At Mary Jo Drive
Endicott Court At Naughton Way 1459 7-17-2006
Fieldcrest Drive (westbound) At Big Bend Boulevard
Fieldcrest Drive (eastbound) At Botanical Drive
Gaston Court At Bassen Drive 1459 7-17-2006
Goldeneye Court At Merganser Boulevard 1460 7-17-2006
Goldenrod Lane (Easbound) At Botanical Drive 1667 11-5-2012
Gundlach Avenue (westbound) At North 2nd Street
Harlequin Point At Wood Duck Drive 1460 7-17-2006
Harvest Lane (eastbound) At Botanical Drive
Harvest Lane (westbound) At Big Bend Boulevard
Hugo Court At Pasteur Lane 1459 7-17-2006
Jardin Court (southbound) At Beau-Gon Avenue
Josephine Drive (northbound) At Fournie Drive
Lombardi Court At Narrow Leaf Lane 1478 12-18-2006
Lotus Drive (eastbound) At Tanbark Drive (southbound)
Lotus Drive (southbound) At Twin Lake Drive
Lotus Drive (westbound) At Lotus Drive (southbound)
Mannington Court At Buckland Court 1478 12-18-2006
Marche Court (northbound) At Beau-Gon Avenue
Mary Jo Drive (southbound) At Fournie Drive
Melrose Court (northbound) At Thrush Lane
Midland Court (northbound) At Thrush Lane
Mimosa Avenue (southbound) At Homestead Avenue
Mimosa Avenue (eastbound) At Village Drive
Mustang Court At Appalossa Drive 1459 7-17-2006
Traffic Schedules 159
Yield Right-of-Way Through Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Northwood Drive (southbound) At Meta Drive
Persimmon Drive (westbound) At Woodridge Drive
Pine Dale Drive (eastbound) At Persimmon Drive
Pine Dale Drive (eastbound) At Woodridge Drive
Pine Dale Drive (westbound) At Woodridge Drive
Pine Dale Drive (northeast bound) At Woodridge Drive
Piney Court At Barteau Drive 1702 4-7-2014
Roan Court At Appalossa Drive 1459 7-17-2006
Roclare Drive (eastbound) At Duncan Avenue
Sawyer Court At Sarah Lane 1460 7-17-2006
Service Street (westbound) At North Illinois Street, Frontage Road
Shade Tree Court At Windward Way Drive 1478 12-18-2006
Short Street (northbound) At Brackett Drive
Shoveler Court At Sarah Lane 1460 7-17-2006
St. James Drive (southbound) At Ivo Drive
Swan Court At Wood Duck Drive 1460 7-17-2006
Tanbark Drive (westbound) At Tanbark Drive
Thistle Lane (eastbound) At Mimosa Avenue
Thistle Lane (westbound) At Big Bend Boulevard
Thorobread Court At Appalossa Drive 1459 7-17-2006
Thrush Lane (eastbound) At Lotus Drive
Thrush Lane (westbound) At Big Bend Boulevard
Timber Drive (southbound) At Bobbie Drive
Turnbridge Drive (southbound) At Bobbie Drive
Turnbridge Drive (northbound) At Mary Jo Drive
Turnbridge Drive (southbound) At Mary Jo Drive
Twin Lake Court (northbound) At Twin Lake Drive
Twin Lake Drive (westbound) At Lotus Drive (southbound)
Urban Way (southbound) At Big Bend Boulevard
160 Swansea - Traffic Code
Yield Right-of-Way Through Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Urban Way (northbound) At Lakeland Boulevard 1667 11-5-2012
Viburnum Drive At Lakeland Boulevard
Village Drive (southbound) At Bettina Drive
Weigela Court (westbound) At Bettina Drive
West “J” Street (eastbound) At Catawba Avenue
Westgate Drive (northbound) At Meta Drive
Westwick Court Drive At Scotsdale Drive 1478 12-18-2006
Westwind Drive (westbound) At Tanbark Drive
Westwind Drive (eastbound) At Timberlake Drive
Woodview Drive (northbound) At Adam Drive
(Prior Code, § 11-305)
Traffic Schedules 161
SCHEDULE VI. LOAD LIMIT STREETS.
(A) Except for local delivery, pick-up, and when used as a conveyance to and fro a local
residence, no person shall operate a motor vehicle in excess of five tons upon any street within the
village.
(B) Except for local delivery or pick-up, no parking of any vehicle over five tons on any village
street will be permitted.
(C) Buses used for purposes of public transportation, or for the transportation of students to and
from school, are specifically exempt from the provisions of this section.
162 Swansea - Traffic Code
Traffic Schedules 163
SCHEDULE VII. ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
Except when directed otherwise by a police officer, no person shall operate a motor vehicle in
any direction other than that so indicated, on any street or alley designated as a one-way street or
alley. One-way streets and alleys are designated as follows: Pensoneau Drive.
(Prior Code, § 11-307)
164 Swansea - Traffic Code
Traffic Schedules 165
SCHEDULE VIII. NO U-TURN ZONES.
Except when directed otherwise by a police officer, no driver of any motor vehicle shall make a
U-turn in any area designated as a no U-turn zone. No U-turn zones are designated as follows.
Location Direction
Intersection of Illinois Route 161 (North Belt West) and Morgan Street Either direction
On Illinois Route 161 (North Belt West), 465 feet east of Morgan Street Either direction
(Prior Code, § 11-308)
166 Swansea - Traffic Code
Traffic Schedules 167
SCHEDULE IX. SPEED LIMIT ZONES.
Within the village, no person shall operate a motor vehicle upon any street at a speed greater
than 25 mph or upon an alley at a speed greater than 15 mph, unless the speed limit is otherwise
posted. Upon the basis of engineering or traffic investigation, the following areas are designated as
reduced speed limit zones.
(A) Twenty mph speed limit zones.
Street Location
Abby Lane For its entire length within the village
Adam Drive For its entire length within the village
Bobbie Drive Between Castle Court and Britanna Drive
Brian Drive For its entire length within the village
Britanna Drive Between Bobbie Drive and Mary Jo Drive
Caseyville Avenue Between Kinsella Avenue and Gilbert Street
Castle Court Between North Belt East and Fournie Drive
Castle Drive Between Castle Drive and Marla Kay Drive
Derbyshire Between Bobbie Drive and Mary Jo Drive
Gilbert Street Between Schulte Drive and Western Avenue
Josephine Drive Between North Belt East and Fournie Drive
Kenwood Drive Between Kingsbury and Western Avenue
Kingsbury Drive Between North 17th Street and Kenwood Drive
Marla Kay Drive Between Bobbie Drive and Castellano Drive
Mary Jo Drive Between Fournie Drive and Britanna Drive
Philecia Drive Between Castle Drive and Marla Kay Drive
Twin Lake Drive Between Leawood Drive and Huntwood Drive
Woodview Drive For its entire length within the village
(B) Ten mph speed limit zones.
Street Location
Miller Lane Between Kinsella Avenue and Caseyville Avenue
(Prior Code, § 11-309)
168 Swansea - Traffic Code
Traffic Schedules 169
SCHEDULE X. SCHOOL SPEED ZONES.
Within the village, no person shall operate any motor vehicle at a speed greater than 20 mph,
between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any school day when children are present, in any designated
school speed zone, listed as follows.
Street Location
Boul Avenue From the intersection at Morgan Street to approximately
600 feet southeast of that intersection
Huntwood Road Between Hunt Drive and Oldy Caseyville Road
170 Swansea - Traffic Code
Traffic Schedules 171
SCHEDULE XI. PEDESTRIAN CROSSWALKS.
Within the village, pedestrian crosswalks are designated as follows.
Location (Across) Location (At)
Big Bend Boulevard At Twin Lake Drive
Boul Avenue At Morgan Street
Caseyville Avenue 50 feet south of Miller Lane
Huntwood Road At Huntwood Court
Twin Lake Drive At Big Bend Boulevard
Twin Lake Drive At the entrance to the parking of Wolf Branch Elementary School
(Prior Code, § 11-315)
172 Swansea - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 78: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
I. No parking zones
II. Fire lanes
III. Loading zones
IV. Snow routes
Cross-reference:
Posting signs, see § 70.042
SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING ZONES.
Within the village, no person shall park a motor vehicle at any time within any designated no
parking zone, listed as follows.
Street Side(s) Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Alleyway Between North Illinois Street and North
1st Street from Gilbert Street to Brackett
Street
Anna Street North Within 50 feet of the intersection with
North Illinois Street
Big Bend Boulevard West Southward from Goldenrod Lane to
Leighigh Drive, but specifically limited to
no parking on school days, between the
hours 7:30 a.m. and 8:30 a.m., and
between the hours of 2:30 p.m. and 4:00
p.m.
Big Bend Boulevard From the northern most property line of
533 Big Bend Boulevard southward to its
terminus
Bobbie Drive North For a distance of 115 feet east of Castle
Drive
Bobbie Drive North From the eastern most boundary of 105
Bobbie Drive to the intersection of Castle
Drive
173
174 Swansea - Traffic Code
Street Side(s) Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Brackett Street Either Between North Illinois Street and North
1st Street
Caseyville Avenue Either From Gilbert Street to Kinsella Avenue 1454, 1755 6-5-2006, 7-
5-2016
Caseyville Avenue Either From Kinsella Avenue to North Belt West 1454 6-5-2006
Castellano Drive West Between Marcella Drive and Marla Kay
Drive
Catawba Avenue Either Between West “J” Street and West “H”
Street
Duncan Avenue East Commencing at a point 600 feet north of
Caseyville Avenue for a distance of 232
feet north
Duncan Avenue West Commencing at a point 490 feet south of
Morgan for a distance of 20 feet south
Ednick Drive North and
south
Starting at the intersection of Route 159
and continuing westward for a distance of
approximately 150 feet
Englewood Drive West Beginning at a point 170 feet from its
intersection with Caseyville Avenue,
southward to its terminus
Frontage Road East Route 159 between Service Street and
Anna Street
Fullerton Court West In front of 416 Fullerton Court
Fullerton Road Either Between Smelting Works Road and Illinois
Route 159
Garden Street Either Between North Illinois Street and North
Belt West
Gilbert Street North From the intersection with Short Street,
westwards to Kenwood Drive
Gilbert Street Either Extending for a distance of 60 feet west
from Illinois Route 159
Grimmig Road Either Between Illinois Route 159 to Smelting
Works Road
Gundlach Place North and
south
Between 1st Street and 2nd Street
Helen Street East For a distance of 180 feet north of the
northern right-of-way line of Clara Street
1761 9-6-2016
Parking Schedules 175
Street Side(s) Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Helen Street West For a distance of 140 feet south of the
southern right-of-way line of Anna Street
1761 9-6-2016
Huntwood Road Either Between Sullivan Drive and Old Caseyville
Road
1714 12-15-2014
Jamestown Road Either
Jay Avenue Either 140 feet from the centerline intersection
with Anna Rose Drive, for a distance of 80
feet
Johanna Place East For its entire length within the village
Josephine Drive Either For its entire length within the village
Kinsella Avenue West Between 1631 and 1617 Kinsella Avenue
Kinsella Avenue Either From the northernmost boundary of 1021
Kinsella Avenue to West “H” Street
Lakeland Boulevard Either Extending for 160 feet from Illinois Route
159
1424 7-6-2005
Leawood Drive Either From the eastern most property line of 536
Leawood Drive westward to its terminus
Lindenwood Drive North From Westage to the cul-de-sac 1424 7-6-2005
Llewellyn Drive Either Between Old Caseyville Road to Sullivan
Drive
Llewellyn Drive Either Between Sullivan Drive to Frank Scott
Parkway
Llewellyn Drive Either Between Frank Scott Parkway to village
limits
Llewellyn Road Either Westward from Old Caseyville Road to the
corporate limits of the village
1384, 1387 9-20-2004,
11-1-2004
Marcella Drive North For a distance in an easterly direction of
67 feet from Castellano Drive
Mary Jo Drive Northwest Within 60 feet of the intersection with
Castellano Drive
Mary Jo Drive West For a distance of 96 feet south of Marcella
Drive
Metro Way North and
south
From Illinois Route 159 to the Tintersection
Metro Way West To Old Fullerton Road
176 Swansea - Traffic Code
Street Side(s) Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Metro Way East From Old Fullerton Road to Fullerton
Road
Metro Way West From Catherine Court to Fullerton Road
Miller Lane Either Between Caseyville Avenue and Kinsella
Avenue
Morgan Street Either For its entire length within the village
Munie Road Either Between Smelting Works Road and Old
Collinsville Road
North 1st Street East North of Pawnee Drive
North 15th Street Either For a distance of 80 feet south of North
Belt West
Old Caseyville Road Either Between Polo Run and Jardin Court
Old Fullerton Road South Beginning at a point 830 from its
intersection with Fullerton Road, eastward
to the intersection with North Illinois
Street
Penny Rose Either
Penrose Drive Either Between Kingsbury Drive and West “J”
Street
Philecia Northeast Between Bobbie Drive and Castle Drive
Schae-Fries Drive Either For its entire length within the village
Schobert Drive Either For its entire length within the village
Service Street Either Between Helen Street and North Illinois
Street
Smelting Works Road Either Between Illinois Route 159 and Drake
Road
Twin Lake Drive East From the property line between 112 Twin
Lake Drive and 116 Twin Lake Drive,
northward and eastward to the intersection
with Twin Lake Court
Twin Lake Drive West Starting at the intersection of Huntwood
Drive, continuing northward to the
intersection of Leawood Drive
West “H” Street Either From Kinsella Avenue to the eastern most
boundary of 741 West “H” Street
Parking Schedules 177
Street Side(s) Location Ord. No. Date Passed
West Pointe Court 1454 6-5-2006
West Pointe Drive 1454 6-5-2006
(Prior Code, § 11-311)
178 Swansea - Traffic Code
Parking Schedules 179
SCHEDULE II. FIRE LANES.
Within the village, no person shall park a motor vehicle at any time within any designated fire
lane, listed as follows.
Street Side(s) Location
Bobbie Drive Southeast Between Castle Drive and Derbyshire Drive
Caroline Street North Westward to the intersection with Garden Street
Castle Court Either Except for the north side of Castle Court from the east end
of Castle Court to Fournie Drive
Castle Drive Either Between Castle Court and Bobbie Drive
Englewood Drive South From Caseyville Avenue in a westerly direction for 170 feet
Erwin Drive East North from Meta Drive to the end of Erwin Drive
Executive Woods Drive South and southwest and
on all sides of the cul-desac
Garden Street East Northward to the intersection with North Belt West
Kings Court North and south For 100 feet east from its intersection with Englewood
Marla Kay Drive Northeast From Castellano Drive to Mary Jo Drive
Mary Jo Drive Southeast Between Marla Kay Drive and Marcella Drive
Meta Drive South East from Westgate and around the cul-de-sac
Meta Drive North West from the end of the cul-de-sac to Erwin Drive
Old Fullerton Road North Between North Illinois Street and 300 Old Fullerton Road
Shawn Drive North From Kinsella Avenue westwards to its terminus
West Belle Street North Between 15th Street and 16th Street
(Prior Code, § 11-312)
180 Swansea - Traffic Code
Parking Schedules 181
SCHEDULE III. LOADING ZONES.
Within the village, no person shall park a motor vehicle at any time, within any designated
loading zone, listed as follows, except for the authorized loading or unloading of merchandise or
materials.
None designated.
182 Swansea - Traffic Code 183
Parking Schedules 183
SCHEDULE IV. SNOW ROUTES.
(A) Within the village, whenever there is an accumulation of three inches or more of snow, no
person, firm or corporation shall park, or allow any motor vehicle to remain parked, on any
designated snow route for a period of 24 hours following said accumulation, or until said route has
been sufficiently cleared of snow.
(B) Snow routes are designated as follows.
Street Location
Beau-Gon Avenue For its complete length within the municipal limits
Bettina Drive From Lakeland Boulevard to Big Bend Boulevard
Big Bend Boulevard From Bettina Drive to Leawood Drive
Bobbie Drive From Castle Drive to Brian Drive
Brian Drive From Bobbie Drive to Mary Jo Drive
Caseyville Avenue From Gilbert Street to North Belt West
Castle Court From Route 161 to Castle Drive
Castle Drive From Castle Court to Bobbie Drive
Creekside Court To Creekside Drive to Old Collinsville Road
Fawn Meadows To Lake Lorraine Drive to Old Collinsville Road
Fournie Drive From Mary Jo Drive to Josephine Drive
Fullerton Road From Route 161 to Route 159
Gilbert Street From North Illinois Street to Kenwood Drive
Green Haven Drive From Route 159 to the western village limits
Huntwood Road From Route 159 to the western village limits
Josephine Drive From Fournie Drive to Route 161
Kenwood Drive From Gilbert Street to Kingsbury Drive
Kingsbury Drive From Kenwood Drive to North 17th Street
Kinsella Avenue From West “H” Street to Caseyville Avenue
Lakeland Boulevard From Route 159 to Bettina Drive
Leawood Drive From Big Bend Boulevard to Twin Lake Drive
Lyonshall Boulevard From Old Collinsville Road to Smelting Works Road
Mary Jo Drive From Brian Drive to Fournie Drive
184 Swansea - Traffic Code
Street Location
Morgan Street From 17th Street to Route 161
Old Collinsville Road To Lake Lorraine Drive to Fawn Meadows
Polo Run To Old Caseyville Road
Rand Lane From Old Collinsville Road to Steinberg Farm Road
Roger Street From 17th Street to Route 161
Smelting Works Road From North Illinois Street to Drake Road for those portions with the municipal
limits
Steinberg Farm Road From Rand Lane to William Lane
Twin Lake Drive From Leawood Drive to Huntwood Road
William Lane From Old Collinsville Road to Steinberg Farm Road
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. ANIMALS
91. NUISANCES
92. PARK REGULATIONS
93. STREET REGULATIONS
94. FIREWORKS
1
2 Swansea - General Regulations
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
Dogs
90.01 Definitions
90.02 Dogs to be inoculated and to have name tags affixed to collars
90.03 Inoculation to be performed by licensed veterinarian; issuance of certificate
90.04 Duration of inoculation
90.05 Specifications for tag
90.06 Exhibition of certificate upon request
90.07 Restraint of dogs
90.08 Impoundment of dogs running at large or unlicensed dogs; citation of owner or keeper
90.09 Notice and citation to owner or keeper of impoundment
90.10 Redemption of impounded dogs
90.11 Impoundment of dogs which have bitten persons
90.12 Pound designated
90.13 Disposition of dogs deemed nuisances
90.14 Animal Services Warden
Community Cats
90.20 Definitions
90.21 Purpose
90.22 Managed care of feral cats/community cats
General Regulations
90.30 Injury to property
90.31 Manner of keeping
90.32 Keeping barking dogs and crying cats
90.33 Cruelty to animals prohibited
90.34 Wild or vicious animals
90.35 Animals in village
90.36 Keeping of numerous dogs and cats in the village
3
2018 S-1
4 Swansea - General Regulations
Urban Chickens
90.50 Definitions
90.51 Permit required
90.52 Number and type of chickens allowed
90.53 Permits restricted to single-family dwellings
90.54 Non-commercial use only
90.55 Enclosures
90.56 Odor and noise impacts
90.57 Predators, rodents, insects and parasites
90.58 Feed and water
90.59 Waste storage and removal
90.60 Chickens at large
90.61 Unlawful acts
90.62 Nuisance
Cross-reference:
Nuisances, see Ch. 91
Parks, see Ch. 92
Streets Regulations, see Ch. 93
DOGS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AT LARGE. Any dog shall be deemed AT LARGE when he or she is off the property of his or
her owner and not under the control of a responsible person.
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE. The Department of Agriculture of the state.
DOG. Includes a female as well as a male dog.
INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES. The injection subcutaneously or otherwise, as approved
by the Department of Agriculture of the state of canine anti-rabic vaccine, approved by the
Department of Agriculture.
OWNER. A person having a right of property in a dog or who keeps or harbors a dog, who has
a dog in his or her care, who acts as its custodian or who knowingly permits a dog to remain on or
about any premises occupied by him or her.
2018 S-1
Animals 5
RESTRAINT. A dog is UNDER RESTRAINT, within the meaning of this subchapter, if he or
she is controlled by a leash, at “heel” beside a responsible person, obedient to that person’s
commands, within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets or within the property limits of his
or her owner or keeper.
(Prior Code, § 14-101)
§ 90.02 DOGS TO BE INOCULATED AND TO HAVE NAME TAGS AFFIXED TO
COLLARS.
(A) Each calendar year, or at such intervals as may hereafter be promulgated by the Department
of Agriculture, every owner or keeper of a dog four months or more of age shall cause such dog to
be inoculated against rabies. Such owner or keeper of such dog shall cause a serially-numbered tag
evidencing such inoculation to be attached to a collar or harness worn by the dog.
(B) Every owner or keeper of a dog, regardless of age, shall cause said dog to wear a collar or
harness and shall affix thereto a metallic or other suitable tag inscribed with the name, address and
phone number, if any, of the owner or keeper of the dog.
(Prior Code, § 14-102) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.03 INOCULATION TO BE PERFORMED BY LICENSED VETERINARIAN;
ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE.
The inoculation of dogs required by § 90.02(A) of this chapter shall be performed by a
veterinarian duly-licensed to practice his or her profession in the state. Upon performing such
inoculation, such veterinarian shall issue to the owner or keeper a certificate showing such fact and
shall also deliver to such owner or keeper a metallic or other suitable tag to be attached to the collar
or harness of such dog, which tag shall also certify to the fact of inoculation against rabies.
(Prior Code, § 14-103)
§ 90.04 DURATION OF INOCULATION.
The inoculation performed under the provisions of § 90.03 of this chapter shall be effective until
the expiration of the calendar year in which the vaccination was performed or the expiration of such
period of time as may be promulgated by the Department of Agriculture.
(Prior Code, § 14-104)
2018 S-1
6 Swansea - General Regulations
§ 90.05 SPECIFICATIONS FOR TAG.
The tag issued under the provisions of § 90.03 of this chapter shall be in such form as shall be
determined by the Department of Agriculture.
(Prior Code, § 14-105)
§ 90.06 EXHIBITION OF CERTIFICATE UPON REQUEST.
At any reasonable time upon request of any member of the Police Department, the owner or
keeper of any un-muzzled dog shall exhibit his or her certificate, issued under the provisions of §
90.03 of this chapter, showing the inoculation against rabies of any dog owned or controlled by him
or her.
(Prior Code, § 14-106) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.07 RESTRAINT OF DOGS.
(A) The owner or keeper of a dog shall keep the dog under restraint at all times and shall not
permit such dog to be at large off the premises of the property of the owner or keeper, unless the dog
is under complete control, as defined in § 90.01 of this chapter.
(B) The owner or keeper of a dog who is in a public park or on a public trail will be required to
keep the dog on a leash. The leash shall not exceed more than six feet in length. A LEASH, per this
division (B), is defined as any rope, cord, chain or similar item which is capable of restraining a dog.
(Prior Code, § 14-107) (Ord. 1679, passed 6-17-2013) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.08 IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE OR UNLICENSED DOGS;
CITATION OF OWNER OR KEEPER.
It shall be the duty of such employees and officers of the Police Department as shall be
designated for that purpose by the Chief of Police to take up and impound in such place as may be
designated and set apart for that purpose, any dog found running at large or unlicensed in the village
contrary to any of the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the village.
(Prior Code, § 14-108)
§ 90.09 NOTICE AND CITATION TO OWNER OR KEEPER OF IMPOUNDMENT.
In case of impounding and where the owner or keeper of such dog is disclosed by any license tag
worn by it, or is otherwise known to the officers impounding same, the Police Department shall, at
once, give notice by mail to such owner or keeper, informing him or her of the impounding of his or
her dog and may cite the owner or keeper of such dog to answer charges of violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14-109)
2018 S-1
Animals 7
§ 90.10 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS.
(A) Any dog impounded under the provisions of this chapter, except such as may have bitten
any person as specified in § 90.11 of this chapter, shall, unless sooner redeemed, shall be taken to
the St. Clair County Animal Control.
(B) In case such dog has not been inoculated against rabies for the current year, such owner
shall also advance the fee required to have such dog inoculated by a duly-licensed veterinarian as he
or she shall elect and the pound keeper shall forthwith cause the dog to be duly-inoculated against
rabies. No dog shall be released without having been inoculated for the current calendar year, or in
accordance with the requirements of the Department of Agriculture. Upon payment of the required
charges, the dog shall thereon be released to the owner or keeper.
(Prior Code, § 14-110)
§ 90.11 IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS WHICH HAVE BITTEN PERSONS.
Any dog which shall have bitten or otherwise injured any person so as to cause an abrasion of
the skin shall be immediately taken to St. Clair County Animal Control.
(Prior Code, § 14-112)
§ 90.12 POUND DESIGNATED.
The County Animal Services Department is hereby designated as the village pound.
(Prior Code, § 14-113)
§ 90.13 DISPOSITION OF DOGS DEEMED NUISANCES.
Any dog which may, in any manner, continually disturb the quiet of any person’s or
neighborhood’s property, or shall destroy or in any manner injure any animal, plant, shrub or other
property not on the premises of its owner or keeper, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and such
dog shall be taken up and impounded and may be redeemed.
(Prior Code, § 14-114)
Cross-reference:
Keeping barking dogs and crying cats, see § 90.32
2018 S-1
8 Swansea - General Regulations
§ 90.14 ANIMAL SERVICES WARDEN.
The President, with the advice and consent of the Village Board of Trustees, may appoint an
Animal Services Warden, the salary of whom shall be established in the annual municipal budget.
(Prior Code, § 14-117)
COMMUNITY CATS
§ 90.20 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMMUNITY CAT. Any free-roaming, feral, or barn cat that may be cared for by one or more
residents of the immediate area and which has no discernible form of ownership identification.
COMMUNITY CAT includes a domesticated cat that an owner has forsaken entirely or neglected or
for which an owner has refused to provide care and support.
COMMUNITY CAT CAREGIVER. A person who provides care, including food, water, shelter
or medical care to a community cat. A COMMUNITY CAT CAREGIVER shall not be considered to
be the owner, custodian, harborer, controller, or keeper of a community cat.
EARTIPPING. The removal of the one-fourth-inch tip of community cat’s ear, performed while
the cat is under anesthesia, under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian and designed to be an
indication that the community cat has been sterilized and vaccinated for rabies.
FERAL CAT. A cat that:
(1) Is born in the wild or is the offspring of an owned or feral cat and is not socialized; or
(2) Is a formerly owned cat that has been abandoned and is no longer socialized; or
(3) Lives on a farm.
FERAL CAT COLONY. A group of cats that congregates, more or less, together as a unit.
Although not every cat in a colony may be feral, any nonferal cats that congregate with a colony
shall be deemed to be a part of it.
(Ord. 1798, passed 11-20-2017)
2018 S-1
Animals 8A
§ 90.21 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this subchapter is to permit implementation of a Community Cat Program (CCP)
in the village for the purpose of reducing the population of feral and free roaming cats, benefitting
public health, improving the quality of life for residents, and ensuring the humane treatment of
community cats.
(Ord. 1798, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 90.22 MANAGED CARE OF FERAL CATS/COMMUNITY CATS.
(A) The Board of Trustees of the Village of Swansea hereby establishes the following
community cat requirements:
(1) All community cats must be cared for on the private property of the caregiver or with
the permission from the owner or property manager if cared for on the property of another.
(2) All community cat caregivers shall make reasonable efforts to have all free-roaming
cats within their care sterilized, vaccinated against rabies, and ear-tipped for easy identification.
(3) All community cat caregivers are required to make reasonable efforts to provide certain
necessities to each community cat under his or her care on a regular/ongoing basis, including, but not
limited to, proper nutrition, adequate quantities of visibly clean and fresh water and medical care as
needed. If medical care is unavailable or too expensive, the community cat caregiver must not allow
the cat to suffer.
(4) Dumping on the ground or dispensing large quantities of food more than will be
immediately eaten by the community cats present is prohibited. Feeding areas must be maintained in
a clean and sanitary condition.
(5) Community cat caregivers shall make reasonable attempts to remove young kittens from
the field for domestication.
(B) As long as St. Clair County continues to exempt community cats from licensing
requirements, community cats within the Village of Swansea meeting the requirements of this section
are exempt from any licensing requirements under Section 3-3-1 of Chapter 3 of the St. Clair County
Code of Ordinances.
(C) The village shall have the right to remove or authorize the removal of any free-roaming cat
or community cat because of immediate public health or safety concerns.
(D) No community cat shall be released at any governmentally owned or managed park, natural
area, area deemed as environmentally sensitive land or on any easement adjacent to such lands
without approval from the village.
2018 S-1
8B Swansea - General Regulations
(E) (1) As long as St. Clair County continues to exempt healthy community cats from the
holding period requirement, healthy community cats within the Village of Swansea that have been
impounded are exempt from the holding period referenced in Section 3-4-4 of Chapter 3 of the St.
Clair County Code of Ordinances and shall be immediately returned to the location at which they
were found, released to a caregiver or adopted. Before being returned to the location at which they
were found or released to a caregiver, community cats shall be sterilized, eartipped while under
anesthesia under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian, and vaccinated for rabies.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever such cat is visibly injured or diseased and
appears to be suffering and it reasonably appears that such cat cannot be expeditiously cured and
returned to the field, transferred to a humane society or private animal nonprofit organization or
placed in foster care, then St. Clair County, acting in good faith and upon reasonable belief, may
humanely euthanize the cat upon the advice of a licensed veterinarian.
(F) As long as St. Clair County continues to exempt community cats from the requirements of
Section 3-4-4(A) - (D) of its Code of Ordinances, community cats within the Village of Swansea
released to a caregiver in accordance with division (E) above shall not be subject to the requirements
of Section 3-4-4(A) - (D) of Chapter 3 of the St. Clair County Code of Ordinances.
(G) Community cat caregivers shall not be prohibited from placing or distributing cat food on
vacant lots or in unoccupied structures in the village, provided that permission from the property
owner has been obtained to care for community cats on the property.
(Ord. 1798, passed 11-20-2017)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 90.30 INJURY TO PROPERTY.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing a dog, cat or other domestic animal to
permit such animal to go upon any sidewalk, parkway or private lands or premises without the
permission of the owner of such premises, and break, bruise, tear up, crush or injure any lawn,
flower bed, plants, shrub, tree or garden in any manner whatsoever, or to defecate thereon. Any cat
or other domestic animal injuring property, as described in this section, is hereby declared a nuisance
and may be taken up and impounded in the same manner as provided by ordinance for dogs.
(Prior Code, § 14-201) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.31 MANNER OF KEEPING.
(A) Pens, yards or runs. All pens, yards or runs or other structures wherein any animal is kept
shall be of such construction so as to be easily cleaned and kept in good repair.
2018 S-1
Animals 8C
(B) Fences. Fences which are intended as enclosures for any animal shall be securely
constructed, shall be adequate for the purpose, kept in good repair and shall not be allowed to
become unsightly.
(Prior Code, § 14-202) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.32 KEEPING BARKING DOGS AND CRYING CATS.
(A) Harboring. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to keep or harbor any dog which
habitually barks, howls or yelps, or any cat which habitually cries or howls to the great discomfort of
the peace and quiet of the neighborhood, or in such manner as to materially disturb or annoy persons
in the neighborhood or ordinary sensibilities. Such dogs and cats are hereby declared to be a public
nuisance.
(B) Petitions complaining of vicious or barking dogs or crying cats. Whenever any person shall
complain to the Police Department that a dog which barks, howls or yelps or a cat which cries or
howls is being kept by any person in the village, the Police Department shall notify the owner of said
dog or cat that a complaint has been received and that the person should take whatever steps
necessary to alleviate the howling, yelping or crying.
(Prior Code, § 14-203) Penalty, see § 90.99
Cross-reference:
Disposition of dogs deemed nuisances, see § 90.13
2018 S-1
8B Swansea - General Regulations
Animals 9
§ 90.33 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
(A) Cruelty to animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously inflict
unnecessary or needless cruelty, torture, abuse or cruelly beat, strike or abuse any animal, or by an
act, omission or neglect cause or inflict any unnecessary or unjustifiable pain, suffering, injury or
death to any animal whether such animal belongs to such person or to another; except that,
reasonable force may be employed to drive away vicious or trespassing animals. Any unwanted
animals should be delivered to the County Animal Control facility for proper disposal.
(B) Food and shelter. It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any animal to fail, refuse
or neglect to provide such animal with food, potable water, shade or shelter, or to cruelly or
unnecessarily expose any such animal to hot, stormy, cold or inclement weather, or to carry any such
animal in or upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner.
(1) For the purpose of this division (B), the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
SHADE. Protection from the direct rays of the sun during the months of June through
September.
SHELTER. As it applies to dogs, a moisture-proof structure of suitable size to
accommodate the dog and allow retention of body heat, made of durable material with a solid floor
raised at least two inches from the ground with the entrance covered by a flexible, wind-proof
material. Such structure shall be provided with a sufficient quantity of suitable bedding to provide
insulation and protection against cold and dampness.
(C) Steel traps and the like. It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize a steel-jawed trap, or
any trap other than a cage or live trap, when attempting to snare game, fur-bearing animals or any
other animal within the village; provided, however, that, the village may, by permit, allow the use of
a water-set trap, upon application for same.
(Prior Code, § 14-204) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.34 WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS.
(A) Keeping of wild and vicious animals.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept on his or her premises
any wild or vicious animal for display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee.
This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing-animal exhibitions or
circuses.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept any wild animal as a
pet, unless a permit is granted by the Department of Natural Resources of the state.
10 Swansea - General Regulations
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a vicious animal within the city.
Any animal which is found off the premises of its owner may be seized by any police officer or
humane officer and upon establishment, to the satisfaction of any court of competent jurisdiction, of
the vicious character of said animal, it may be killed by a police officer or humane officer; provided,
however, that, this section shall not apply to animals under the control of a law enforcement or
military agency, nor to animals which are kept for the protection of property; provided that, such
animals are restrained by a leash or chain, cage, fence or other adequate means from contact with the
general public or with persons who enter the premises with the actual or implied permission of the
owner or occupant.
(4) The State Department of Agriculture may issue a temporary permit for the keeping,
care and protection of any infant animal native to this area which has been deemed to be homeless.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal which has previously attacked or bitten any person or
which has behaved in such a manner that the person who harbors said animal knows or should
reasonably know that the animal is possessed of tendencies to attack or bite persons. An animal is not
deemed VICIOUS if it bites, attacks or menaces a trespasser on its owner’s property, or harms or
menaces anyone who abuses it or torments it or if it is a professionally trained dog for law
enforcement or guard duties.
WILD ANIMAL. Any live monkey or ape, raccoon, skunk, fox, snake or other reptile,
leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other animal or any bird of prey which can normally be
found in the wild state.
(Prior Code, § 14-205) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.35 ANIMALS IN VILLAGE.
(A) Certain prohibitions. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall keep
within the village any cattle, cows, horses, sheep, swine, goats, ducks, turkeys, geese or other
livestock.
(B) Exceptions. This section shall not apply in areas of the village that are zoned for agricultural
purposes, nor shall this section apply to livestock brought into the village for the purpose of being
shipped out of the village.
(C) Powers of Enforcement Officer. The Enforcement Officer shall have the power to issue an
order prohibiting the keeping of any animal, fowl or bird which is deemed to pose a health hazard to
the general public.
(Prior Code, § 14-206) Penalty, see § 90.99
Animals 11
§ 90.36 KEEPING OF NUMEROUS DOGS AND CATS IN THE VILLAGE.
(A) Nuisance.
(1) The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs and cats in the village for a considerable
period of time detracts from and, in many instances, is detrimental to the healthful and comfortable
life for which such areas were created. The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs and cats is,
therefore, declared to be a public nuisance.
(2) For the purpose of this division (A), the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CAT. Any feline, regardless of age or sex.
DOG. Any canine, regardless of age or sex.
(B) Number of dogs and cats limited.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep more than five dogs or five cats
within the village, with the exception that a litter of pups, a litter of kittens or a portion of a litter
may be kept for a period of time not exceeding five months from birth.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any establishment wherein dogs or cats
are kept for breeding, sale, sporting purposes or boarding.
(C) Keeping stray animals. It shall be unlawful for any person in the village to knowingly and
intentionally harbor, feed, keep in possession by confinement, or otherwise, any stray animal which
does not belong to him or her unless he or she has, within 24 hours from the time such animal came
into his or her possession, notified animal services of his or her intentions to either surrender the
stray animal to animal services or advertise such stray animal in the local newspaper with the most
circulations of five consecutive days. If the individual holding the stray animal selects to advertise the
animal and the prior owner does not respond by the tenth day, the individual who has advertised shall
be deemed the legal owner. If the advertisement has not started within 72 hours, animal services
require that the animal be surrendered to an authorized representative of animal services. It shall be
unlawful for any person to refuse to surrender any such stray animal.
(Prior Code, § 14-207) Penalty, see § 90.99
12 Swansea - General Regulations
URBAN CHICKENS
§ 90.50 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CHICKEN. A member of the subspecies gaiius galius domesticus, a domesticated fowl.
PERMITTED TRACT OF LAND. The tract of land as identified by the application upon which
a permit is granted for keeping chickens pursuant to this subchapter.
PERMITTEE. An applicant who has been granted a permit to raise, harbor or keep chickens
pursuant to this subchapter.
PERMITTING OFFICER. The Mayor or his or her designee.
TRACT OF LAND. A property or a zoned lot that has one single-family dwelling located on
that property or zoned lot.
URBAN CHICKEN. A chicken kept on a permitted tract of land pursuant to a permit issued
under this subchapter.
(Ord. 1765, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 90.51 PERMIT REQUIRED.
(A) Permit required. No person shall raise, harbor or keep chickens within the village limits
without a valid permit obtained from the Permitting Officer under the provisions of this subchapter.
Permits are issued for a period of one year and must be renew annually.
(B) Application. In order to obtain a permit, an applicant must submit a completed application
on forms provided by the Permitting Officer, and pay all fees required by this subchapter. The
application fee is $10.
(C) Requirements. The requirements to the receipt of a permit include:
(1) All requirements of this subchapter are met;
(2) All fees, as may be provided for from time to time by the Board of Trustees' resolution,
for the permit are paid in full;
(3) All judgments in the village's favor and against the applicant have been paid in full;
Animals 13
(4) The tract of land to be permitted shall contain on one single family dwelling occupied
and used as such by the permittee; and
(5) The applicant has provided written notice to the residents of all immediately adjacent
dwellings of the applicant's intent to obtain a permit.
(D) Issuance of permit. If the Permitting Officer concludes as a result of the information
contained in the application that the requirements for a permit have been met, then the Officer shall
issue the permit.
(E) Denial, suspension, revocation, nonrenewal. The Permitting Officer may deny, suspend,
revoke or decline to renew any permit issued for any of the following grounds:
(1) False statements on any application or other information or report required by this
section to be given by the applicant;
(2) Failure to pay any application, penalty, reinspection or reinstatement fee required by
this section or Board of Trustee resolution;
(3) Failure to correct deficiencies noted in notices of violation in the time specified in the
notice;
(4) Failure to comply with the provisions of an approved mitigation/remediation plan by the
Permitting Officer, or designee; or
(5) Failure to comply with any provision of this subchapter.
(F) Notification. A decision to revoke, suspend, deny or not renew a permit shall be in writing,
delivered by ordinary mail or in person to the address indicated on the application. The notification
shall specify reasons for the action.
(G) Effect of revocation, and the like. When an application for a permit is denied, or when a
permit is revoked, the applicant may not reapply for a new permit for a period of one year from the
date of the denial or revocation.
(H) Appeals. No permit may be denied, suspended, revoked or not renewed without notice and
an opportunity to be heard is given the applicant or holder of the permit. In any instance where the
Permitting Officer has denied, revoked, suspended or not renewed a permit, the applicant or holder
of urban chicken may appeal the decision to the Mayor, or designee other than the Permitting Officer
within ten business days of receipt by the applicant or holder of the permit of the notice of the
decision. The applicant or holder of the permit will be given an opportunity for a hearing. The
decision of the officer hearing the appeal, or any decision by the Permitting Officer which is not
appealed in accordance with
14 Swansea - General Regulations
this subchapter shall be deemed final action.
Penalty, see § 90.99
(Ord. 1765, passed 11-21-2016; Ord. 1774, passed 2-6-2017)
§ 90.52 NUMBER AND TYPE OF CHICKENS ALLOWED.
(A) The maximum number of chicken allowed is four per tract of land regardless of how many
dwelling units are on the tract.
(B) Only female chickens (hens) are allowed.
(Ord. 1765, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 90.53 PERMITS RESTRICTED TO SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS.
Permits will be granted only to permittees legally occupying single-family dwellings within any
zoning district in the village, an are specific to said single-family dwelling and not transferrable.
(Ord. 1765, passed 11-21-2016; Ord. 1774, passed 2-6-2017)
§ 90.54 NON-COMMERCIAL USE ONLY.
A permit shall not allow the permittee to engage in chicken breeding or fertilizer production for
commercial purposes.
(Ord. 1765, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 90.55 ENCLOSURES.
(A) Chickens must be kept in an enclosure or fenced area at all times. Chickens shall be secured
within a hen house or chicken tractor during non-daylight hours.
(B) Enclosures must be kept in a clean, dry, odor-free, neat and sanitary condition at all times.
(C) Hen houses, chicken tractors and chicken pens must provide adequate ventilation and
adequate sun and shade and must be impermeable to rodents, wild birds and predators, including
dogs and cats.
Animals 15
(D) Hen houses and chicken tractors.
(1) Hen houses and chicken tractors shall be designed to provide safe and healthy living
condition for the chickens with a minimum of four square feet per bird while minimizing adverse
impacts to other residents in the neighborhood.
(a) A hen house or chicken tractor shall be enclosed on all sides and shall have a roof
and doors. Access doors must be able to be shut and locked at night. Opening windows and vents
must be covered with predator and bird proof wire of less than one-inch opening.
(b) The materials used in making a hen house or chicken tractor shall be uniform for
each element of the structure such that the walls are made of the same material, the roof has the same
shingles or other covering, and any windows or openings are constructed using the same materials.
The use of scrap, waste board, sheet metal or similar materials is prohibited. Hen houses and chicken
tractors shall be well maintained.
(2) Hen houses, chicken tractors and chicken pens shall only be located in the rear yard or
side yard and within the required setbacks as required by the zoning code.
(3) Hen houses, chicken tractors and chicken pens must be located at least ten feet from the
property line and at least 25 feet from any adjacent residential dwelling, church, school or place of
business.
(E) Any enclosed chicken pen shall consist of sturdy wire fencing. The pen must be covered
with wire, aviary netting or solid roofing.
(Ord. 1765, passed 11-21-2016) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.56 ODOR AND NOISE IMPACTS.
(A) Odors from chickens, chicken manure or other chicken related disturbances shall not be
perceptible beyond the boundaries of the permitted tract of land.
(B) Noise from chickens shall not be loud enough beyond the boundaries of the permitted tract
of land at the property boundaries to disturb persons of reasonable sensitivity.
(Ord. 1765, passed 11-21-2016) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.57 PREDATORS, RODENTS, INSECTS AND PARASITES.
The permittee shall take necessary action to reduce the attraction of predators and rodents and
the potential infestation of insects and parasites. Chickens found to be infested with insects and
parasites that may result in unhealthy conditions to human habitation may be removed by an Animal
Services Warden.
(Ord. 1765, passed 11-21-2016)
16 Swansea - General Regulations
§ 90.58 FEED AND WATER.
Chickens shall be provided with access to feed and clean water at all times. The feed and water
shall be unavailable to rodents, wild birds and predators.
(Ord. 1765, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 90.59 WASTE STORAGE AND REMOVAL.
All stored manure shall be covered by a fully enclosed structure with a roof or lid over the entire
structure. No more than three cubic feet of manure shall be stored on the permitted tract of land. All
other manure not used for composting or fertilizing shall be removed. The hen house, chicken
tractor, chicken pen and surrounding area must be kept free from trash and accumulated droppings.
Uneaten feed shall be removed in a timely manner.
(Ord. 1765, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 90.60 CHICKENS AT LARGE.
The permittee shall not allow the permittee's chickens to roam off the permitted tract of land. A
dog or cat or other domesticated animal that kills a chicken off the permitted tract of land shall not,
for that reason alone, be considered a dangerous or aggressive animal, or elicit responsibility on the
part of the village to enforce its animal control provisions.
(Ord. 1765, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 90.61 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep chickens in violation of any provision of this
subchapter or any other provision of the village code.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any owner, renter or leaseholder of property to allow chickens to be
kept on the property in violation of the provisions of this subchapter.
(C) No person shall keep chickens inside a single-family dwelling unit, multi-family dwelling
unit(s) or rental unit.
(D) No person shall keep a rooster.
(E) No person shall keep chickens on a vacant or uninhabited tract of land.
(Ord. 1765, passed 11-21-2016) Penalty, see 90.99
Animals 17
§ 90.62 NUISANCE.
Any violation of the terms of this subchapter that constitutes a health hazard or that interferes
with the use or enjoyment of neighboring property is a nuisance and may be abated under general
nuisance abatement provisions.
(Ord. 1765, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
(A) Generally. Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is not
provided shall be fined not more than $750 for each offense. Each day's violation constitutes a
separate offense.
(B) Violation of §§ 90.50 through 90.62. Any violation of the terms of §§ 90.50 through 90.62
that constitutes a health hazard or that interferes with the use or enjoyment of neighboring property is
a nuisance and may be abated under general nuisance abatement provisions.
(Ord. 1765, passed 11-21-2016)
18 Swansea - General Regulations
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
91.01 Specific nuisances enumerated
91.02 Notice to abate
91.03 Failure to comply with notice
91.04 Abatement
Weeds
91.15 Definitions
91.16 Nuisance
91.17 Notice
91.18 Service of notice
91.19 Abatement
91.20 Lien
91.21 Payment
91.22 Foreclosure of lien
Garbage and Debris
91.35 Definitions
91.36 Accumulation prohibited
91.37 Notice to person
91.38 Service of notice
91.39 Abatement
91.40 Lien
91.41 Payment
91.42 Foreclosure of lien
Cross-reference:
Animals, see Ch. 90
Parks, see Ch. 92
19
20Swansea - General Regulations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 SPECIFIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and to be against the health, peace and comfort of the
village for any person, firm or corporation within the limits of the village to permit the following, the
enumeration of which shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(A) Filth. To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any rubbish, garbage, filth or noisome
substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others;
(B) Deposit of offensive materials. To throw or deposit any rubbish, garbage or other offensive
matter, or the carcass of any dead animal, in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring well or common
sewer, street or public highway;
(C) Corruption of water. To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water of any spring,
river, stream, pond or lake to the injury or prejudice of others;
(D) Highway encroachment. To obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private ways,
streets, alleys, commons, landing places and ways to burying places;
(E) Unlawful advertising. To advertise wares or occupations by painting notices of the same on,
or affixing them to fences or other private property, or on rocks or other natural objects without the
consent of the owner or, if in the highway or other public place, without permission of the proper
authorities;
(F) Harassment. To harass, intimidate or threaten any person who is about to sell or lease or
has sold or leased a residence or other real property, or is about to buy or lease or has bought or
leased a residence or other real property, when the harassment, intimidation or threat relates to a
person’s attempt to sell, purchase or lease a residence or other real property;
(G) Filthy premises conditions. To keep or suffer to be in a foul, offensive, nauseous or filthy
condition, any chicken coop, cow barn, stable, cellar, vault, drain, privy, sewer or sink upon any
premises belonging to or occupied by him or her, or any railroad car, building, yard, grounds and
premises belonging to or occupied by him or her;
(H) Expectorate. To expectorate on any public sidewalk, street or other public building or floor
or walk of any public vehicle or hall;
(I) Litter on village street. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow trash, paper, cardboard,
wire, yard waste, dirt, rock, stone, glass, brick, lumber, wood or litter of material objects of any
size or description to fall upon village streets;
Nuisances 21
(J) Accumulation of junk, trash and the like. To deposit or pile up any rags, old rope, paper,
iron, brass, copper, tin, aluminum, ashes, garbage, refuse, plastic, brush, litter, weeds, slush, lead,
glass bottles or broken glass upon any lot, piece or parcel of land or upon any public or private alley,
street or public way within the village, or to place same so that it can be blown about or scattered by
the wind;
(K) Rodents. To cause or permit any condition or situation to exist that shall attract, harbor or
encourage the infestation of rodents;
(L) Bringing nuisances into the village. To bring into the village or keep therein, for sale or
otherwise, either for food or for any other purpose, any dead or live animal or any matter, substance
or thing which shall be a nuisance or which shall occasion a nuisance in the village, or which may or
shall be dangerous or detrimental to health;
(M) Offensive liquids. To keep any nauseous, foul or putrid liquid or substance likely to become
nauseous, foul, offensive or putrid, or to permit any such liquid to be discharged, placed, thrown or
to flow from or out of any premises into or upon any adjacent premises or any public street or alley,
or to permit the same to be done by any person connected with the premises under his or her control;
(N) Motor transport engines. To operate motor transport engines in the nighttime between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in any place in which a majority of the buildings within a radius of
400 feet are used exclusively for residence purposes, excluding state and federal highways; and
(O) Sump pump discharge. To discharge any water or other fluids originating from sumps, sump
pits, sump pumps or other pumps, or any reservoir serving as a water drain or receptacle for water,
from pipes or other structures onto any public sidewalk, street or street curb, street gutter or storm
sewer, causing runoff to be concentrated over and onto that public sidewalk, street, street curb or
street gutter whereby the water will stagnate, freeze or cause slippery conditions on the sidewalk,
street or street curb or street gutter.
(Prior Code, § 12-101) (Ord. 1498, passed 9-17-2007) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.02 NOTICE TO ABATE.
It shall be the duty of the designated authority to serve notice, by certified mail, upon the
owner’s last known address, and occupant, agent or person in possession or control of any lot,
building or premises in or upon which any nuisance may be found, or who may be the owner or the
cause of any such nuisance, requiring him or her to abate the same within five days in such a manner
as the designated authority shall prescribe; provided that, an owner, occupant, agent or person in
possession of any lot, building or premises who receives a notice under this section for sump pump
discharge, as defined in § 91.01(O) of this chapter, shall have 180 days from the date on which he or
she was served with notice to abate any nuisance caused by sump pump discharge if this discharge
originates from sumps, sump pits, sump pumps or other pumps that were in existence at the time of
the passage of this subchapter. It shall
22 Swansea - General Regulations
not be necessary, in any case, for the designated authority to specify in the notice the manner in
which any nuisance shall be abated, unless he or she shall deem it advisable to do so.
(Prior Code, § 12-102) (Ord. 1498, passed 9-17-2007)
§ 91.03 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE.
If the person notified to abate a nuisance shall neglect or refuse to comply with the requirements
of such notice by abating such nuisance within the time specified, such person shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 12-103) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.04 ABATEMENT.
It shall be the duty of the designated authority to proceed at once upon the expiration of the time
specified in the notice to cause such nuisance to be abated; provided, however, that, whenever the
owner, occupant, agent or person in possession or control of any premises in or upon which any
nuisance may be found is unknown or cannot be found, the designated authority shall proceed to
abate such nuisance without notice. In either case, the expense of such abatement shall be collected
from the person who may have created or suffered such nuisance to exist, in addition to any penalty
or fine.
(Prior Code, § 12-104)
WEEDS
§ 91.15 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DEVELOPED LAND. Any lot of land where a structure is erected, land maintained as lawn,
land in unfinished phases of residential or commercial subdivisions wherein a minimum of two
buildings have been build and occupied, and public rights-of-way adjacent to the land described in
this definition.
VACANT LAND. Any lot of land on which there is no construction pending, land that has been
graded in preparation for construction or improvement, forested land, pasture land and land that is
being farmed, whether planted or left fallow, and public rights-of-way adjacent to the land described
in this definition.
WEEDS. Burdock, ragweed (giant), ragweed (common), thistle, cocklebur, jimson, blue
vervain, common milkweed, wild carrot, poison ivy, wild mustard, rough pigweed, lambs quarter,
wild lettuce,
Nuisances 23
curled dock, smartweeds (all varieties), poison hemlock, wild hemp and Johnson grass and all other
noxious weeds.
(Prior Code, § 12-201) (Ord. 1629, passed 11-7-2011)
§ 91.16 NUISANCE.
(A) It is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful, for the owner or occupant of
any lot of developed land to refuse or neglect to cut weeds or any variety of grasses, when such
weeds or grasses shall have reached a height in excess of eight inches.
(B) It is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful, for the owner or occupant of
any lot of vacant land to refuse or neglect to cut weeds or any variety of grasses, when such weeds
or grasses shall have reached a height in excess of 20 inches.
(Prior Code, § 12-202) (Ord. 1629, passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.17 NOTICE.
The Street Supervisor, Chief of Police, President of the Village Board of Trustees or any other
person so designated by the President may issue a written notice for removal of weeds or grass. Such
weeds or grass shall be cut by the owner or occupant within five days after such notice has been duly
served.
(Prior Code, § 12-203)
§ 91.18 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
Service of notice provided for herein may be effected by handing the same to the owner,
occupant or lessee of the premises, or to any member of his or her household 15 years of age or
older found on the premises, or by mailing such notice to the last known residence address of the
owner by certified mail; provided that, if the premises are unoccupied and the owner’s address
cannot be obtained, then the notice may be served by posting the same upon the premises.
(Prior Code, § 12-204)
§ 91.19 ABATEMENT.
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within five days, the village may proceed to
abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the expenses of the abatement, and such expense shall be
charged and paid by such owner or occupant.
(Prior Code, § 12-205)
24 Swansea - General Regulations
§ 91.20 LIEN.
(A) Charges for such weed or grass removal shall be a lien upon the premises. A bill
representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service shall be presented to the owner.
(B) If this bill is not paid within 30 days of submission of the bill, a notice of lien of the cost
and expense thereof incurred by the village shall be recorded in the following manner:
(1) A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof;
(2) The amount of money representing the cost and expenses incurred or payable for the
service; and
(3) The date or dates when said cost and expense was incurred by the village and shall be
filed within 60 days after the cost and expense is incurred.
(Prior Code, § 12-206)
§ 91.21 PAYMENT.
Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his or her address is
known. Upon payment of the cost and expense after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be
released by the village or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release shall be filed
on record in the same manner as filing notice of the lien.
(Prior Code, § 12-207)
§ 91.22 FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.
Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed cutting charges shall be sold for non-payment of the
same after deducting costs, as in the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall
be in the name of the village, after the lien is in effect for 60 days.
(Prior Code, § 12-208)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-20-6 and 5/11-20-7
Nuisances 25
GARBAGE AND DEBRIS
§ 91.35 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DEBRIS. Rubble, rubbish, waste, trash, discarded material, refuse and abandoned, dismantled
or derelict vehicles; provided that, the latter shall not include any vehicle kept within a building.
GARBAGE. Refuse, animal or vegetable matter, offal or litter.
PROPERTY. Any real property within the village which is not a public street or highway.
VEHICLE. The same as that defined in 625 ILCS.
(Prior Code, § 12-301) (Ord. 1825, passed 5-21-2018)
§ 91.36 ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED.
No person shall permit any garbage or trash to accumulate on his or her premises or private
property. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of
real estate to refuse or neglect to remove the garbage or debris.
(Prior Code, § 12-302) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.37 NOTICE TO PERSON.
The President of the Village Board of Trustees, Chief of Police or the President’s designated
representative may issue a written notice for removal of garbage or debris. Such garbage or debris
shall be removed by the owner or occupant within five days after such notice has been duly served.
(Prior Code, § 12-303)
§ 91.38 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
Service of notice provided for herein may be effected by handing the same to the owner,
occupant or lessee of the premises, or to any member of his or her household 15 years of age or
older found on the premises, or by mailing such notice to the last known address of the owner;
provided that, if the premises are unoccupied and the owner’s address cannot be obtained, then the
notice may be served by posting the same upon the premises.
(Prior Code, § 12-304)
2018 S-1
26 Swansea - General Regulations
§ 91.39 ABATEMENT.
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within five days, the village may proceed to
abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the expense of the abatement, and such expense shall be
charged and paid by such owner or occupant.
(Prior Code, § 12-305)
§ 91.40 LIEN.
(A) Charges for such removal shall be a lien upon the premises. A bill representing the cost and
expense incurred or payable for the service shall be presented to the owner.
(B) If this bill is not paid within 30 days of submission of the bill, a notice of lien of the cost
and expenses thereof incurred by the village shall be recorded in the following manner:
(1) A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof;
(2) The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
service; and
(3) The date or dates when said cost and expense was incurred by the village and shall be
filed within 60 days after the cost and expense is incurred.
(Prior Code, § 12-306)
§ 91.41 PAYMENT.
Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his or her address is
known. Upon payment of the cost and expense after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be
released by the village or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release shall be filed
on record in the same manner as filing notice of lien.
(Prior Code, § 12-307)
§ 91.42 FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.
Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for non-payment of the same, and the
proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges after deducting costs, as is the case in the
2018 S-1
Nuisances 27
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be in the name of the village after lien is in
effect for 60 days. Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced within two years after the date of
filing notice of lien.
(Prior Code, § 12-308)
28 Swansea - General Regulations
CHAPTER 92: PARK REGULATIONS
Section
92.01 Park hours
92.02 Destruction of park property
92.03 Littering, water pollution
92.04 Fires in parks
92.05 Picnics
92.06 Erection of structures
92.07 Signs
92.08 Animals
92.09 Motor vehicles
92.10 Sales, amusements for gain
92.11 Reserving facilities
92.12 Special events
92.13 Applications for required permits
92.14 Decision on permit application
92.15 Issuance; denial of permit
92.16 Prohibited acts
92.99 Penalty
§ 92.01 PARK HOURS.
(A) All village parks, including any adjacent parking areas, shall be open to the public daily
from 6:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. from April 1 through October 31 of each year, and from 7:00 a.m.
until 6:00 p.m. from November 1 through March 31 of each year. No person shall remain in a park
at any time other than those listed above, except village personnel on official business, or those
engaged in a village sponsored or sanctioned activity, or those who have requested and been
approved to reserve specific facilities within a park for designated dates and times.
(B) For those who have requested and been approved to reserve one of the park community
centers shall be entitled to utilize such facility between 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., which, during
winter months, is after normal park closing hours.
(Prior Code, § 6-201) (Ord. 1394, passed 12-7-2004; Ord. 1596, passed 11-1-2010) Penalty, see §
92.99
29
30 Swansea - General Regulations
§ 92.02 DESTRUCTION OF PARK PROPERTY.
Within the municipal parks, no person, except park personnel on official business, shall:
(A) Cut, break, injure, destroy, take or remove any tree, shrub, timber, plant or natural object;
(B) Kill, cause to be killed or pursue with intent to kill any bird or animal, except in areas
where the Board has authorized hunting;
(C) Take any fish from park waters contrary to any fishing regulations promulgated by the
Village Board of Trustees; and/or
(D) Willfully mutilate, injure or destroy any building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, guidepost,
notice, tablet, fence, monument or other park property or appurtenances.
(Prior Code, § 6-202) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.03 LITTERING, WATER POLLUTION.
(A) No person shall deposit any trash within the municipal parks, except in proper receptacles
where these are provided, and only when such trash is generated as a result of using said parks.
Where receptacles are not provided, all trash shall be carried away from the parks by the person
responsible for its presence, and be properly disposed of elsewhere.
(B) No person shall discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any
fountain, lake, stream or other body of water, in or adjacent to any park or in any tributary, stream,
storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters any substance or thing, liquid or solid, which will or
may result in the pollution of said waters.
(Prior Code, § 6-203) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.04 FIRES IN PARKS.
(A) No person shall light or use any unenclosed picnic fire within the municipal parks. Fires
may be built only in fireplaces or on grills constructed for that purpose in designated areas.
(B) In designated camping areas, every campfire shall be attended by a competent person at all
times.
(C) Every person who has lighted or used any fire in a municipal park shall extinguish such fire
before leaving the park.
(Prior Code, § 6-204) Penalty, see § 92.99
Park Regulations 31
§ 92.05 PICNICS.
No person shall picnic in the municipal parks, except in areas designated for that purpose.
Village park personnel are hereby authorized to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary
to prevent congestion or to secure the maximum use, comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall
comply with any directions given to achieve this end.
(Prior Code, § 6-205) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.06 ERECTION OF STRUCTURES.
No person shall build or place any tent, building, booth, stand or other structure in or upon any
municipal park or other village-owned recreational facility unless he or she has obtained a permit to
do so from the village.
(Prior Code, § 6-206) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.07 SIGNS.
No person shall place within any municipal park, or affix to any object therein, any sign or
device designed to advertise any business, profession, exhibition, event or thing unless he or she has
obtained a permit to do so from the village.
(Prior Code, § 6-207) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.08 ANIMALS.
(A) Dog park. A dog park has been placed in an area of Melvin Price Memorial Park for the use
by any park visitors.
(1) No membership is necessary.
(2) No fee is required.
(3) Village personnel are hereby authorized to regulate the activities in the dog park are
when necessary to prevent congestion or to secure the maximum use, comfort, and convenience of
all.
(4) The village will not be responsible for any harm to human or animal while using the
dog park.
(B) No person shall:
(1) Bring any dangerous animal into any municipal park;
2018 S-1
32 Swansea - General Regulations
(2) Permit any dog to be in any park unless such dog is on a leash or in the dog park area;
(3) Ride or lead any horse in any municipal park or other village-owned recreational area,
except upon paths or other ways expressly provided and posted for that purpose; or
(4) Allow any permitted animal to defecate on park properties or walkways, unless said
person shall immediately remove all feces so deposited by said animal before removing the animal
from the immediate area where said defecation occurred.
(Prior Code, § 6-208) (Ord. 1456, passed 6-19-2006; Ord. 1779, passed 4-17-2017) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.09 MOTOR VEHICLES.
No person, other than municipal personnel on official business, shall drive or park any motor
vehicle in any municipal park, except on a roadway or parking lot.
(Prior Code, § 6-209) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.10 SALES, AMUSEMENTS FOR GAIN.
Within the parks of the municipality, no person shall, without first having obtained a permit
from the village:
(A) Sell or offer for sale, any goods or services; and/or
(B) Conduct any amusement for gain or for which a charge is made.
(Prior Code, § 6-210) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.11 RESERVING FACILITIES.
(A) Whenever any person, group, or organization desires to reserve a specific facility within a
municipal park, including pavilions, lighted athletic fields, and the Norman Lehr Community Center
and Thompson Civic Center at Mel Price Park, to the exclusion of others, they shall do so only
through written request and authorization in accordance with the following:
(1) Waiver.
(a) Specified organizations entitled to waiver. Specified organizations within the
village, namely the Swansea Senior Society, the Metro-East Regional Chamber of Commerce, the
Swansea Patriots, and the Swansea Farmers' Market, shall be entitled to utilize the Community
Center at Price Memorial Park, to the exclusion of all others and without charge or deposit, for their
regularly scheduled
2018 S-1
Park Regulations 33
meetings, and for any special events reported to the village during the month of November and
scheduled in the following year, provided that the village shall retain the right to utilize said facility
at any time for any public purpose.
(b) Other organizations entitled to waiver. The Board of Trustees shall allow certain
other organizations to utilize a specific facility within a municipal park to the exclusion of all others
and without charge or deposit if the following requirements are met, as determined by the Board of
Trustees in its discretion:
1. A written request has been submitted at least 30 days before the proposed
reservation date;
2. The specific facility has not already been reserved by another organization or
person; and
3. The organization making the request promotes a public interest or purpose that
is consistent with the public purpose and service objectives of the village government, or provides
services due for the public good without compensation.
(2) Other reservations; acceptance. Any other reservations shall be accepted for each
calendar year beginning with the first business day of December.
(3) Only residents to reserve; exceptions. Reservations for such facilities, except park
pavilions, shall only be accepted from residents of the village, or from businesses or organizations
located in the village. The village shall verify residency by requiring the person making said
reservation to submitting a copy of their driver's license or other acceptable form of identification, or
by requiring the company or organization to submit a letter, on their letterhead, authorizing the
reservation.
(4) Reservation requests. Reservation requests shall be made in writing on forms provided
by the village, and no reservation shall be assured until a formal request is made and approved by the
village. No reservation shall be taken over the telephone. Such form may include language regarding
additional terms and conditions upon the use of the village's facilities.
(5) Conflicting requests; priority. Should two reservation requests be submitted for the
same day, the first such request submitted to the village shall be given first consideration.
(6) Required information in requests. Each such request shall specifically state the location
and facilities requested, as well as all special needs or requirements.
(7) Fee. Each such request for reservation of a park pavilion shall be accompanied by a
check, cash or credit card payment in the amount of $25 for residents and $50 for non-residents as
the reservation fee for the use of said facility. This check shall be immediately deposited by the
village with the intent of offsetting some of the costs of utilities and maintenance for said facility.
34 Swansea - General Regulations
(8) Athletic facilities; fees. Each such request for reservations of athletic facilities when
field lights are required, shall be accompanied by a check, cash or credit card payment in an amount
equal to $15 per hour of lights required, with a two-hour minimum. Lights will be available in
increments of hours only. The village will be responsible for turning on and off the lights for each
scheduled use.
(9) Community Center; fees. Each request for reservation of the Norman Lehr Community
Center at Melvin Price Memorial Park shall be accompanied by check, cash or credit card payment
in the amount of $225. One hundred dollars is for the rent amount of the Community Center, and
$125 is for a security deposit. The total amount will be entered into the cash receipts system. The
$125 deposit fee shall be returned to the person making said reservation only if, upon inspection,
said facility is found by the village to be clean and undamaged, and all keys and any equipment are
returned to the village.
(10) Thompson Center, Lehr Center , TWM Center; keys; times entry permitted and other
rules. For those requesting to reserve the Thompson Center, the Lehr Center or TWM Center, a key
to the appropriate building shall be made available so that it can be picked up on the date of the
approved reservation. The person making said reservation shall be held responsible for the safe
keeping of such key, and entry into the Thompson Center, Lehr Center or TWM Center shall only be
authorized on the date and during the times approved on the reservation request. Entry at any other
time shall be deemed unlawful. It shall also be the responsibility of the person making the reservation
to assure that all doors to the Thompson Center, Lehr Center or TWM Center are locked and to
assure that the key is returned. Further rules and regulations regarding when and where to pickup
and drop off the keys for these rentals shall be adopted by resolution of the Board of Trustees and
attached to the building reservation form.
(11) Thompson Center; fees; rules. Each request for reservation of the Thompson Center at
Melvin Price Memorial Park shall be accompanied by check, cash or credit card payment in the
amount of $350. One hundred fifty dollars is for the rent of the Thompson Center, and $200 is for a
security deposit. Should the renter also want access to the kitchen, the reservation shall be
accompanied by check, cash or credit card payment in the amount of $500. Two hundred dollars is
for the rent of the Thompson Center, and $300 is for a security deposit. The total amount will be
entered into the cash receipts system. No disc jockeys (“DJs”) or live music is allowed at the
Thompson Center. The applicable deposit fee shall be returned to the person making said reservation
only if, upon inspection, said facility is found by the village to be clean and undamaged, and all keys
and any equipment are returned to the village.
(12) TWM Center, Schranz Memorial Park; fees and rules. Each request for reservation of
the TWM Center at Schranz Memorial Park shall be accompanied by check, cash or credit card
payment in the amount of $250 for residents or $300 for non-residents. One hundred dollars for
residents and $150 for non residents shall be the rent amount of the TWM Center. The remaining
$150 for residents and non-residents shall be held as a security deposit. The entire amount shall be
entered into the cash receipts system. The security deposit shall be returned to the person making
said reservation only if, upon inspection, said facility is found by the village to be clean and
undamaged, and all keys and any equipment are returned to the village.
Park Regulations 35
(13) Reservation for weddings; minimum rental period. The foregoing notwithstanding, any
reservation tor a building for a wedding must reserve the building for a minimum of three days,
accompanied by check, cash or credit card payment in the amount of rent for three days and one
security deposit for the building as provided hereinabove.
(B) Shranz Park Splash Pad reservation. Whenever anyone desires to use the Schranz Park
Splash Pad for an organized group of ten or more persons, they shall do so only through written
reservation, authorization and permit in accordance with the following:
(1) The number of users permitted by the reservation shall not exceed 50 persons.
(2) The time reserved shall be limited to the hours of 11:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m., and only on
a non-holiday weekday when the Schranz Park Splash Pad is open.
(3) Any person making such a reservation which allows exclusive use of the Schranz Park
Splash Pad during the time and date of the reservation, shall pay a fee to do so, in the form of a
check made payable to “The Village of Swansea”. Said fee shall be $50 for residents of the village,
and $75 for non-residents. Any such check shall immediately be deposited by the village with the
intent of offsetting some of the operating cost for said facility.
(4) Any such reservation request for exclusive use of the Schranz Park Splash Pad shall be
accompanied by a check or cash security deposit in the amount of $100 for residents of the village,
or $200 for non-residents. The deposit will be entered into the cash receipts system and refunded to
the person making said reservation only if, upon inspection, the Splash Pad is found to be clean and
undamaged, with the filtration system free of food or any other materials not allowed in or near the
splash pad, and all other rules governing its use were followed. The Village Administrator, or any
other official authorized by the Board of Trustees, shall have the authority to decide not to refund a
security deposit.
(5) Reservation requests shall be made in writing, at least 30 days in advance, on forms
provided by the village, and no reservation shall exist until the request is approved by the village. No
reservations shall be taken over the telephone. Such forms may include language regarding additional
terms and conditions upon the use of the village's facilities.
(6) Each permitted reservation shall be posted at an appropriate location at the Schranz
Park Splash Pad facility, and the reserving group shall be entitled to exclusive use on that date and
during that time period.
(Prior Code, § 6-211) (Ord. 1394, passed 12-7-2004; Ord. 1445, passed 3-20-2006; Ord. 1500,
passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 1539, passed 1-20-2009; Ord. 1558, passed 10-19-2009; Ord. 1591, passed
9-20-2010; Ord. 1626, passed 9-19-2011; Ord. 1716, passed 2-17-2015; Ord. 1745, passed 4-4-
2016; Ord. 1746, passed 4-4-2016; Ord. 1756, passed 7-5-2016) Penalty, see § 92.99
36 Swansea - General Regulations
§ 92.12 SPECIAL EVENTS.
(A) Whenever any group, association or organization desires to use said park facilities for a
particular special event, such as company picnics or parties, theatrical or entertainment
performances, political speeches, festivals or carnivals, a representative of said group, association or
organization shall first obtain the written permission from the village. All requests for special events
must be made at least 30 days prior to event.
(B) The village shall grant the application if it appears that the group, association or
organization will not interfere with the general use of the park by the individual members of the
public and if said group, association or organization meets any other conditions required by the
village.
(C) The village may require an indemnity bond to guard from any liability of any kind or
character determined to be necessary to protect the village from loss or damage.
(Prior Code, § 6-212)
§ 92.13 APPLICATIONS FOR REQUIRED PERMITS.
(A) Applications for permits required by §§ 92.01(B), 92.06, 92.07 and 92.10 and any other
section of this chapter shall be made in writing to the village not less than seven days before the
proposed date of the activity for which the permit is sought.
(B) Each application shall include the following information:
(1) Statement briefly describing the nature of the proposed activity;
(2) Name, address and telephone number of the person or organization wishing to conduct
such activity;
(3) The date when such activity is to be conducted;
(4) The hour when such activity will start and terminate;
(5) The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired; and
(6) An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
(Prior Code, § 6-213)
Park Regulations 37
§ 92.14 DECISION ON PERMIT APPLICATION.
(A) After due consideration of the information contained in the permit application, but no later
than four days after the application has been filed, the village shall determine whether the application
is satisfactory.
(B) An application shall be deemed satisfactory if:
(1) The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract
from the general public enjoyment of the park;
(2) The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day and hour requested
in the application;
(3) The conduct of such activity will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly
movement of traffic;
(4) The proper policing of such activity will not require the diversion of so great a number
of police officers as to prevent normal police protection to the remainder of the municipality;
(5) The conduct of such activity is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or
property, or to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct; and
(6) Such activity is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or
event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit.
(Prior Code, § 6-214)
§ 92.15 ISSUANCE; DENIAL OF PERMITS.
(A) By regular mail or by telephone, the village shall promptly notify every permit applicant of
the decision of his or her application.
(B) If such decision is favorable, the village shall issue the permit. As a condition of the
issuance of any permit, the village may require that an indemnity bond be obtained if, in its opinion,
such bond is necessary to protect the municipality from liability or to protect municipal property
from damage.
(C) The village shall inform each applicant who has been denied a license regarding the reasons
for the denial and the procedure for appeals.
(Prior Code, § 6-215)
38 Swansea - General Regulations
§ 92.16 PROHIBITED ACTS.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation using such parks to either perform or
permit to be performed any of the following acts:
(A) Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any building,
bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving or paving material, waterline or other public utility or
part or appurtenance thereof, sign, notice or placard, whether temporary or permanent, monument,
stake, post or other boundary marker or other structure or equipment, facility or park property or
appurtenance whatsoever;
(B) Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain,
pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream,
storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which
will or may result in the pollution of said waters;
(C) Bring in any dump, or leave any bottle, broken glass, ashes, paper, box, can, dirt, rubbish,
waste, garbage, refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or
contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper
receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or
waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly
disposed of elsewhere;
(D) Engage in disorderly conduct or disturb the peace;
(E) Prevent any person from peaceably using any park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with
such use;
(F) Swim, bathe or wade in any water or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such
waters and at such places as are designated therefor;
(G) Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have
the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to
secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any
directions given to achieve this end;
(H) Use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the buildings or structures therein for the
purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area and
facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded, except by permission as provided in
this chapter;
Park Regulations 39
(I) Engage in special activities including flying model airplanes, golf practice, ice skating,
sledding, fishing, games and picnics except at locations specifically designated for such activities by
the village. Areas for such activities may be reserved by groups for use at specified times, as
provided in this chapter;
(J) Drive or park any bicycle, automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle, except on a
street, driveway or parking lot in any park, or park or leave any such vehicle in any place other than
one established for public parking. It shall be unlawful to pass on any park road. The speed limit in
any park shall be ten mph;
(K) Bring any horse or dangerous animal or permit any dog to be in any park unless such dog is
on a leash not more than six feet long. Allow any permitted animal to defecate on park properties or
walkways, unless said person shall immediately remove all feces so deposited by said animal before
removing the animal from the immediate area where said defecation occurred;
(L) Sell, peddle or offer for sale any commodity or article within any village park, without a
written permit;
(M) Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever,
erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever in any park or roads adjacent to a park;
(N) Deposit or leave any species of fish, fowl or animal in any park;
(O) Remove Indian relics, arrowheads or other artifacts;
(P) Light any fires other than in established fire containers or pits;
(Q) Consume or have in one’s possession any intoxicating beverage on or within 30 feet of any
playground or playground with water play fixtures, or on any sports field or court or within 30 feet
of the outer field lines of any sports field or court during any game or practice session of any sports
team(s) in which the players are under the age of 21 years, or within the enclosed area of the dog
park, or any place within any park or park facilities when there is a gathering of more than 50
persons unless the Village Clerk issues a permit, after a group of such size has made application for a
permit at least 30 days in advance of the event, and has presented proof of an indemnity bond or
other insurance to protect the village from liabilities of any kind or character that the village
determines necessary to guard the village from loss or damage as a result of consumption of
intoxicating beverages, and after said application has been approved by the Park Board;
(R) Fire, or have in possession, with the exception of those with a valid concealed weapon
permit, any firearm, air gun, archery device or other device for the propelling of objects; and/or
(S) Smoke cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, cigars, pipes or chew tobacco within 30 feet of any
playground, or playground with water play fixtures or within the fenced area of the dog park.
(Prior Code, § 6-216) (Ord. 1521, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 1584, passed 6-21-2010)
40 Swansea - General Regulations
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
Anyone found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$50, nor more than $750.
(Prior Code, § 6-216)
CHAPTER 93: STREET REGULATIONS
Section
General Regulations
93.01 Undermining
93.02 Closing streets, generally
93.03 Closing streets; block parties
93.04 Closing streets; community events
93.05 Closing streets; private construction
93.06 Signs across street
93.07 Porch
93.08 Vehicles on sidewalks
93.09 Culverts
93.10 Burning
93.11 Materials on sidewalks
93.12 Obstructing street
93.13 Water from eaves
93.14 Building materials in street
93.15 Signs and notices
93.16 Merchandise on public streets
93.17 Encroachments
93.18 Injury to new pavements
Trees and Shrubs as Obstructions to Streets
93.30 Planting
93.31 Unlawful to plant trees and shrubbery
93.32 Removal
93.33 Injury
93.34 Dangerous trees
93.35 Certain trees prohibited
93.36 Wires
93.37 Gas pipes
93.38 Decayed trees
41
42 Swansea - General Regulations
Regulations for Street Excavation
93.50 Application for permit
93.51 Bond
93.52 Manner of excavating
93.53 Restoration of excavation
93.54 Time limit
93.55 Fitness of applicant
93.56 Issuance of permit
93.57 Supervision
93.58 Exemptions
93.59 Obstructing work in street
93.60 Barriers and lights
93.61 Lights on material in street
93.62 Interference with barriers and lights
93.63 Liability of persons to village for damage
93.64 Definitions
93.65 Rights-of-way agreements
93.66 Annual registration and fee
93.67 Small wireless facilities
93.99 Penalty
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 93.01 UNDERMINING.
No person shall undermine, in any manner, any street or any other ground or real estate situated
in the village and owned by the village or by any other private person.
(Prior Code, § 6-301) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.02 CLOSING STREETS; GENERALLY.
(A) Whenever public safety or the repair of any street, alley or sidewalk requires it, the Mayor,
Police Chief, Fire Chief or Superintendent of Public Works may order any street, alley or sidewalk
temporarily closed to traffic, and shall direct the placing of barricades and signs indicating that such
right-of-way is closed by the order of same. Whenever such barricades and signs are so placed, it
shall be unlawful for any person to walk, drive or ride upon or cross such closed street, alley or
sidewalk.
2018 S-1
Street Regulations 43
(B) It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove or relocate any barricade from
any public right-of-way, or for any person to damage, deface, destroy or remove or relocate any
closure or detour placard.
(C) There shall be no fee imposed by the village for the temporary occupation or closure of any
street, alley or sidewalk for any block party, community event or private construction.
(Prior Code, § 6-302) (Ord. 1634, passed 12-19-2011) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.03 CLOSING STREETS; BLOCK PARTIES.
(A) Any person or group of persons may make application to the Chief of Police to close any
street or part of a street for any day or part of a day for the purpose of conducting a block party. The
applicant shall agree to the following:
(1) Provide adequate method of street closure;
(2) Allow one lane to remain clear and open for the passage of emergency vehicles; and
(3) Accept responsibility for any damage or liability that may occur.
(B) The Chief of Police shall approve the request if the Chief determines that the applicant will
fulfill the requirements listed herein and the event will not affect public safety or unduly
inconvenience the public. Upon approval, the Chief of Police shall notify the Mayor and the Board of
Trustees of the scheduled block party.
(Prior Code, § 6-303) (Ord. 1634, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 93.04 CLOSING STREETS; COMMUNITY EVENTS.
Any person, corporation, not-for-profit organization or other group seeking to temporarily
occupy or close any street under the jurisdiction of village for any parade, festival, organized run,
walk or bicycle tour or similar community event shall first make application to the Chief of Police.
The applicant shall present a diagram of the streets proposed to be occupied or closed, detour route
and barricade and signage plan. The Chief of Police shall review the proposed occupation or closure
of such street or streets and shall recommend to the Board of Trustees the approval or denial of the
application. The Board of Trustees shall give its approval, with conditions if deemed necessary, or
denial of the proposed occupation or closure of such street or streets considering the safety and
convenience of the public.
(Prior Code, § 6-304) (Ord. 1634, passed 12-19-2011)
2018 S-1
44 Swansea - General Regulations
§ 93.05 CLOSING STREETS; PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION.
Any person or firm seeking the temporary occupation or the closure of all or part of any street,
alley or sidewalk for any purpose in connection with the erection, removal, alteration or repair of
any building
or other structure shall first make application to the Superintendent of Public Works or his or her
designated representative. The Superintendent of Public Works shall approve, with conditions if
deemed necessary, or deny the application considering the duration of the closure, the practicality of
the detour plan, the arrangements for appropriate detour and closure signage and the safety and
convenience of the public. The Superintendent of Public Works shall give 48 hours’ notice to the
Police and Fire Departments and the ambulance company of any scheduled street closure.
(Prior Code, § 6-305) (Ord. 1634, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 93.06 SIGNS ACROSS STREET.
No person shall place any sign, advertisement or banner over any street or alley in the village,
unless he or she has written approval of the Village Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 6-306) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.07 PORCH.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation to construct and maintain any
porch or similar overhead covering device extending from any building bordering upon any public
sidewalk, which overhangs any public sidewalk or passageway, supported by or resting upon posts,
in the village.
(Prior Code, § 6-307) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.08 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
No person shall operate any licensed vehicles over any sidewalk, except in crossing the same to
go into a yard or parking lot.
(Prior Code, § 6-308) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.09 CULVERTS.
Any person desiring a driveway-type culvert shall secure permission from the Superintendent of
Public Works. After securing the proper size, location, depth and method of installation information
from the village, the person shall purchase the approved culvert and the Village Street Department
shall install the culvert.
(Prior Code, § 6-309) (Ord. 1621, passed 8-1-2011) Penalty, see § 93.99
2018 S-1
Street Regulations 45
§ 93.10 BURNING.
It shall be unlawful in the village to burn leaves, grass, rubbish or any other substance on the
margin of any cement, bituminous or other hard-surfaced paved street, highway or sidewalk within
or partly within the village.
(Prior Code, § 6-310) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.11 MATERIALS ON SIDEWALKS.
(A) It shall be unlawful to place or locate on any public sidewalk any material, which may be
harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, any glass or other articles which might cause
injury to persons, animals or property.
(B) Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks preparatory to delivery;
provided that, the usable width is not thereby reduced to less than four feet; and, provided that, no
such article shall remain on such walk for more than one-half hour.
(Prior Code, § 6-311) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.12 OBSTRUCTING STREET.
No person shall place or cause to be placed or erected on any public ground or in any public
street, alley or sidewalk in the village any debris, materials or obstruction, including mud, dirt and
other organic matter deposited as a result of construction, except as may be permitted by this
subchapter. When any such matter is deposited as a result of construction, it shall be the
responsibility of the general contractor, or the property owner in the absence of a general contractor,
to assure that such material is removed daily and streets are left clean and unobstructed.
(Prior Code, § 6-312) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.13 WATER FROM EAVES.
No person owning or occupying any building in the village shall cause pipes conducting the
water from eaves of the building to be so constructed as to spread the water over the sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 6-313) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.14 BUILDING MATERIALS IN STREET.
The Superintendent of Pubic Works may cause to be moved any obstruction on any street or
sidewalk of the village; but, before doing so, he or she shall notify the person responsible therefor to
remove such obstruction within a reasonable time after being notified. Any person engaged in
erecting a building or fence or improving any lot on such street may deposit materials thereon and
contiguous to
46 Swansea - General Regulations
such length of time as may be necessary for the work. The obstruction shall not extend to more than
one-half of the width of the sidewalk, street or alley adjacent to such improvement and the gutter
shall always be left free and unobstructed. Such person shall warn passers-by at night by placing
warning lights around such materials.
(Prior Code, § 6-314) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.15 SIGNS AND NOTICES.
(A) No person shall attach, post, nail, tack, paste, paint or fasten or cause to be attached,
posted, nailed, tacked, painted or fastened any sign, handbill, poster, advertisement, notice of any
kind or any other foreign substance or material onto:
(1) Any tree or shrub in any right-of-way, street, parkway or other public place;
(2) Any telephone, telegraph, electric light, utility, police or fire-alarm pole or post;
(3) Any street or traffic sign located on any sidewalk, street, alley or public grounds;
(4) Any curbstone, flagstone or any other portion or part of any sidewalk;
(5) Any hydrant; or
(6) Any private well, door or gate without the consent in writing of the owner of the wall,
door or gate.
(B) No person shall injure or deface any item referred to in (A)(1) through (A)(6) hereinabove.
(C) The foregoing notwithstanding, the proper village of Swansea and St. Clair county officials
may post election signs, polling place signs and other signs or placards, but shall not be attached to a
tree or shrub.
(Prior Code, § 6-315) Penalty, see § 93.99
Cross-reference:
Posting bills, see § 130.26
§ 93.16 MERCHANDISE ON PUBLIC STREETS.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use any street, sidewalk or other
public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale or to write or make any signs
advertising on any such pavements.
(Prior Code, § 6-316) Penalty, see § 93.99
Street Regulations 47
§ 93.17 ENCROACHMENTS.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or maintain any building,
structure, fence, pole or sign, which encroaches upon any public street, property or right-of-way,
without written authorization to do so from the Village Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 6-317) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.18 INJURY TO NEW PAVEMENTS.
It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon or destroy any newly-laid
sidewalk pavement while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure
any soft, newly-laid pavement.
(Prior Code, § 6-318) Penalty, see § 93.99
TREES AND SHRUBS AS OBSTRUCTIONS TO STREETS
§ 93.30 PLANTING.
It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or bush in any public right-of-way, street or parkway, or
other public place, without having first secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall
be made to the Village Clerk and shall be referred by him or her to the Village Board of Trustees.
All trees and shrubs so planted shall be placed subject to the directions and approval of the Village
Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 6-401) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.31 UNLAWFUL TO PLANT TREES AND SHRUBBERY.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation to plant or cause to be planted
any tree or shrub less than seven feet from any property line fronting any public street. No tree shall
be planted on the corner of a lot at a distance less than 30 feet from any intersecting streets.
(Prior Code, § 6-402) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.32 REMOVAL.
It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree or shrub or portion thereof in any right-ofway,
parkway or public place without having first secured a permit therefor. Applications for such
permits shall be made to the Village Clerk and shall be referred by him or her to the Village Board
of Trustees before permission shall be granted.
(Prior Code, § 6-403) Penalty, see § 93.99
48 Swansea - General Regulations
§ 93.33 INJURY.
It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or shrub planted in any public place.
(Prior Code, § 6-404) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.34 DANGEROUS TREES.
(A) Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public place in the
municipality at a height less than eight feet or in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or
travel on such public place shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises on which such tree or
shrub grows, so that the obstruction shall cease.
(B) Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across a public way or place
shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such tree grows or stands.
(C) The Superintendent of Public Works may, at the owner’s expense, trim or remove any tree
or shrub so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be done away with.
(Prior Code, § 6-406) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.35 CERTAIN TREES PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation to plant or cause to be planted
in any of the public rights-of-way, streets, alleys, sidewalks, parkways and other public places in the
village any trees of any of the following varieties: cottonwood, poplar and willow.
(Prior Code, § 6-407) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.36 WIRES.
(A) It shall be unlawful to attach any wires or rope to any tree or shrub in any public street,
parkway or other public place without the permission of the Village Board of Trustees.
(B) Any person or company given the right to maintain the poles and wires in the streets, alleys
or other public places in the municipality shall, in the absence of provision in the franchise
concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles free from and away from any trees or shrubs in
such places so far as may be possible and shall keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed,
subject to the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works so that no injury shall be done either
to the poles or wires or the shrubs and trees by their conduct.
(Prior Code, § 6-408) Penalty, see § 93.99
Street Regulations 49
§ 93.37 GAS PIPES.
Any person or company maintaining any gas pipe in the municipality shall, in the absence of
provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such pipes free from leaks so that no injury
shall be done to any trees or shrubs.
(Prior Code, § 6-409) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.38 DECAYED TREES.
Any person owning a parcel of land whereon is situated a decayed or dead tree which extends
over any sidewalk or street shall remove such dead or decayed tree or parts thereof in such a manner
that danger to the public is eliminated.
(Prior Code, § 6-410) Penalty, see § 93.99
REGULATIONS FOR STREET EXCAVATION
§ 93.50 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
Any person desiring to lay, lower, change, repair or remove any pipes or to make connections
therewith, or to make any change, improvement, fill, excavation or alteration within or upon any
right-of-way, street, alley, sidewalk or other public place shall apply to the Superintendent of Public
Works or his or her designated representative for a permit to do so. The applicant shall describe the
portion of the right-of-way, street, alley, sidewalk or other public place where such work is to be
done and the nature and character of the work to be done.
(Prior Code, § 6-501) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.51 BOND.
(A) The applicant shall also give a $5,000 bond or 5% of project, whichever is greater,
conditioned that he or she will:
(1) Suitably guard and protect any excavation or obstruction;
(2) Defend, save, keep harmless and indemnify the village and from all actions, suits,
costs, damages and expenses including any injuries or damages received or sustained by any person
by or from acts or omissions of the applicant or his or her employees in doing such work;
(3) Complete such work as expediently as possible, and when completed, notify the village
of such fact so that the Superintendent of Public Works or his or her designated representative may
see that the same has been promptly and properly restored to its former condition;
50 Swansea - General Regulations
(4) Guarantee that such work is to reconstructed, refilled and restored in a good and
workmanlike manner, and of good and proper material, and that the same shall not deteriorate, cavein
or require repair or reconstruction for a period of at least two years from the time of approval of
such work; and
(5) Upon the giving of notice to that effect, pay to the village, for use of same, any and all
costs and expenses to which the village may have been put, paid or become liable for in refilling,
repairing and replacing the work on the surface or pavement of such right-of-way, street, alley or
sidewalk, or other public place if the work shall be done by the village, or it becomes necessary for
the village to do so, the cost in all cases to be certified by the Superintendent of Public Works or his
or her designated representative.
(B) Such bond, with sureties, shall be approved by the President of the Village Board of
Trustees or his or her designated representative.
(Prior Code, § 6-502)
§ 93.52 MANNER OF EXCAVATING.
(A) It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation or tunnel in any way contrary to or at
variance with the terms of the permit therefor. Proper bracing shall be maintained to prevent the
collapse of adjoining ground; and in excavations, the excavation shall not extend anywhere below the
surface any distance which would be greater than the opening at the surface.
(B) No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits or any village department or office
charged with the care thereof, and no pipes, cables or conduits or parts thereof, which are or may be
in danger or affected by making such excavation or tunnel, shall be removed without obtaining a
permit to do so before such pipes, cables or conduits shall be disturbed.
(C) No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any tree or shrub or the roots thereof.
(Prior Code, § 6-503) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.53 RESTORATION OF EXCAVATION.
The street shall be restored by the applicant and or developer as indicated below.
(A) All trenches shall be backfilled with compacted CA-6 rock or approved alternate. No
material removed from the trench will be allowed to be reused unless approved by the village prior to
placement.
(B) Temporary patches may be installed to facilitate traffic movement until a permanent patch
can be installed. The contractor shall be responsible for maintaining the temporary patch and for all
liability associated with the excavation and repair.
Street Regulations 51
(C) The contractor shall notify the village 24 hours prior to pouring or placing any permanent
repairs.
(D) The existing pavement should be saw-cut one foot beyond the trench limits (each direction)
prior to initiating the pavement repair.
(E) (1) Concrete streets shall be repaired with portland cement pavement having a 28-day
compressive strength of not less than 4,000 PSI and having a minimum thickness equivalent to the
pavement being replaced, but in no case less than six inches in thickness.
(2) Prior to pouring the replacement slab, the contractor shall install one-half dowel bars at
a maximum of 30-inch spacing (minimum two, each direction) into the existing slab.
(3) The contractor shall be responsible for replacing any reinforcing removed during the
repair process and for installing reinforcing in any repair area as directed by the village.
(F) Asphalt streets shall be repaired with a minimum thickness equal to the surrounding surface,
but not less than eight-inch bituminous concrete dyed to match the surrounding. Asphalt can be used
in lieu of bituminous concrete pavement.
(G) Oil and chip streets shall be repaired with a minimum thickness equal to the surrounding
surface, but not less than eight inches of bituminous concrete pavement.
(Prior Code, § 6-504) (Ord. 1696, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.54 TIME LIMIT.
(A) Each application for a permit shall state the length of time it is estimated will elapse from
the commencement of the work until the restoration of the surface of the ground, or until the refill is
made ready for the pavement to be put on by the village, if same restores such surface pavement.
(B) It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with this time limitation unless permission for an
extension of time is granted by the village.
(Prior Code, § 6-505) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.55 FITNESS OF APPLICANT.
No permits shall be granted to any person failing to file the appropriate bond, or who, in the
judgment of the President of the Village Board of Trustees or his or her designated representative, is
unfit or unqualified to engage in the class of work herein provided for.
(Prior Code, § 6-506)
52 Swansea - General Regulations
§ 93.56 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
Upon receipt of application, the Superintendent of Public Works or his or her designated
representative, in coordination with the Village Engineer and upon approval of the President of the
Village Board of Trustees or his or her designated representative, shall issue a permit to the
application, stating therein all privileges thereby granted.
(Prior Code, § 6-507)
§ 93.57 SUPERVISION.
(A) The Superintendent of Public Works or his or her designated representative shall, from time
to time, inspect all excavations and tunnels being made in or under any public street, alley or other
public place in the village to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter.
(B) Sufficient notice shall be given to the Superintendent of Public Works or his or her
designated representative before the work of refilling any such excavation or tunnel commences.
(Prior Code, § 6-508)
§ 93.58 EXEMPTIONS.
The provisions of the regulation relative to securing permits shall not apply to officers or
employees of the village engaged in doing such work; nor to persons or corporations which are
operating under a franchise or grant from the village if such franchise provides for the making of
excavation and tunnels without securing a permit therefor.
(Prior Code, § 6-509)
§ 93.59 OBSTRUCTING WORK IN STREET.
When any right-of-way, street, alley, sidewalk or other public place is being improved under any
contract with the village, it shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, injure, carry away, remove
or interfere with any of the material or appliances used in or about the work, or impede, obstruct or
interfere with the execution of the work or destroy or damage any of the work or materials which
may have been placed by the contractor.
(Prior Code, § 6-510) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.60 BARRIERS AND LIGHTS.
Whoever digs, or causes to be dug, a ditch or excavation in or adjoining any right-of-way,
street, alley, sidewalk or other public place shall erect a suitable barrier about such excavation and,
during the
Street Regulations 53
night, shall keep a sufficient number of illuminated warning lights around such excavation, and the
earth there from, in order to warn passers-by.
(Prior Code, § 6-511) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.61 LIGHTS ON MATERIAL IN STREET.
Every object standing on a street, alley or other public road within the village shall have an
illuminated light thereon at night, if it is an object other than a vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 6-512) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.62 INTERFERENCE WITH BARRIERS AND LIGHTS.
No person shall remove or interfere with any barrier, warning sign or light placed in any street
for the protection of the public.
(Prior Code, § 6-513) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.63 LIABILITY OF PERSONS TO VILLAGE FOR DAMAGE.
If any person violates any provision of this subchapter, and any person or property in
consequence thereof is injured or damaged, the person so guilty of such violation shall be liable to
the village in relation thereto, and no prosecution or other proceeding by the village of such person
for any penalty imposed for a violation shall constitute a bar to such action by the village for such
damages.
(Prior Code, § 6-514)
§ 93.64 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of §§ 93.65 and 93.66, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm or corporation duly authorized to furnish under regulation
to the public:
(1) Electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraph, transportation, water or sewerage systems;
and
(2) To the extent allowable by law, any data or internet services.
(Ord. 1821, passed 4-23-2018)
2018 S-1
54 Swansea - General Regulations
§ 93.65 RIGHTS-OF-WAY AGREEMENTS.
(A) Rights-of-way use agreement application. An application for rights-of-way use agreement,
on village forms, shall be presented to the village in writing and shall include all such information as
is required by this Code. This application requires payment of a nonrefundable application fee of
$750, which fee shall be utilized to offset the village’s costs in this process, consistent with
applicable law. If applicable, the applicant shall be obligated to reimburse the village for its
reasonable expenses associated with the review, negotiation and adoption of an appropriate rights-ofway
use agreement that may reasonably exceed the application fee amount. The application will be
used to determine the qualifications and eligibility of the applicant to be granted either a license
agreement, franchise, or rights-of-way use agreement under the Municipal Code, and federal and
state law, and to assist the village in ensuring compliance of the applicant with applicable law, and
adapting any agreement to unique or special circumstances as may be established by the applicant.
The applicant shall be responsible for accurately maintaining the information in the application
during the term of any rights-of-way use agreement and shall be responsible for all costs incurred by
the village due to the failure to provide or maintain as accurate any application information required
herein.
(B) Franchise application. This provision shall not override any section in the Municipal Code
of the Village of Swansea which describes, controls, or regulates franchise agreements. Such
provisions remain in full force and effect.
(C) No warranty. The village makes no express or implied representation or warranty regarding
its rights to authorize the installation or construction of facilities or utilities on any particular segment
of rights-of-way and shall not be liable for any damage therefrom. The burden and responsibility for
making all such determinations in advance of construction or installation shall be entirely upon the
applicant. Such applicant shall be wholly liable for any damages to facilities or other property due to
any work, improvement, or maintenance performed on the rights-of-way, without cost or liability to
the village. No remedies or monetary recourse may be enforced against or paid by the village arising
from the use of rights-of-way.
(D) Third parties. Except as otherwise provided by written agreement or as required by law, no
franchise, license, or permit may be transferred or assigned to a third party without the written
application to and consent of the village based on the requirements and policies of this section and §
93.66.
(Ord. 1821, passed 4-23-2018)
§ 93.66 ANNUAL REGISTRATION AND FEE.
(A) Annual registration required. Every public utility that occupies a right-of-way within the
village shall register on January 1 of each year with the Village Code Administrator, providing the
public utility’s name, address, regular business telephone and facsimile numbers, the name of one or
more contact persons who can act on behalf of the public utility in connection with emergencies
involving the
2018 S-1
Street Regulations 54A
public utility’s facilities in the right-of-way, a 24-hour telephone number for each such person,
evidence of insurance, and a map evidencing the public utility’s facilities.
(B) Annual registration fee. Except where inconsistent with applicable law, a $25 annual
registration fee shall accompany the above registration information.
(Ord. 1821, passed 4-23-2018)
§ 93.67 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
(A) Purpose and scope.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish regulations, standards and
procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on rights-of-way within the
village’s jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the village exclusively for
commercial or industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act (the “Act”).
(2) Conflicts with other ordinances. This section supersedes all ordinances or parts of
ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
(3) Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable federal or state laws or
regulations conflict with the requirements of this section, the wireless provider shall comply with the
requirements of this section to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or
regulations.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio
frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes
adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes, including
the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the village for a permit to collocate
small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such
collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole.
2018 S-1
54B Swansea - General Regulations
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; telecommunications
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
153(53), as amended; or wireless service other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as
amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless
provider.
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE. A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK. A building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either
(a) Listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible
for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the
authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National
Register, in accordance with Section VI.D.l.a.i through Section VI.D.l.a.v of the Nationwide
Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or
(b) Designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by
an ordinance adopted by the village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements
of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or
where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office
is pending.
LAW. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local
ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension
than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior antenna,
if any, no longer than 11 inches.
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the village in public
rights-of-way.
PERMIT. A written authorization required by the village to perform an action or initiate,
continue, or complete a project.
PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association,
trust, or other entity or organization.
2018 S-1
Street Regulations 54C
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal government, the state, a
unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in whole or in part within this state,
that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other
emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE. A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public
sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include
village-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications:
(a) Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in
volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed
elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and
(b) All other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated
ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter,
concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power
and other services.
UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a
communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or a similar
function.
WIRELESS FACILITY.
(a) Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user
equipment and a communications network, including:
1. Equipment associated with wireless communications; and
2. Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
(b) WIRELESS FACILITY includes small wireless facilities.
(c) WIRELESS FACILITY does not include:
1. The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is
collocated; or
2018 S-1
54D Swansea - General Regulations
2. Wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between
wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not
immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless communication transmission
equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless
services provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a particular
class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed
spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to
support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not
include a utility pole.
(C) Regulation of small wireless facilities.
(1) Permitted use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject
to administrative review, except as provided in division (D)(9) below regarding height exceptions or
variances, but not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated:
(a) In rights-of-way in any zoning district, or
(b) Outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial
use.
(2) Permit required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the village to
collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be received and processed, and permits issued
shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements:
(a) Application requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the following
information to the village, together with the village’s small cell facilities permit application, as a
condition of any permit application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless
support structure:
1. Site specific structural integrity and, for any village-owned utility pole, makeready
analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the-Structural
Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
2018 S-1
Street Regulations 54E
2. The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would
be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles
or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where
utility poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed
facility;
3. Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989, for each proposed small
wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed;
4. The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless
equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
5. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless
facility covered by the application, if approved; and
6. Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation requirements
and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant’s knowledge.
7. In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an
existing pole owned by an entity other than the village, the wireless provider shall provide legally
competent evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
(b) Application process. The village shall process applications as follows:
1. The first completed application shall have priority over applications received
by different applicants for collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure.
2. An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole
or wireless support structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless support structure
shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the village fails to
approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission of a completed application.
A. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on
a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in writing of its intention to invoke the
deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75 days after the submission of a completed application.
B. The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the ninetieth day
after submission of the complete application or the tenth day after the receipt of the deemed approved
notice by the village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village’s
denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this division (C)(2)(b)2.
3. An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation
of a new utility pole shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the
village fails to approve or deny the application within 120 days after the submission of a completed
application.
2018 S-1
54F Swansea - General Regulations
A. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on
a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in writing of its intention to invoke the
deemed approved remedy no sooner than 105 days after the submission of a completed application.
B. The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the one hundredtwentieth
day after submission of the complete application or the tenth day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude
the village’s denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this division
(C)(2)(b)3.
4. The village shall deny an application which does not meet the requirements of
this division (C)(2).
A. If the village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations
that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and conditions contained herein require
that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced before the requested collocation,
approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at
the cost of the provider.
B. The village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific
code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the documentation to
the applicant on or before the day the village denies an application.
C. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the village and
resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant
without paying an additional application fee. The village shall approve or deny the revised
application within 30 days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved.
Failure to resubmit the revised application within 30 days of denial shall require the application to
submit a new application with applicable fees, and recommencement of the village’s review period.
D. The applicant must notify the village in writing of its intention to proceed
with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted with the revised
application.
E. Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies
cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the cure requires the review of
a new location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless
equipment associated with the small wireless facility.
5. Pole attachment agreement. Within 30 days after an approved permit to
collocate a small wireless facility on any village-owned utility pole, the village and the applicant shall
enter into a master pole attachment agreement, provided by the village for the initial collocation on
any village-owned utility pole by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a
small wireless facility on any village-owned utility pole, the village and the applicant shall enter into
a license supplement of the master pole attachment agreement.
2018 S-1
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. GENERAL REGISTRATION
111. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
112. JUNK YARDS
113. TOW YARDS
114. GAMES OF CHANCE
115. LIQUOR CONTROL
1
2 Swansea - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL REGISTRATION
Section
110.01 Business registration requirement
110.02 Registration forms
110.03 Fees
110.04 Duration of registration
110.05 Suspension; revocation and appeal
110.99 Penalty
§ 110.01 BUSINESS REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT.
In order to comply with the provisions of § 154.051 of this code of ordinances, every business,
in any zoning district in the village, as a non-residential use of property, shall register with the
Zoning Administrator each year during the month of April.
(Prior Code, § 16-101)
(A) The village hereby adopts and incorporates the provisions of the Food Handling Regulation
and Enforcement Act (410 ILCS 625/1 et seq.). The sale of non-potentially hazardous food by home
kitchen operations and cottage food operations is permitted in accordance with 410 ILCS 625/1 et
seq.
(B) Farmers or gardeners selling the produce of their farms and gardens is permitted.
(C) The remainder of this chapter shall not apply to divisions (A) and (B) of this section.
(Ord. 1833, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 110.02 REGISTRATION FORMS.
Forms for the registration of all non-residential use of property shall be provided by the Zoning
Administrator and shall request, but not be limited to, the following information:
(A) The name of the owner or operator of the non-residential use;
3
2018 S-1
4 Swansea - Business Regulations
(B) The location of the use;
(C) The nature of any services or products to be offered to the public whether sold at retail,
wholesale or without charge;
(D) The average number of any employees to be employed at the location;
(E) The nature of any toxic or flammable compounds, chemicals or other such substances store
or used at said location; and
(F) The number of any and all certificates of registration required under the Retailers
Occupation Tax Act, 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq., Service Occupation Tax Act, 35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.,
Use Tax Act, 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq., and any similar acts of the state.
(Prior Code, § 16-102)
§ 110.03 FEES.
(A) The annual fee for registration of non-residential uses of property shall be $25; provided,
however, that, for schools, educational institutions, churches and governmental entities, the annual
fee shall be waived.
(B) In the event any such use fails to submit a registration form and the required $25 fee prior to
the termination date of said annual registration, as stated below, an additional late fee of $75 shall be
assessed.
(Prior Code, § 16-103) (Ord. 1406, passed 3-7-2005)
§ 110.04 DURATION OF REGISTRATION.
(A) Business registration shall be effective for a period of one year commencing on May 1 of
each year and shall terminate on April 30 of the following year.
(B) The Zoning Administrator shall notify all registered businesses of the time of expiration of
the registration held by the business, at least three weeks prior to the date of expiration; provided,
however, that, a failure to make such notification or a failure of the registered business to receive the
notification shall not excuse the business from the obligation to obtain a new registration, or a
renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an action based upon operation without registration.
(Prior Code, § 16-104)
2018 S-1
General Registration 5
§ 110.05 SUSPENSION; REVOCATION AND APPEAL.
(A) The Police Chief is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke a business registration thereby
causing the cessation of a business when:
(1) The business operation constitutes a clear and present danger to the public safety, health
or general welfare; or
(2) The registration application information is fraudulent, false or deceptive.
(B) If a registration is suspended or revoked the business will be notified immediately either in
person by an official of the village or by telephone. A follow-up written notice will be sent by
certified mail. Both notifications will include the reason or reasons that caused the caused the action.
A suspension or revocation shall remain in place until rescinded by the Police Chief or by a
successful appeal to the Board of Trustees.
(C) An appeal of the suspension or revocation must be requested by the registrant and is allowed
at either:
(1) The next regularly scheduled Board of Trustees meeting; or
(2) A special meeting if the special meeting meets village ordinances and the business has
been given at least three days’ notice or has waived the three-day requirement.
(D) The Village Attorney shall present the complaint and represent the village. The registrant is
allowed counsel and has the right to submit evidence and cross-examine witnesses. A simple majority
vote of the Board of Trustees is required to rescind the suspension or revocation. In the case of a tie,
the Village President will case the deciding vote.
(E) The village will keep an electronic record of the hearing. If either party requires a
transcript, that party shall pay the cost of transcription.
(F) Revocation of a business registration shall not preclude prosecution or imposition of other
penalties for the violation of any other ordinance of the village.
(Prior Code, § 16-105) (Ord. 1493, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
Any person or entity convicted of a violation of any section of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $25, nor more than $750, for each such offense.
(Prior Code, § 16-106)
2018 S-1
6 Swansea - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
111.01 Purpose; policy
111.02 Definitions
111.03 Permit required
111.04 Application for permits; qualifications
111.05 Exemptions
111.06 Issuance of permit
111.07 Credentials
111.08 Fee
111.09 Regulations and prohibitions
111.10 Notice to solicitors; duty to observe
111.11 Denial of permit
111.12 Revocation of permit
111.13 Appeal of permit denial or revocation
111.14 Solicitation on streets by charitable organizations
111.15 Solicitor's bond
111.16 Maintenance of registry
111.17 Maintenance of no contact list
111.99 Penalty
§ 111.01 PURPOSE; POLICY.
(A) General statement of purpose. Residents of the village have an inalienable interest in their
personal safety, well-being and privacy in their residences, as well as their ability to provide or
receive information regarding matters of personal belief, political or charitable activities and goods
and services lawfully in commerce. The village has a substantial interest in protecting the well-being,
tranquility, personal safety and privacy of its citizens, which includes the ability to protect citizens
from unwanted intrusions upon residential or commercial property. The village also has a substantial
interest in protecting citizens from fraud or otherwise unfair consumer sales practices as well as
criminal activity.
(B) General statement of policy. There must be a balance between these substantial interests of
the village and its citizens, and the effect of the regulations in this chapter on the rights of those who
are regulated. Based on the collective experiences of village officials derived from regulating
business activity, protecting persons and property from criminal conduct, responding to the inquiries
of citizens
7
8 Swansea - Business Regulations
regarding door-to-door and on street solicitation and canvassing, the experience of its law
enforcement officers and those affected by door-to-door and on street solicitation and canvassing, as
well as judicial decisions outlining the boundaries of constitutional protections afforded and denied
persons seeking to engage in door-to-door and on street solicitation and canvassing, the village adopts
this chapter to promote the village's substantial interests in:
(1) Respecting citizens' decisions regarding privacy in their residences and businesses;
(2) Protecting persons from criminal conduct;
(3) Providing equal opportunity to advocate for and against religious belief, political
position or charitable activities; and
(4) Permitting truthful and non-misleading door-to-door and on street solicitation regarding
lawful goods or services in intrastate or interstate commerce.
(C) Preservation, protection. The village finds that the procedures, rules and regulations set
forth in this chapter are narrowly tailored to preserve and protect the village interests referred to
herein while at the same time balancing the rights of those regulated.
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
CANVASSER. Any person, firm, corporation or entity including agents and employees of any
firm, corporation or entity whether a resident of the village or not, who engages in canvassing.
CANVASSING. Includes the act of any person, whether a resident of the village or not,
traveling by foot, vehicle or other type of conveyance to go from place to place, from house to house
or street to street by:
(1) Conducting a poll, survey or petition drive;
(2) Sharing, communicating or otherwise conveying ideas, views or beliefs; or
(3) Disseminating oral or written information to a person willing to directly receive such
information, for the political, religious, charitable purposes or otherwise.
CHARITABLE. Patriotic, philanthropic, social service, health, welfare, benevolent,
educational, civic, cultural or fraternal.
Peddlers and Solicitors 9
COMMERCIAL BUILDING. Any place of business within the village or any structure used by
any firm, corporation or entity for the purpose of sale of any items on a commercial basis.
HANDBILLS. Include any commercial or non-commercial handbill, pamphlet, circular,
newspaper, paper, newsletter, booklet, poster, leaflet, brochure or other printed or written materials
that have been cast, deposited, placed, scattered or thrown onto the property of a business or
residence in the absence of a subscription agreement.
HEARING OFFICER. The person designated or responsible for hearing and deciding any
appeal relating to or regarding the denial or revocation of a solicitors permit and issuing a decision as
required by this chapter. Shall be the same person designated in the Motor Vehicle Code as the
Hearing Officer for the village, and shall have the duties described herein.
PANHANDLER. A person who panhandles.
PANHANDLING. Any solicitation made in person upon any street, public place or park in the
village in which a person requests an immediate donation of money, goods or any other form of
gratuity from another person. When the person being solicited receives an item of little or no
monetary value in exchange for a donation under circumstances where a reasonable person would
understand that the transaction is in substance a donation, it is a donation for the purpose of this
section.
PEDDLER. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association corporation, limited
liability company, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or other lawful entity, organization,
society or association who or which engages in peddling.
PEDDLING. The selling, bartering or exchanging or the offering for sale, barter or exchange of
any tangible personal property upon or along the streets, highways or public places of the village or
from house to house, whether at one place thereon or from place to place, from any wagon, truck,
pushcart or other vehicle or from movable receptacles of any kind, but shall not include the delivery
routes where the purchaser has previously requested the seller to stop and exhibit his or her items.
RESIDENCE. Any separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more
persons, contained within any type of building or structure.
SOLICITATION. Occurs when a solicitor travels by foot, vehicle or any other type of
conveyance, from place to place, house to house or from street to street while engaging in one or
more of the following activities:
(1) Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, personal
property or services of any kind, character or description for any kind of remuneration or
consideration regardless of advance payment of sought;
(2) Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any
type;
10 Swansea - Business Regulations
(3) Seeking to obtain prospective customers or clients for application or purchase of stocks,
bonds, mutual funds or other investments;
(4) Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every
other type or kind of publication;
(5) Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or other property of value
for the support or benefit, in whole or in part, of any charitable or non-profit association,
organization, corporation or project;
(6) Delivery of handbills;
(7) Seeking to engage an individual in conversation at a residence or commercial building
for the purpose of promoting or facilitating the receipt of information regarding religious belief,
political position or charitable conduct;
(8) Activities falling within the definition of canvassing; and/or
(9) Activities falling within the definition of peddling.
SOLICITOR. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association corporation, limited
liability company, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or other lawful entity, organization,
society or association who or which engages in solicitation.
§ 111.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
Unless otherwise authorized, permitted or exempted, pursuant to the terms and provisions of this
chapter, being in or upon a private residence or commercial property or on a public street within the
village by a solicitor for the purpose of solicitation is prohibited and is punishable as set forth in this
chapter.
§ 111.04 APPLICATION FOR PERMITS; QUALIFICATIONS.
(A) No person shall engage in the act of solicitation, unless such person obtains a permit from
the Chief of Police, or his or her designee.
(B) The application for the permit, as provided by the village, shall contain information about
the solicitor, including the following:
(1) The applicant's name, telephone number and home address and length of residence at
such address;
Peddlers and Solicitors 11
(2) Applicant's home address during the past three years if other than applicant's present
home address;
(3) Applicant's present local address if other than applicant's home address;
(4) Applicant's business address if other than present home or local address;
(5) Applicant's date of birth;
(6) Applicant must provide a photo copy of applicant's driver's license or identification
card issued by any state;
(7) If employed or acting as an agent, the name, address and telephone number of the
employer or principal who is being represented, as well as credentials in written form establishing
the relationship and the authority of the employee or agent to act for the employer or the principal;
(8) The name and address of the applicant's employer/principal during the past three years
if other than the present employer/principal;
(9) A description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the solicitation which
the applicant will engage in;
(10) The date of the latest previous application for a permit under this chapter, if any;
(11) Whether a permit issued to the applicant under this chapter has ever been revoked and,
if so, when and the reason for the revocation;
(12) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any other provision of
the village's code of ordinances or the code of any other municipality regulating solicitation;
(13) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any criminal
offense under any state law or federal law of the United States whether felony or misdemeanor, other
than traffic violations. As to any such offense, the applicant must provide the date and place of
conviction, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty imposed;
(14) The names of the last cities or villages, not exceeding three, where applicant has carried
on business immediately preceding the date of application and the address(es) from which the
business was conducted in those municipalities;
(15) Two photographs of the applicant will be taken by the Village Police Department
personnel at the time application is made;
12 Swansea - Business Regulations
(16) Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal, state or local laws
and regulations, the applicant is required to have in order to conduct the proposed business, or
which, under any such laws or regulations, would exempt the applicant from the permit requirements
of this chapter. If a charitable solicitation, applicant shall show compliance with the Solicitation for
Charity Act, 225 ILCS 460/0.01 et seq.;
(17) The application shall contain a waiver of liability, allowing the village to investigate and
verify the information contained in the application; and
(18) The application shall be verified, under oath, by the applicant stating that the
information contained therein is true and correct.
§ 111.05 EXEMPTIONS.
(A) The following are exempt from obtaining a solicitor's permit and from registering with the
village:
(1) Persons specifically invited to a residence or a commercial building by a competent
individual prior to the time of the person's arrival at the residence or commercial building;
(2) Person delivering goods to a residence or commercial building pursuant to a previously
made order, or persons providing services at a residence or commercial building to a previously
made request by a competent individual;
(3) Persons advocating or disseminating information for, against or in conjunction with any
religious belief, or political position;
(4) Those seeking to obtain from an occupant of any residence or business, an indication of
the occupant's belief in regard to any political or religious matter;
(5) Those who canvas door to door;
(6) Those who distribute handbills;
(7) A person of 16 years of age and under, who is participating in a fund raising program
for, or sponsored by, a public or private elementary, high school or bonafide children's organization,
including, without limitation, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts or youth sports; and
(8) A charitable solicitor other than a charitable organization soliciting on village streets.
(See § 111.14 of this chapter.) The charitable solicitor, however, shall comply with the Solicitation
for Charity Act, 225 ILCS 460/0.01 et seq, if applicable.
Peddlers and Solicitors 13
(B) Those who are exempt from obtaining a solicitor's permit or from registering with the
village, must comply with §§ 111.09 and 111.10 of this chapter.
§ 111.06 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
The Chief of Police, after consideration of the application and all information obtained relative
thereto, shall issue the permit if the applicant possesses the qualifications for such permit as herein
required and the issuance of a permit to the applicant would be in accord with the intent and purposes
of this chapter. The permit shall be issued for the calendar year in which the application is filed. The
permit shall be issued within 15 days of the receipt of the application and shall expire on December
31 of the year for which it was issued. The solicitor shall surrender the permit to the Chief of Police
upon its expiration unless renewed by the Chief of Police.
§ 111.07 CREDENTIALS.
Upon approval of the application for a permit, as hereinbefore stated, the Chief of Police shall
issue credentials to the applicant which credentials shall be issued over the name of the Chief of
Police, and to which shall be appended a photograph of the applicant. Such credentials must be worn
by the solicitor within the village when soliciting. The credentials will be worn in such a manner as
to be readily visible to all individuals being solicited.
§ 111.08 FEE.
(A) A permit applicant must pay a non-refundable application fee in the amount of $50 payable
to the village (money order, in-state business check, cashier's check or exact change cash only). In
addition, each person to whom a permit is issued shall pay an annual fee of $50 (money order,
cashier's check, in-state business check or exact change cash only).
(B) Once a permit is issued, the solicitor may annually renew the permit for the following year,
by paying, to the village, a renewal fee of $50 (money order, cashier's check, in-state business check
or exact change cash only) by no later than December 31 in the year in which the permit is to expire.
In addition, the solicitor shall confirm the information contained within the initial application and
advise the Chief of Police of any changes with regard to the information. Should the solicitor fail to
renew the annual permit, he or she shall be required to reapply for a new permit.
14 Swansea - Business Regulations
§ 111.09 REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS.
Unless otherwise noted herein, the following shall apply to all solicitors, including those exempt
from obtaining a solicitor's permit or from registering with the village.
(A) Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence or commercial building, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by
the occupant.
(B) It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether
issued a permit under this chapter or not, to solicit on a public street or to go upon any premises and
ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence or commercial building located thereon, or
rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract attention
of the occupant of such residence or commercial building for the purpose of securing an audience
with the occupant thereof, and engage in soliciting as herein defined, at any time less than 30 minutes
after sunrise or 30 minutes before sunset. Further, it shall be unlawful to engage in soliciting at any
time Sunday or any state or nation holiday. This provision shall not apply to solicitation on streets by
charitable organizations, as provided in § 111.14 of this chapter. Further canvassing may take place
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. central time on any day.
(C) Except as provided in § 111.14 of this chapter, no solicitor shall solicit in a village street or
highway located within the village.
(D) No solicitor shall represent in any manner that the village or its departments or officers have
indorsed the permit holder or the products, services or causes on behalf of which individuals are
being solicited without the written consent of the Chief of Police.
(E) No solicitor shall willfully obstruct the movement of any person on any street, sidewalk or
other public place.
(F) No solicitor shall solicit any person that has objected by words or conduct to such soliciting.
(G) No solicitor shall refuse to identify the entity on whose behalf the soliciting is being
conducted when requested to do so by any person contacted by the solicitor or fail to truthfully state
the use(s) to which any solicited item(s) will be put when requested to do so by any person being
solicited.
(H) No solicitor shall threaten any injury or damage to any individual who declines to be subject
to any soliciting or who declines to make a purchase, donation or contribution.
(I) No solicitor shall directly or indirectly solicit for any purpose by misrepresentation of his or
her name, occupation, financial conditions, social condition, physical or mental health or residence
and no person shall make or perpetrate any misstatement, deception or fraud in connection with any
soliciting for any purpose.
Peddlers and Solicitors 15
(J) No more than two solicitors shall solicit at a residence or commercial building at any one
time.
(K) It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, other than the permit holder, to use any permit issued
under the provisions of this chapter.
(L) It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling within the village limits when either
the panhandler or the person being solicited is located at any of the following locations; at a bus stop;
in a public transportation vehicle or public transportation facility; in a sidewalk café.
(M) It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling in an aggressive manner including
any of the following actions:
(1) Panhandling a person who is standing at an automated teller machine while located
within 20 feet of that person and within one minute after the person leaves the machine;
(2) Panhandling within 20 feet of the entrance to a bank and within one minute after the
person leaves the bank;
(3) Repeating a panhandling request when the person solicited is stationary and has refused
an immediately prior request made at that location;
(4) At any time immediately before, during, or after the panhandling request, touching the
solicited person without that person's consent;
(5) Directing profane or abusive language at the person solicited at any time immediately
before, during or after panhandling;
(6) Immediately before, during, or after panhandling, making any statement other than the
panhandling request or acting in any other manner which, in light of the circumstances taken as a
whole, would cause a reasonable person to feel harassed, intimidated, or compelled to contribute;
(7) Panhandling a person while such person is standing in line and waiting to be admitted to
a commercial establishment;
(8) Blocking the path of a person being solicited, or the entrance to any building or vehicle;
(9) Following behind, or alongside or walking ahead of the person who walks away from
the panhandler after being solicited; or
(10) Panhandling in a group of two or more persons;
(11) Each act of panhandling prohibited by this section shall constitute a public nuisance and
a separate violation of this Code.
Penalty, see 111.99
16 Swansea - Business Regulations
§ 111.10 NOTICE TO SOLICITORS; DUTY TO OBSERVE.
(A) Any occupant of a residence or commercial building may give notice of a desire to refuse
solicitors by displaying a “No Solicitation” or “No Trespassing” or similar sign which shall be
posted on or near the main entrance door or near the property line adjacent to the sidewalk leading to
the residence or the commercial building. Such sign shall not exceed the size parameters specified in
the village's land use ordinance regulating to signs. The display of such sign shall be deemed to
constitute notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence or commercial building does not
desire to receive and/or does not invite solicitors. It shall be the responsibility of the solicitor to
check such residence or commercial building for the presence of any such notice.
(B) The Police Department shall maintain a “Do Not Contact List.” The “Do Not Contact List”
shall set forth the address of the property of the owners/tenants of the property who do not wish to be
solicited or wish to receive solicitors. It is the responsibility of the solicitor to make himself or
herself aware of the list before entering into the act of soliciting.
(C) No solicitor shall solicit at any residence or commercial building where the owner or
occupant has provided notice pursuant to divisions (A) and/or (B) above.
(D) The provisions of this section shall apply to all solicitors including those who are exempt
from obtaining a solicitor's permit or registering with the village.
§ 111.11 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
The Chief of Police, after consideration of the application and all information obtained relative
thereto, shall deny the application if the applicant does not possess the qualifications for such permit
as herein required, and the issuance of a permit to the applicant would not be in accord with the
intent and purposes of this chapter. Endorsement of the denial shall be made by the Chief of Police
upon the application.
§ 111.12 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the Chief of Police for any of the following
reasons:
(A) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a permit;
(B) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the permitee in the course of
conducting solicitation activities;
(C) Conducting solicitation activities contrary to the provisions contained in the permit;
Peddlers and Solicitors 17
(D) Conviction of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude subsequent to the issuance of
a permit;
(E) Conducting solicitation activities in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, constitute
a breach of the peace or endanger the health, safety or general welfare of the public; and/or
(F) Going upon the premises of a residence or commercial building in violation of § 111.10 of
this chapter.
§ 111.13 APPEAL OF PERMIT DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
(A) An applicant whose permit has been denied or a registered solicitor whose permit has been
revoked shall have the right to appeal to the Hearing Officer the denial of the application for or
revocation of the solicitor's permit. Upon determining that grounds for a permit denial or revocation
exists as set forth in §§ 111.12 or 111.12 of this chapter, the Chief of Police shall furnish written
notice of the denial or revocation to the applicant or permit holder. Such notice shall summarize the
principal reasons for the denial or revocation; shall state that the applicant or permit holder may
appeal the decision by filing a written request for a hearing with the Chief of Police within ten
business days of the postmarked date of the denial or revocation of the permit. If the request for
hearing is timely made, the village's Hearing Officer shall conduct a hearing within 21 calendar days
of the filing of such request by the applicant or permit holder. Notice of time and place of the
hearing shall be given to the applicant or permit holder at least seven calendar days in advance of
the date set for the hearing. At the hearing, the applicant or permit holder and the village shall be
entitled to present relevant evidence and call witnesses who shall testify under oath. All notices to the
applicant or permit holder shall be delivered by sending the notice, by certified mail, postage prepaid
addressed to the applicant or permit holder as the name and address appears on the application
of the applicant or permit holder.
(B) At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall decide whether grounds for
denial or revocation of the permit exist and shall submit a written report to the Chief of Police. Such
report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and shall state findings, conclusions
and whether the decision of the Chief of Police is affirmed or reversed. If the Chief of Police's
decision is reversed, a permit shall be issued or reinstated as the case may be, forthwith. A copy of
such report shall be forwarded by certified mail, postage prepaid to the applicant or permit holder
within one day after it is filed with the Chief of Police. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be
final and binding on all parties concerned with said decision being subject to the State Administrative
Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. The costs of preparing and certifying the record of the
proceedings for filing with the Circuit Court shall be paid to the village by the appellant prior to the
filing of such record with the court.
18 Swansea - Business Regulations
§ 111.14 SOLICITATION ON STREETS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
(A) A charitable organization which is either based in the village or maintains a business or
office in the village shall, through its representatives and or members, be permitted to solicit at the
intersections of the village streets without obtaining a solicitor's permit, but shall be required to
register with the Village Clerk and provide the following information:
(1) Name address and telephone number of the group or organization;
(2) Name address and telephone number a contact person for the group or organization;
(3) The purpose of the solicitations to be conducted in the village;
(4) A list of the names of the persons acting on behalf of the group or organization; and
(5) Provide proof of compliance with the Solicitation for Charity Act, 225 ILCS 460/0.01
et seq, if applicable.
(B) Solicitation shall be allowed only under the following conditions:
(1) Solicitations may only be set up at intersections controlled by stop signs and as
designated by the Chief of Police. They are not permitted at intersections controlled by electronic
traffic signals.
(2) A construction type barricade shall be placed in the center of each street where an
individual is soliciting. Individuals shall remain behind the barricade at all times. With advanced
coordination, the barricades may be available from the Village Public Works Department. In any
event, the barricade shall be a minimum of 36 inches high and 24 inches wide.
(3) Each individual participating in the event shall be at least 16 years of age and will wear
a reflective vest.
(4) The charitable organization or corporation shall be liable for any injuries to any person
or property during the solicitation which is casually related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
solicitor; shall hold the village harmless from any claim of said person(s); shall provide the village
with evidence that the charitable organization is insured for $1,000,000 through an insurance
company licensed to do business in the state and has named the village as an additional insured.
(5) The solicitor shall comply with § 111.09 of this chapter.
(6) Solicitation may be conducted on weekends only. For the purpose of this section, a
WEEKEND shall mean Friday, Saturday and Sunday.
(7) The applicant shall be entitled to solicit a total of two non-consecutive weekends in any
calendar year.
Peddlers and Solicitors 19
(8) The solicitation shall take place on no more than two days of the weekend with the total
hours of solicitation, per weekend, not exceed eight hours. The applicant may divide this time over
the two-day period.
(9) Solicitation will not be permitted on the consecutive weekends whether by the same or
different applicant. However, should weather or other unforeseen circumstances prevent the
charitable organization from conducting their scheduled solicitation, the village shall have the
discretion to permit the applicant to conduct a solicitation on another weekend even if the solicitation
would result in a solicitation taking place on consecutive weekends.
(10) Solicitation will be permitted only between one-half hour after sunrise and one-half hour
before sunset.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.15 SOLICITOR'S BOND.
(A) Surety bond.
(1) The applicant's employer or principal or if none, the applicant himself or herself shall,
before a permit is issued to the applicant, file with the village a surety bond in the amount of $10,000
covering the applicant's employer or principal, as the case may be, or if none the applicant himself
or herself. If more than one employee or agent of an employer or principal is issued a permit under
this chapter, the bond shall cover all such employees or agents. The bond shall condition that the
applicant shall comply fully with the ordinances of the village and statutes of the state regulating the
solicitors, and guaranteeing to the residents of the village that all money paid to the applicant or his
or her employer or principal will be accounted for or applied according to the representations of the
applicant, and further guaranteeing to the residents of the village doing business with the applicant
that the property purchased will be delivered according to the representations of the applicant.
Actions on such bond may be brought by the person aggrieved and for whose benefit among others
the bond is given.
(2) Any person injured by the breach of conditions of such surety bond may make
application to the village to recover legal damages suffered by reason of such breach; provided that,
the aggregate recovery from such surety bond for all such damages shall, in no event, exceed the
sum of said surety bond. Where the legal damage suffered by an injured person exceeds the amount
recovered by the surety bond, such partial recovery shall, in no way, prejudice the right of the
injured person to proceed directly against the solicitor for such excess damages.
(B) Cash bond. In addition to posting the surety bond, as provided in division (A) above, the
applicant's employer or principal, or if none the applicant himself or herself, shall, before a permit is
issued to the applicant, post with the village a cash bond in the amount of $100 to ensure compliance
with the code of ordinances of the village. Should the village issue a citation against the permit
holder for violation of an ordinance of the village, the bond may, at the village's discretion, be
applied to any fine levied against the solicitor upon a guilty plea or finding of guilt as to the citation.
20 Swansea - Business Regulations
§ 111.16 MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY.
The Chief of Police shall maintain and make available, for public inspection and copy, a record
of every completed application received and the permit issued by the village or the denial or
revocation of same. The applicant's background check shall remain a confidential, protected, private
record not available for public inspection.
§ 111.17 MAINTENANCE OF NO CONTACT LIST.
The Police Department shall maintain and make available for public inspection and copy a
record of the address of every person or entity who has requested that he, she or it not be contacted
by a solicitor.
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically
provided, shall be penalized in an amount not to exceed $750 per violation and/or sentenced to up to
six months in jail per violation.
CHAPTER 112: JUNK YARDS
Section
112.01 License required
112.02 Definitions
112.03 Application
112.04 Disqualification
112.05 License
112.06 Physical requirements
112.07 Minors
112.08 License fee
§ 112.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to keep, maintain, or
conduct a junk yard within the corporate limits of the village, without first obtaining a license to do
so. A separate license shall be required for each junk yard located on non-contiguous lots, blocks,
tracts or parcels of land.
(Prior Code, § 16-401) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
JUNK. Scrap and old iron, steel, chain, brass, copper, magnesium, aluminum, tin, lead or other
base medal, scrap lumber, old rope, old bags, rags, waste paper, paper clippings, scraps of woolens,
clips, bagging, rubber and glass, empty bottles of different kinds or sizes when the number of each
kind or size is less than one gross, any wrecked or dilapidated motor vehicle, engine or machinery
received, stored or held for more than 90 days, all articles and things discarded or no longer used as
a manufactured article composed of or consisting of any one or more the materials or articles herein
mentioned.
21
22 Swansea - Business Regulations
JUNK DEALER. Every person, firm, partnership or corporation that shall engage in the
business of buying, selling, bartering or exchanging, or shall collect, receive or store or hold in
possession for sale, barter or exchange, any of the things defined in this section as “junk”.
JUNK YARD. The premises upon which a junk dealer is engaged in the business of buying,
selling, bartering, exchanging, collecting, receiving, storing or holding in possession for sale, barter
or exchange any of the things in and by this section defined as “junk”.
(Prior Code, § 16-402)
§ 112.03 APPLICATION.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation desiring to operate a junk yard in the village shall
make a verified application, in writing, to the Village Clerk, stating the following:
(A) The full name of the applicant or applicants;
(B) The residence address of the applicant;
(C) The trade name of the applicant;
(D) A legal description of the premises where the junk yard is to be located;
(E) The size and approximate location of each entrance thereto and exit therefrom;
(F) Whether the premises where the junk yard is to be located is enclosed on its perimeter with
a solid, non-transparent wall or fence of a minimum height of eight feet measured from ground level,
except in the entrances and exits therefrom;
(G) Whether public streets and alleys adjacent to the premises where the junk yard is to be
located have junk thereon; and
(H) If the applicant is a partnership the names and residences of all the partners thereof and in
the case of a corporation the name and residence of the president and secretary thereof, as well as the
location of its principal place of business and its state of incorporation.
(Prior Code, § 16-403)
§ 112.04 DISQUALIFICATION.
Any applicant for a license to keep, maintain, conduct or operate a junk yard shall be
disqualified for any of the following reasons:
(A) Falsification of an application for a license hereunder;
Junk Yards 23
(B) A license for a junk yard previously issued to the applicant has been revoked during the
preceding 24 months; and/or
(C) Failure to meet any one of the minimum physical requirements for a junk yard as specified
in § 112.06 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16-404)
§ 112.05 LICENSE.
Any license issued hereunder shall state the following:
(A) Such license is issued in the name of the junk dealer solely for the purpose of keeping,
maintaining, conducting or operating a junk yard;
(B) The expiration date thereof;
(C) The legal description of the premises where the junk yard is to be located:
(1) The license shall be used and the privileges thereof exercised only at the described
premises; and
(2) Such license is not assignable and non-transferable.
(D) Such license shall further provide that it is issued subject to all provisions of this chapter,
and that, upon the first conviction of a violation of any of the provisions of this section, in addition to
the fine, such junk yards shall remain closed for a period of 30 days; that, upon the second
conviction for a violation of any of the provisions of this section, such license shall become null and
void, and that the licensee shall forfeit all sums paid for such license, and that the licensee by the
acceptance of such license expressly agrees to all of the terms and conditions thereof, and to the
terms and provisions of this section, and all amendments hereto.
(Prior Code, § 16-405)
§ 112.06 PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS.
The minimum physical requirements at all times for each junk yard shall be as follows.
(A) The premises where the junk yard is located shall not have more than two entrances thereto
and two exits therefrom, each of which shall not exceed 15 feet in width at the perimeter of the
premises;
(B) The premises where the junk yard is located shall be enclosed on its perimeter with a solid,
non-transparent, vertical wall or fence with a minimum height of eight feet measured from ground
level, excepting for the entrances and exits permitted by this section.
24 Swansea - Business Regulations
(C) The aforesaid solid, non-transparent wall or fence and the gates or doors, if any, at the
aforesaid entrances and exits, shall not contain any sign, poster or advertising matter of any kind
whatsoever, except as permitted pursuant to the village’s Zoning Code.
(D) The public streets and alleys adjacent to the junk yard shall not have junk thereon.
(Prior Code, § 16-406) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.07 MINORS.
No licensee hereunder shall purchase or receive any article whatsoever from any minor without
the written consent of the minor’s parent or guardian.
(Prior Code, § 16-407) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.08 LICENSE FEE.
The annual license fee for each junk yard shall be $500 payable in advance with the filing of the
application for license, and shall not be subject to prorate reduction for a portion of the year, either
because the application for or because of revocation of a license; provided, however, that, only one
annual license fee shall be payable for licenses, which may be issued whenever the applicant desires
to keep, maintain, conduct or operate junk yards on lots, blocks, tracts or parcels of land which are
situated on directly opposite sides of and abut upon each side of a public street or alley.
(Prior Code, § 16-408)
CHAPTER 113: TOW YARDS
Section
113.01 License required
113.02 Definitions
113.03 Application
113.04 Disqualification
113.05 License
113.06 Physical requirements
113.07 Notifications and regulations
113.08 License fees
113.09 Unclaimed vehicle report
§ 113.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to keep, maintain or conduct
a towing and storage company within the corporate limits of the village without first obtaining a
license to do so. A separate license shall be required for each location on non-contiguous lots,
blocks, tracts or parcels of land.
(Prior Code, § 16-501) (Ord. 1510, passed 3-17-2008) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
TEMPORARY STORAGE. A term of not more than 90 days.
TOW STORAGE LOT. Any premises where vehicles are stored by the tow company on a
temporary basis for retrieval by owner or legally authorized person entitled to the vehicle.
TOWING AND STORAGE COMPANY. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation engaged
in towing and temporary storage of vehicles whether wrecked, abandoned, inoperable or for any
other purpose.
25
26 Swansea - Business Regulations
VEHICLE. Every device by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn
upon a highway or is requiring a certificate of title under 625 ILCS 3-101, excluding human powered
vehicles, snowmobiles and devices designed to operate solely upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Prior Code, § 16-502) (Ord. 1510, passed 3-17-2008)
§ 113.03 APPLICATION.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation desiring to operate a towing and storage company
in the village shall make a verified application in writing to the Village Clerk stating the following:
(A) The full name of the applicant(s);
(B) The resident address of the applicant(s) and phone number(s);
(C) A legal description of the premises where the towing and storage company is to be located;
(D) The trade name of the applicant;
(E) The size and approximate location of each entrance thereto and exit therefrom;
(F) Whether the premises where the towing and storage is to be located is enclosed on its
perimeter with a solid non-transparent wall or fence of a minimum height of six feet measured from
ground level, except the entrances and exits therefrom;
(G) Whether all stored vehicles are within the fenced area; and
(H) If the applicant(s) is a partnership, the names and residences of all the partners thereof and
in the case of a corporation the names and residences of the president and secretary thereof, as well
as the location of its principal place of business and its state of incorporation.
(Prior Code, § 16-503) (Ord. 1510, passed 3-17-2008)
§ 113.04 DISQUALIFICATION.
Any applicant seeking a license to keep, maintain, conduct or operate a towing and storage lot
shall be disqualified for any of the following reasons:
(A) Falsification of an application for a license hereunder; and/or
(B) A license for a tow and storage lot previously issued to the applicant has been revoked
during the preceding 24 months.
(Prior Code, § 16-504) (Ord. 1510, passed 3-17-2008)
Tow Yards 27
§ 113.05 LICENSE.
Any license issued hereunder shall state the following:
(A) Such license is issued in the name of the towing and storage company solely for the purpose
of towing and storage of vehicles on a temporary basis;
(B) The expiration date thereof;
(C) The legal description of the premises where the business is to be located;
(D) The license shall be used and the privileges thereof exercised;
(E) Such license is not assignable and non-transferable; and
(F) Such license shall further provide that it is issued subject to all provisions of this chapter and
that, upon the first violation of any of the provision in this section, in addition to fine, the business
shall remain closed for a period up to 30 days; that upon a conviction of second violation of any
provisions of this section, such license shall become null and void (revoked); that the licensee shall
forfeit all sums paid for such license(s); and that the licensee, by the acceptance of such license
expressly agrees to all the terms and provisions of this section, and all amendments thereto.
(Prior Code, § 16-505) (Ord. 1510, passed 3-17-2008)
§ 113.06 PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS.
The minimum physical requirements all times for each towing and storage lot shall be as
follows.
(A) The premises where the vehicles are to be stored shall have no more than two entrances and
two exits therefrom, each of which shall not exceed 15 feet in width at the perimeter of the premises.
(B) The premises where the vehicles are to be stored shall be enclosed on its perimeter with a
solid, non-transparent, vertical wall or fence, with a minimum height of six feet measured from
ground level, excepting for the entrances and exits permitted by this section.
(C) A landscaping plan shall be submitted for the premises indicating features such as berming
and the planting of bushes and trees, especially trees of the “evergreen” varieties that will provide
year-round visual buffering and are at least six feet tall at the time of planting.
(D) The previously mentioned solid, non-transparent, wall or fence and the gates, or doors, if
any at the aforesaid entrances and exits shall not contain any signs, posters or advertising matter of
any kind whatsoever, except as permitted pursuant to Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.
28 Swansea - Business Regulations
(E) All tow yards shall be paved in accordance with § 154.121 of this code of ordinances, and
shall have storm water detention facilities designed in accordance with §§ 153.049 through 153.051
of this code of ordinances.
(F) No vehicles shall be stored outside of the wall or fenced area of the premises. The stacking
of vehicles shall be prohibited.
(G) The premises shall not store any other materials, items or junk as described in § 112.02 of
this code of ordinances.
(H) Only vehicles shall be stored on a temporary basis.
(Prior Code, § 16-506) (Ord. 1510, passed 3-17-2008; Ord. 1528, passed 8-4-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.07 NOTIFICATIONS AND REGULATIONS.
(A) All licensees shall comply with the Illinois Compiled Statutes regulating abandoned, lost,
stolen or unclaimed vehicles (625 ILCS 5/4-201 to 625 ILCS 5/5-802) and all other state regulations.
(B) All licensees shall furnish a list of all unclaimed vehicles in their possession to the Village
Police Department weekly. The list shall include make, model, color, license plate, vehicle
identification number, date of tow and name of person or agency authorizing the tow.
(C) All licensees shall notify the Village Police Department of any vehicle left unclaimed for 30
days and supply a copy of all related tow information for the vehicle and any contact or
correspondence involving the disposition of said vehicle.
(D) If the licensee is conducting business as a commercial vehicle relocator, the licensee must
provide a copy of all relocator licenses, operator and dispatcher permits and abide by 625 ILCS
5/18a-100 to 625 ILCS 5/18a-700.
(E) No vehicle shall be stored at the place of business by contract agreement or other means
beyond 90 days. No rentals of parking or storage areas are permitted. The storage lot is for the
temporary storage of unclaimed, disabled or impounded vehicles.
(F) The village reserves the right of inspection and compliance with the terms and provisions of
this section.
(Prior Code, § 16-507) (Ord. 1510, passed 3-17-2008) Penalty, see § 10.99
Tow Yards 29
§ 113.08 LICENSE FEES.
The annual license fee for each towing and storage business shall be $1,000 payable in advance
with the filing of the application for license, and shall not be subject to prorate reduction for a
portion of the year, either because application for or because of revocation of a license; provided,
however, that, only an annual license fee shall be payable for licensees, which may be issued
whenever the applicant desires to keep, maintain, conduct or operate the towing and storage
business.
(Prior Code, § 16-508) (Ord. 1510, passed 3-17-2008)
§ 113.09 UNCLAIMED VEHICLE REPORT.
Tow Yard - Unclaimed Vehicle Report
Date of Tow Agency requesting tow
Location towed from
Make Model
Color Year
V.I.N. Plate State
Date of Tow Agency requesting tow
Location towed from
Make Model
Color Year
V.I.N. Plate State
Date of Tow Agency requesting tow
Location towed from
Make Model
Color Year
V.I.N. Plate State
Tow Company Date
Signature
(Prior Code, § 16-509) (Ord. 1510, passed 3-17-2008)
30 Swansea - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 114: GAMES OF CHANCE
Section
114.01 Definitions
114.02 Raffles
114.03 Video gaming
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
NON-PROFIT. An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-for-profit basis
with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the operation thereof.
RAFFLE. A form of lottery (as defined in 720 ILCS 5/28-2(b)) conducted by an organization
licensed under the code whereby:
(1) A player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and
differentiated by a number or a combination of numbers designating the winning chance; and
(2) The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method
based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of persons conducting or connected
with the lottery; except that, the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
held sporting contest.
(Prior Code, § 10-101)
§ 114.02 RAFFLES.
(A) Licenses and applications.
(1) No organization shall operate a raffle in the village without first complying with any
and all regulations of this chapter and obtaining a license therefor.
(a) Licenses shall be issued in the same manner and by the same authority as provided
for in accordance with 230 ILCS 15/3.
31
32 Swansea - Business Regulations
(b) Where the provisions of this chapter or of 230 ILCS 15/1 et seq. requires
supplemental information, limitations or otherwise conflict with the Business Code requirements,
then the express provisions of this chapter and 230 ILCS shall control over the general requirements
of the Business Code.
(2) Licenses shall be issued only to bonafide religious, charitable, labor, business,
fraternal, educational or veterans’ organizations (as those terms are defined in 230 ILCS 15/2(b) that
operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a period
of five years immediately before making application for a license and which have had during that
entire five-year period a bonafide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives.
(3) The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit
character of the prospective licensee organization, signed by the presiding officer and the secretary of
that organization. Said application should also include a Form 99 financial statement or other proof
of tax exempt status.
(Prior Code, § 10-102)
(B) Limitations.
(1) The retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded in a single raffle shall not exceed
$200,000.
(2) The retail value of each prize in a single raffle shall not exceed $200,000.
(3) The maximum price that may be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold shall not
exceed $100.
(4) The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold shall not
exceed 365 days (May 1 through April 30). No more than 50 raffles can be conducted during the
license period.
(Prior Code, § 10-103)
(C) Conduct of raffles. The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions.
(1) The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes
of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
(2) No person, except a bonafide member of the sponsoring organization, may participate
in the management or operation of the raffle.
(3) No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management
or operation of the raffle.
(4) A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in
a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under this act.
Games of Chance 33
(5) Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license and
winning chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the license.
(6) A person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting of raffles or
chances only with the permission of a parent or guardian.
(Prior Code, § 10-104)
(D) Raffle Managers and bonds. All operations of and the conduct of raffles within the village
shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the organization. The
manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of an amount determined by the village in favor of the
organization conditioned upon his or her honesty in the performance of his or her duties. Terms of
the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the village not less than 30 days prior to
its cancellation. The Village Board of Trustees may waive this bond requirement by including a
waiver provision in the license issued to an organization under this chapter; provided that, a license
containing such waiver provision shall be granted only by unanimous vote of the members of the
licensed organization.
(Prior Code, § 10-105)
(E) Records.
(1) Each organization shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for
each single occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts
for each single occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a
description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction. The distribution of net
proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment.
(2) Each organization shall have separate records of each raffle conducted. The person who
accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles on behalf of such
organization shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
(3) Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to its membership and
to the village its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles and the distribution of net
proceeds itemized. This report shall be submitted to the Village Clerk’s office promptly after the
conclusion of each raffle.
(Prior Code, § 10-106)
(F) Ineligibility. The following are ineligible for any license under this chapter:
(1) Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
(2) Any person who is or who has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter;
(3) Any person who is not of good moral character;
34 Swansea - Business Regulations
(4) Any firm or corporation in which a person defined as listed in divisions (A), (B) or (C)
above has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such a person is active or employed;
(5) Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A), (B) or (C) above is an
officer, director or employee, whether compensated or not; or
(6) Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A), (B) or (C) above is to
participate in the management or operation of a raffle as defined in this act.
(Prior Code, § 10-107)
(G) Filing fee. An annual fee of $25 must be paid when applying for a raffle license.
(Prior Code, § 10-108)
(H) Violation. Violation of this section shall constitute a petty offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-109)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.03 VIDEO GAMING.
(A) Permit. Any establishment within the village which is licensed to serve alcoholic liquor and
has obtained a license to operate a video gaming terminal from the Illinois Gaming Board at such
premises shall be required to apply for and obtain a video gaming permit from the village, for each
video gaming terminal located at such establishment. Maximum number of video gaming terminals at
such establishment is five.
(B) Filing fee.
(1) There is hereby established a $25 annual fee for the operation of each video gaming
terminal located in the village pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS
40).
(2) The annual video gaming terminal fee, as established hereby, shall be paid to the village
on or before the initial date of terminal operation, and for terminals then in operation, on, or before,
April 30 of each year thereafter. The annual video gaming terminal fee shall not be prorated for
periods of less than 12 months.
(C) Classification. Such permits shall be and are hereby divided into four classes.
(1) Class A permits shall authorize the placement of video gaming terminals in
establishments where estimated net revenue of at least 60% derives from a combination of the sale of
food prepared on site, and the sale of alcoholic liquor consumed on premises. There shall be no more
than four Class A licenses issued.
2018 S-1
Games of Chance 34A
(2) Class B permits shall authorize . the placement of video gaming terminals in
establishments with a convenience store, that sells at retail a where a minimum of 10,000 gallons of
fuel per month. There shall be no more than five Class B licenses issued.
(3) (a) Class C permits shall authorize the placement of video gaming terminals in
establishments with a primary purpose of video gaming, with considerations for determination
include but are not limited to:
1. A seating area for video gaming terminals greater than the seating area for
food and beverage service or merchandise sales;
2. The absence of a full service kitchen;
3. An estimated net revenue of at least 60% derives from video gaming terminals;
and
4. An overall gross square footage not to exceed 1,500 square feet.
(b) There shall be no more than four Class C licenses issued. No Class C establishment
shall be located within 1,000 feet of another Class C establishment, or within 1,000 feet of any car
title loan or payday loan establishment. Determination of distance between said establishments shall
be from the nearest entrance for each establishment.
(4) Class D permits shall authorize the placement of video gaming terminals in fraternal
establishments having a fraternal purpose where membership is based upon a common tie or the
pursuit of a common object. There shall be no more than three Class D licenses issued.
(Ord. 1836, passed 8-20-2018)
2018 S-1
34B Swansea - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 115: LIQUOR CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
115.01 Definitions
115.02 License required
115.03 Applications
115.04 Examination of applicant
115.05 Persons ineligible to be licensed
115.06 Term
115.07 Classification; fees
115.08 Limitation of licenses
115.09 Nature of license
115.10 Dramshop insurance required
115.11 Display of license
115.12 Record of licenses
115.13 Revocation of licenses
115.14 Disposition of fees
Regulations
115.25 Hours
115.26 Open view into interior
115.27 Prohibited locations
115.28 Stores selling school supplies, lunches
115.29 Change of location
115.30 Transporting in motor vehicles
115.31 Liquor in vehicles; minors
115.32 Restricted residential areas
115.33 Election days
115.34 Unlawful acts
115.35 Unlawful entertainment
115.36 Sanitary conditions
115.37 Diseased employees
35
36 Swansea - Business Regulations
115.38 Disorderly house
115.39 Prohibited sales; generally
115.40 Minor selling liquor
115.41 Unlawful purchase of liquor
115.42 Identification required
115.43 Transfer of identification card
115.44 Restriction of sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages
115.45 Posting warning
115.46 Exclusionary provision
115.47 Inspections
Violations
115.60 Owner of premises permitting violation
115.61 Act of agent of employee; liability of licensee
115.62 Revocation of license after conviction
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted,
whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include
denatured alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid,
patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of being consumed as a
beverage by a human being. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the
manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations
promulgated there under, nor to any liquid or solid containing 0.5% or less of alcohol by volume.
BEER. A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley
or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer,
porter and the like.
CLOSE. To shut up so as to prevent entrance or access by any person; and the entire suspension
of business.
Liquor Control 37
CLUB. A corporation organized under the laws of this state and not for pecuniary profit, solely
for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors,
kept, used and maintained by its members, through the payment of annual dues and owning, hiring
or leasing a building or space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable and
adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their guests
and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining space and equipment; and provided,
further that its affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or
similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting, and that no member or officer, agent or
employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives in the form of salary or other
compensation, any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or its members
or guests introduced by members, beyond the amount of each salary as may be fixed and voted at
any annual meeting by the members or by the board of directors or other governing body out of the
general revenue of the club.
PACKAGE LIQUOR STORE. Any public place where packaged liquors are offered for sale in
the original, unopened container for consumption away from the premises.
PRESIDENT, SWANSEA BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner
as provided in 235 ILCS 5/4-2.
PUBLIC PLACE. Any premises enclosed or unenclosed or partly enclosed and partly
unenclosed wherein any service or goods, chattels or merchandise is offered for sale to the public or
any such premises used as a clubhouse, clubroom or meeting place. The terms PUBLIC PLACE and
PUBLIC PREMISES shall be interchangeable for the purposes of this chapter.
RESIDENT. One who has his or her residence in the village and is a registered voter at that
place of residence.
RESTAURANT. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public
as a place where regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided with
adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and having employed therein
a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
RETAILER. A person who sells or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor for use or consumption and
not for resale in any form.
SALE. Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means whatsoever for a
consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor,
agent, servant or employee.
SELL AT RETAIL and SALE AT RETAIL. Any sales for use or consumption and not for resale
in any form.
38 Swansea - Business Regulations
SPIRITS. Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or
other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin or other spirituous liquors and
such liquors when rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
TO SELL. Includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to sell.
WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits, or
vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or
spirits, as above defined.
(Prior Code, § 9-101) (Ord. 1774, passed 3-6-2017)
§ 115.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
(A) No person shall sell, keep or offer for sale at retail, or conduct any place for the sale at
retail of alcoholic liquor within the limits and territory of the village without having a license to do
so, issued by the President of the Village Board of Trustees, in the manner hereinafter provided, and
a valid license for such purpose issued by the State Liquor Control Commission.
(B) A similar valid license issued by the President of the Village Board of Trustees is hereby
required for and with respect to each building, location and premises, within the aforesaid territory
of the village, at or upon which alcoholic liquor is to be sold or kept or offered for sale or retail.
(Prior Code, § 9-201) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.03 APPLICATIONS.
(A) The President of the Village Board of Trustees is authorized to grant and issue licenses to
individuals, firms and corporation to sell at retail, and to keep and offer for sale at retail alcoholic
liquors within the limits and territory of the village, upon the conditions and in the manner provided
by this chapter and by the Act of the General Assembly of the state, and not otherwise. Such license
shall be in writing, signed by the President and attested by the Village Clerk, with the seal of his or
her office affixed thereto.
(B) Prior to issuance of a license, the applicant must submit to the President of the Village
Board of Trustees an application in triplicate, in writing and under oath, stating:
(1) The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a
copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof, and in the case of a corporation for
profit, limited liability corporation or a club, the date of incorporation, the object for which it was
organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors and, if a majority in interest of the
stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his or her nominee, the address and name and
address of such person;
Liquor Control 39
(2) The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of birth and, if a naturalized citizen,
the time and place of his or her naturalization;
(3) The character of business of the applicant and, in a case of a corporation, the objects
for which it was formed. In addition, the applicant shall submit, as applicable, the articles of
incorporation and current bylaws, if any, of the corporation or the current operating agreement of the
limited liability corporation. The applicant shall also submit proof of its current registration with the
state;
(4) The length of time that the applicant has been engaged in the business of that character
or, in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was issued;
(5) The location and description of the premises or place of business, which is to be
operated under such license;
(6) Whether applicant has made similar application for a similar other license on premises
other than described in the application and the disposition of such application;
(7) That applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a
license by reason of any matter or thing contained in the aforesaid act of the General Assembly or in
this chapter, or resolution and amendments thereto;
(8) Whether a previous license issued to the applicant, by any state or subdivision thereof
or by the Federal Government has been revoked, and the reasons therefor; and
(9) He or she will not violate any of the laws of the state or of the United States, or any of
the provisions of this chapter or resolution and amendments thereto, in the conduct of his or her
place of business.
(C) In the case of a partnership or corporation, the information and statements required by this
section shall be furnished as to each partner, and as to the president and secretary of the corporation
with the location of the principal office of the corporation.
(D) If the application is made in behalf of a partnership, firm, association, club or corporation,
then the same shall be signed and sworn to by at least two members of such partnership, firm,
association or club, or by the president and secretary of such corporation.
(E) One copy of the application shall be retained by the President of the Village Board of
Trustees, and one copy given to the Village Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall endorse on the
copies his or her approval or disapproval of the application and may make further comments
regarding that application. The copies shall be returned to the President and the endorsement and
comment of the Chief of Police shall be considered by him or her as an aid in deciding whether the
license should be issued or refused.
(Prior Code, § 9-202) (Ord. 1651, passed 6-4-2012)
40 Swansea - Business Regulations
§ 115.04 EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT.
The President of the Village Board of Trustees shall have the right to examine or cause to be
examined, under oath, any applicant for a local license or for renewal thereof, or any licensee upon
whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served, and to examine or cause to be examined
the books and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for his or
her information in the performance of his or her duties, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas
which shall be effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information
desired by the President under this section, he or she may authorize his or her agent to act on his or
her behalf.
(Prior Code, § 9-203)
§ 115.05 PERSONS INELIGIBLE TO BE LICENSED.
No retail license shall be issued by the President of the Village Board of Trustees to:
(A) A person who is not a resident of the village;
(B) A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he or she
resides;
(C) A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
(D) A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the state or of the United
States of America;
(E) A person who has been convicted of being a keeper of or keeping a house of ill fame;
(F) A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to
decency or morality;
(G) A person whose license has previously been revoked for cause;
(H) A person who, at the time of the application for renewal for any license issued hereunder,
would not be eligible for such license upon a first application;
(I) A co-partnership, if any general partner thereof, or any limited partner thereof, owning
more than 5% of the aggregate limited partner interest in such co-partnership would not be eligible to
receive a license hereunder for any reason;
(J) A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof or any stockholder or stockholders
owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock of such corporation would not be eligible to
receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the village;
Liquor Control 41
(K) A corporation unless it is incorporated in the state, or unless it is a foreign corporation
which is qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983 to transact business in the state;
(L) A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless the manager or
agent possesses the same qualifications by the licensee;
(M) A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the
manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, subsequent to the passage of this act or has
forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation;
(N) A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does
not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued;
(O) Any law enforcing public official, including members of the Village Liquor Control
Commission, if any, any President of the Village Board of Trustees, any member of the Village
Board of Trustees; and no such official shall be interested directly in the manufacture, sale or
distribution of alcoholic liquor; except that, license may be granted to such official in relation to
premises which are not located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the
issuance of such license is approved by the State Liquor Control Commission;
(P) A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee;
(Q) A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as described by § 28-1(a)(3)
through (a)(10) and as described by the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 ILCS 5/28-1 through 5/28-9, as
heretofore or hereafter amended, or as prescribed by the statute replaced by any of the aforesaid
statutory provisions;
(R) A person to whom a federal wage earning stamp has been issued by the federal government
for the current tax period;
(S) A co-partnership to which a federal wage earning stamp has been issued by the federal
government for the current tax period or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming
device stamp or federal wage earning stamp by the federal government of the current tax period;
(T) A corporation, if any, officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the
aggregate more than 20% of the stock of such corporation or any stockholder owning in the
aggregate more than 20% of the stock of such corporation has been issued a federal wage earning
stamp for the current tax period; and
(U) Any premises for which a federal wage-earning stamp has been issued by the federal
government for the current tax period.
(Prior Code, § 9-204)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-2
42 Swansea - Business Regulations
§ 115.06 TERM.
The term of each license year shall run from May 1 through April 30 in the following year. Each
license issued later than May 1 shall terminate on April 30, next following its issuance, and the fee to
be paid shall be reduced in proportion to the full calendar months which have expired in the year
prior to the issuance of the license. Annual license fees shall be paid in advance of the ensuing
license year. Failure to pay in advance shall be a violation of this chapter and give the village the
power to revoke the license issued and make the offender liable for a penalty under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-205)
§ 115.07 CLASSIFICATION; FEES.
Such licenses shall be and are hereby divided into four classes.
(A) Class A licenses shall authorize the retail sale on the premises specified of alcoholic liquor
for consumption on the premises, as well as other retail sales of such liquor, during the hours
specified in § 115.25 of this chapter. The annual fee for the license shall be $250. There shall be no
more than 11 Class A licenses issued; provided further that, charitable, educational and benevolent
corporations not organized for pecuniary profit may pay in lieu of the above fee a daily license fee of
$5 for 24 consecutive hours for the sale of alcoholic liquor, payable in advance. Such fee shall not
exceed $250 per year.
(B) Class B licenses shall authorize the wholesale or retail sale of alcoholic liquor, but not for
consumption on the premises where sold during the hours specified in § 115.25 of this chapter. The
annual fee for such license shall be $300. There shall be no more than six Class B licenses issued.
(C) Class C licenses shall authorize the retail sale on the premises specified of alcoholic liquor
for consumption on the premises where sold, as well as other retail sales of liquor during the hours
specified in § 115.25 of this chapter. The annual fee for such license shall be $500. There shall be no
more than six Class C licenses issued.
(D) Class D licenses shall authorized the wholesale or retail sale of alcoholic liquor, but not for
consumption on the premises where sold during the hours specified in § 115.25 of this chapter. The
annual fee for such license shall be $500. There shall be no more than four Class D licenses issued.
(Prior Code, § 9-206) (Ord. 1402, passed 1-3-2005; Ord. 1436, passed 1-3-2006; Ord. 1542, passed
3-16-2009; Ord. 1568, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 1597, passed 11-1-2010; Ord. 1638, passed 3-5-2012;
Ord. 1676, passed 5-6-2013; Ord. 1687, passed 11-18-2013; Ord. 1693, passed 2-3-2014; Ord.
1748, passed 4-25-2016; Ord. 1778, passed 4-17-2017; Ord. 1791, passed 10-2-2017; Ord. 1827,
passed 6-4-2018)
2018 S-1
Liquor Control 43
§ 115.08 LIMITATION OF LICENSES.
(A) Annexing license holders. The restrictions contained herein shall in no way affect taverns
and other businesses holding retail liquor licenses duly licensed by the county, which are located in
any territory annexed to the village. Licenses may be issued to them or renewed by the duly
constituted authorities upon annexation; provided that, thereafter, all of the restrictions and
contingencies contained herein shall apply.
(B) Destroyed or damaged business. No license shall be held in existence by the mere payment
of fees by any person, firm or corporation for a longer period than 90 days, without a tavern or
liquor business for the same being in complete and full operation. However, if a tavern or liquor
business has been destroyed or damaged by fire or act of God, and cannot be rebuilt or repaired
within the 90-day period, then, in that event, the President of the Village Board of Trustees shall
extend the period of time for which a liquor license may be held by the payment of fees without the
tavern or liquor business being in full and complete operation for an additional 90 days. If either of
the above stated periods of time pass without the particular tavern or liquor business returning to
complete and full operation, the license for that particular business shall expire and not be subject to
renewal, unless all other requirements of this chapter shall have been met.
(Prior Code, § 9-207)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-1
§ 115.09 NATURE OF LICENSE.
(A) A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for and not to exceed one year after
issuance, except a non-beverage users license, unless sooner revoked as in this act provided, and
shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor
shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall
cease upon the death of the licensee; provided that, executors or administrator of the estate of any
deceased licensee, and the trustee of any involvement or bankrupt licensee, and the trustee of any
part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor under
order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased, or insolvent or
bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the
expiration of such license no longer than months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such
licensee. Except in the case of a non-beverage user’s license, a refund shall be made of that portion
of the license fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from operating under
such license in accordance with the provisions of this division (A).
(B) Any licensee may renew his or her license at the expiration thereof; provided, he or she is
then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought or
suitable for such purpose; and, provided further that, the renewal privilege herein shall not be
construed as a vested
44 Swansea - Business Regulations
right which shall in any case prevent the Village President and Board of Trustees, from decreasing
the number of licenses to be issued within its jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 9-208)
§ 115.10 DRAMSHOP INSURANCE REQUIRED.
Any licenses issued by the President of the Village Board of Trustees shall be revoked if the
licensee does not provide a copy of an effective liquor liability insurance policy that insures the
licensee from liability not less than $30,000 per person for “bodily injury”, $30,000 for “property
damage” and $30,000 for “means of support”, under the Dramshop Act of the state, 235 of ILCS
5/6-21, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 9-209)
§ 115.11 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
Every licensee under this chapter shall cause his or her license to be framed and hung in plain
view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
(Prior Code, § 9-210) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-24
§ 115.12 RECORD OF LICENSES.
The President of the Village Board of Trustees shall keep a complete record of all licenses issued
by him or her and shall supply the Village Clerk, Treasurer and Chief of Police a copy of the same.
Upon issuance or revocation of a license, the President shall give written notice to these same
officers within 48 hours.
(Prior Code, § 9-211)
§ 115.13 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
The President of the Board of Trustees shall serve as the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
and shall have the following powers, functions and duties with respect to licenses granted under this
chapter.
(A) In addition to, and not limited by, the specific penalties set out for violations of specific
articles of this chapter, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may suspend for 30 days, or revoke,
any liquor license issued under this chapter for the violation of any state law pertaining to the sale of
alcoholic liquors by any licensee, his or her agent, servant or employee.
(B) The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may suspend or revoke any liquor license if the
licensee makes any false statement or misrepresentation in the application for a license.
Liquor Control 45
(C) The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may enter, or authorize any law enforcement
officer to enter, at any time, upon any premises licensed, to determine whether any of the provisions
of this chapter or the laws of the state pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor have been or are
being violated at such time, and to examine the premises of the licensee in connection therewith.
(D) (1) Any five residents of the county shall have the right to file a complaint with the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner, stating that any licensee under this chapter has been, or is, violating
the provisions of this chapter or any amendments hereto, or of any of the statutes of the state,
enacted with reference to the control of liquor. Such complaint shall be in writing and shall be signed
and sworn to by the parties complaining.
(2) The complaint shall state the particular provision, rule or regulation believed to have
been violated and the facts in detail upon which such belief is based. If the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner is satisfied that the complaint substantially charges a violation, and that from the facts
alleged, there is reasonable cause of such belief, he or she shall set the matter for hearing, and shall
serve notice upon the licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charges in
the complaint.
(Prior Code, § 9-212)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-4
§ 115.14 DISPOSITION OF FEES.
(A) All such fees shall be paid to the village at the time application is made, and shall be
forthwith turned over to the Village Treasurer.
(B) In the event the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant.
(C) If the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the General Corporate Fund or in
such other fund as shall have been designated by the Board of Trustees by proper action.
(Prior Code, § 9-213)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-4
46Swansea - Business Regulations
REGULATIONS
§ 115.25 HOURS.
(A) Class A licenses authorize the retail sale on the premises specified of alcoholic liquors
between 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sunday through Thursday; provided, however, that, on
each Friday and Saturday, July 3, the day before Thanksgiving Day, the day before Christmas Day
and the last day of the year, Class A licenses are authorized to sell alcoholic liquor between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m.
(B) Class B licenses authorize the wholesale or retail sale of alcoholic liquor, but not for
consumption on the premises where sold. Such sales shall be authorized between 6:00 a.m. and
12:00 midnight on Sunday through Thursday; provided, however, that, on each Friday and Saturday,
July 3, the day before Thanksgiving Day, the day before Christmas Day and the last day of the year,
Class B licenses are authorized to sell alcoholic liquor between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m.
(C) Class C licenses authorize the retail sale on the premises specified of alcoholic liquor
between 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. during all days of the week, including Sunday. Places operated
under this class of license shall cease the dispensing of all alcoholic liquor at 2:00 a.m. on each day.
(D) Class D licenses authorizes the wholesale or retail sale of alcoholic liquor, but not for
consumption on the premises where sold. Such sales shall be authorized between 6:00 a.m. and 2:00
a.m. during all days of the week including Sunday. Places operated under this class of license shall
cease the sale of all alcoholic liquor at 2:00 a.m. on each day.
(E) It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or to admit the public to any tavern, in which
alcoholic liquor is sold at retail, during the hours within which the sale of such liquor is prohibited;
provided, that in the case of restaurants, clubs, hotels, grocery stores, convenience stores and any
such business where other products and services are sold, such establishments may be kept open
during such hours, but no alcoholic liquor may be sold to or consumed by the public during such
hours.
(Prior Code, § 9-301) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.26 OPEN VIEW INTO INTERIOR.
(A) When the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the premises is licensed (other than
as a restaurant, hotel or club, as defined in the aforesaid act of the General Assembly, other than one
situated on the first or ground floor), no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be
permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside such premises,
which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises from the street, road or
sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction, nor any arrangement of
lights, or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such licensed premises which shall
prevent a full
Liquor Control 47
view of the entire interior of the premises from the street, road or sidewalk and said premises must
be so located that there shall be a full view of the entire interior of such premises from the street,
road or sidewalk.
(B) All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises shall be continuously
lighted during business hours by natural light or artificial white lights so that all parts of the interior
of the premises shall be clearly visible.
(C) In case the view into any such licensed premises required by the foregoing provision shall be
willfully obscured by the licensee, or by him or her willfully suffered to be obscured or in any
manner obstructed, then such license shall be subject to revocation in the manner herein provided.
(D) In order to enforce the provisions of this section, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
shall have the right to require the filing with him or her plans, drawings and photographs showing
the clearance of the view, as above required.
(Prior Code, § 9-302) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.27 PROHIBITED LOCATIONS.
(A) No license shall be issued for the sale of any alcoholic liquor at retail within 100 feet of any
church, school, hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or
children or any military or naval station; provided that, this prohibition shall not apply to hotels
offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs or to restaurants, food shops or other places
where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on, if such place of business
so exempted shall have been established for such purposes prior to the taking effect of this act; nor to
the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on the premises within 100 feet since
the issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the distance of 100 feet shall be
measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational programs and
not to property boundaries.
(B) Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a church or private school
to sell retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on
the premises solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of
alcoholic liquors.
(Prior Code, § 9-303) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-11
48 Swansea - Business Regulations
§ 115.28 STORES SELLING SCHOOL SUPPLIES, LUNCHES.
No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any store
or other place of business where the majority of customers are minors of school age or where the
principal business transacted consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for
such minors.
(Prior Code, § 9-304) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.29 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
A retail liquor dealer’s license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only on the premises
described in the application and license. Such location may be changed only upon the written permit
to make such change issued by the President of the Village Board of Trustees. No change of location
shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor under the law of the state and the code of ordinances of the village.
(Prior Code, § 9-305)
§ 115.30 TRANSPORTING IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
Within the village, no person shall, transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor in,
upon or about any motor vehicle in or on any public street, alley or place, except in the original
package with the seal unbroken.
(Prior Code, § 9-306) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.31 LIQUOR IN VEHICLES; MINORS.
The presence in a vehicle other than a public vehicle of any alcoholic liquor shall be prima facie
evidence that it is in the possession of, and is being carried by all persons occupying such vehicle at
the time of which such alcoholic liquor is found, except under the following circumstances:
(A) If such liquor is found on the person of one of the occupants therein; or
(B) If such vehicle contains at least one occupant over 21 years of age.
(Prior Code, § 9-307) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.32 RESTRICTED RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
It shall be unlawful to establish a retail liquor business within the village in violation of Ch. 154
of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 9-308) Penalty, see § 10.99
Liquor Control 49
§ 115.33 ELECTION DAYS.
All such licensees may sell alcoholic liquor at retail, by the drink or in the original package for
consumption either on or off the premises licensed on the day of any national, state, county or
municipal election, including primary elections, during the hours the polls are open within the
political area in which such election is being held and on Sundays, subject to all the remaining terms,
conditions and opening hours and closing hours in this chapter set forth.
(Prior Code, § 9-309) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.34 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do or commit any of the following acts within the village:
(A) Drink any alcoholic liquors on any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public way without
special permission granted by the Village Board of Trustees;
(B) Drink any alcoholic liquors in any public park, except with the permission of an owner
thereof;
(C) Drink any alcoholic liquors on any private property without permission of an owner thereof;
and/or
(D) Appear on or in any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, including parks and
recreation areas, in an intoxicated condition.
(Prior Code, § 9-310) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.35 UNLAWFUL ENTERTAINMENT.
(A) No licensee or his or her agent, servant or employee shall permit or allow any lewd or
lascivious act, or any topless and/or bottomless employee and/or employees (TOPLESS being
defined as naked and substantially without clothing or covering of the body from the waist to
neckline and bottomless being defined as naked and substantially without clothing or covering of the
body from the waist downward), or entertainment to be performed within the licensed premises by an
entertainer employed therein, or by any employee or guest; nor shall any licensee or his or her agent,
servant or employee permit or allow any employee or guest, or any other person whomever to solicit
or encourage the purchasing or any alcoholic liquor or beverage of any description, or the giving of
any gratuity or gift by any patron or guest to or for the benefit of any such employee of guest.
(B) In the village, the following kinds of conduct, on premises licensed to sell liquor, are
prohibited:
(1) The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy,
bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts;
50 Swansea - Business Regulations
(2) The actual or simulated exhibition, touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts,
buttocks, pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals;
(3) The actual or simulated displaying of the breasts, buttocks, pubic hair, anus, vulva or
genitals;
(4) The permitting by a licensee of any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises
who exposes to view any portion of his or her breasts, buttocks, genitals, vulva or anus; and/or
(5) The displaying of films or pictures depicting acts, a live performance of which is
prohibited by the regulations quoted above.
(Prior Code, § 9-311) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/11-20, 5/11-30
§ 115.36 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the storage of such liquor for such
sale shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be kept in full compliance with the
codes regulating the condition of the premises used for the storage or sale of food for human
consumption.
(Prior Code, § 9-312) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 410 ILCS 650/1
§ 115.37 DISEASED EMPLOYEES.
It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, any
person who is afflicted with or who is a carrier of any contagious, infectious or venereal disease; and
it shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such disease to work in or
about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or distribution for such
liquor.
(Prior Code, § 9-313) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 410 ILCS 650/10
§ 115.38 DISORDERLY HOUSE.
Any person licensed under this chapter shall not suffer any disorder, drunkenness, quarreling,
fighting, unlawful games or riotous or disorderly conduct in any house or premises kept or occupied
by him or her for the sale of liquor.
(Prior Code, § 9-316) Penalty, see § 10.99
Liquor Control 51
§ 115.39 PROHIBITED SALES; GENERALLY.
(A) No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such
licensee, shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years, or to an
intoxicated person or to any person known by him or her to be under legal disability or in need of
mental treatment. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give
or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years, except in the
performance of a religious ceremony or service.
(B) Whoever violates the provisions of this section is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 9-317) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-16(a)
§ 115.40 MINOR SELLING LIQUOR.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to attend any bar or to sell, draw,
pour or mix any alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail premises.
(Prior Code, § 9-318) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
§ 115.41 UNLAWFUL PURCHASE OF LIQUOR.
A person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age
shall not purchase, or accept a gift of such alcoholic liquor, have such alcoholic liquor in his or her
possession.
(Prior Code, § 9-319) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-20
§ 115.42 IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED.
If a licensee or his or her agents or employees believes, or has reason to believe that a sale or
delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the age of the prospective recipient, he or
she shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive
identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public office in the performance of his or her
official duties.
(Prior Code, § 9-320)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-20
52 Swansea - Business Regulations
§ 115.43 TRANSFER OF IDENTIFICATION CARD.
No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification card; use the identification card of
another; carry or use a false or forged identification card; or obtain an identification card by means
of false information. No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of alcoholic liquor
in violation of this chapter. The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person less than 21 years of
age is forbidden.
(Prior Code, § 9-321) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-20
§ 115.44 RESTRICTIONS ON THE OUTSIDE CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES.
While Class A and Class C liquor licenses allow consumption on the premises set forth in the
license application and the premises to which the license is issued, no such license shall sell, give,
deliver or allow to be consumed, any alcoholic liquor on said premises, except within the building
and any designated and approved outdoor area located on said premises. It shall be unlawful for any
license to allow the consumption of alcohol in any area of the premises not specifically approved by
the Local Liquor Commissioner and the issued licenses.
(A) Designated outdoor areas; ongoing.
(1) Any new establishment that will include an outdoor area where alcoholic liquor will be
sold, given, delivered, or allowed to be consumed on an ongoing basis, shall specifically designate,
describe and depict each such area in its application for a Class A or Class C liquor license.
(2) Any existing Class A or Class C liquor license establishment that wishes to add an
outdoor area where alcoholic- liquor will be sold, given, delivered, or allowed to be consumed on an
ongoing basis, shall submit each such area to the President of the Village Board of Trustees as the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner of the village, for approval prior to selling, giving, delivering
or allowing the consumption of alcohol within said area.
(3) If approval for an outdoor area where alcoholic liquor will be sold, given, delivered, or
allowed to be consumed on an ongoing basis, is granted by the President of the Village Board of
Trustees, the premises set forth in the license application and the premises to which the license is
issued shall be considered amended to include the designated and approved outdoor area, and
thereafter the licensee shall be allowed to sell, give, deliver or allow the consumption of alcohol
within said area.
(4) The licensee shall notify its insurance carrier and ensure that dram shop and all other
applicable liability insurance coverage is extended to also cover all designated and approved outdoor
areas.
Liquor Control 53
(5) Any fence, landscaping, screening, partitions or other structures around any such
designated and approved outdoor area, shall at all times allow a clear, open view into the area,
similar to that already required within the licensed building by § 115.26 of the Swansea Municipal
Code.
(B) Designated outdoor areas temporary.
(1) Any existing Class A or Class C liquor license establishment that wishes to establish a
temporary outdoor area where alcoholic liquor will be sold, given, delivered, or allowed to be
consumed during a special event, including, but not limited to, St. Patrick's Day and Cinco de
Mayo, must first secure written approval from the President of the Village Board of Trustees.
(2) Any such request shall be in writing specifically identifying and depicting the area of
the licensed premises to be designated as the temporary outdoor area. Request should be made at
least 30 days in advance.
(3) The President of the Village Board of Trustees shall consult with the Chief of Police,
and after doing so may require specific safety and security plans from the licensee prior to approval
of any special event,
(4) Any approval granted for such a temporary outdoor area shall be in writing, with
notification also to the Chief of Police, and shall extend the premises set forth in the license
application and the premises lo which the license is issued to include the designated and approved
temporary outdoor area, but only for the time period specified, not to exceed 48 hours.
(5) The licensee shall notify its insurance carrier and ensure that dram shop and all other
applicable liability insurance coverage is extended to also cover all temporary outdoor areas.
(6) Any fence, landscaping, screening, partitions or other structures around any such
designated and approved temporary outdoor area, shall at all times allow a clear, open view into the
area, similar lo that already required within the licensed building by § 115.26.
(C) Open alcohol or liquor outside the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to
take open alcohol or liquor outside or beyond any specifically designated and licensed premises,
provided, however, that a patron may remove one unsealed and partially consumed bottle of wine for
off-premise consumption from a restaurant if that patron purchased a meal and consumed a portion of
the bottle of wine with the meal on the restaurant premises, or consumed a portion of the bottle of
wine on the winery premises, and the partially consumed bottle of wine that is lo be removed from
either premise is securely scaled by the licensee in a transparent one-time use, tamper-proof bag, and
the licensee provides a elated receipt for the bottle of wine to the patron, but only as permitted by
235 ILCS 5/6-33 as it is then in effect.
(Ord. 1774, passed 3-6-2017) Penalty, see § 10.99
54 Swansea - Business Regulations
§ 115.45 POSTING WARNING.
(A) In every licensed business where alcoholic liquor is sold, there shall be displayed at all times
in a prominent place, a printed card which shall read as follows:
WARNING TO MINORS
You are subject to a fine up to $500.00 under the ordinances of this municipality if you purchase
alcoholic liquor, or misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor license, or his or her agent or employee,
to suffer or permit any minor to be or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to,
or situated in the room or place where such licensed premises is located; provided that, this division
(B) shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or any
licensed premises which derives its principal business from the sale of services or other commodities
other than alcoholic liquor.
(Prior Code, § 9-323) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.46 EXCLUSIONARY PROVISION.
The possession and dispensing, or consumption, by a person under 21 years of age of alcoholic
liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the consumption by a person under
21 years of age under the direct supervision and approval of the parents or parent or those persons
standing in loco parentis of such person under 21 years of age in the privacy of a home is not
prohibited by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-324)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-20
§ 115.47 INSPECTIONS.
It shall be unlawful to refuse to grant admittance to the premises for which a license has been
issued at any time upon the verbal request of any police officer, the health officer or any member of
the Village Board of Trustees, for the purpose of making an inspection of such premises, or any part
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 9-325) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-2, 5/4-4
Liquor Control55
VIOLATIONS
§ 115.60 OWNER OF PREMISES PERMITTING VIOLATION.
If the owner of the licensed premises or any person from whom the licensee derives the right to
possession of such premises, or the agent of such owner or person, shall knowingly permit the
licensee to use said licensed premises in violation of the terms of this chapter, said owner, agent or
other person shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter to the same extent as said licensee
and be subject to the same punishment.
(Prior Code, § 9-401)
§ 115.61 ACT OF AGENT OF EMPLOYEE; LIABILITY OF LICENSEE.
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee, shall be
deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee, and said employer or licensee shall be
punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been one committed or omitted by him
or her personally.
(Prior Code, § 9-402)
§ 115.62 REVOCATION OF LICENSE AFTER CONVICTION.
Whenever any licensee shall be convicted of any violation of this chapter, the license of said
licensee may, in the discretion of the President of the Village Board of Trustees, be revoked and
forfeited and all fees paid thereon shall be forfeited, and it shall thereafter be unlawful and shall
constitute a further violation of this chapter of said licensee to continue to operate under such license.
(Prior Code, § 9-403)
56 Swansea - Business Regulations
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
130. GENERAL PROVISIONS
131. SEX OFFENSES
132. BODILY HARM
133. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
134. PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND DECENCY
135. LITTER
136. TRESPASS
137. PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
1
2 Swansea - General Offenses
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Definitions; Criminal Code Adopted
130.01 Meaning of words and phrases
130.02 Criminal Code adopted
General Provisions
130.15 Abusing a police officer
130.16 Disturbing church services
130.17 Disturbing assemblies
130.18 Disturbing the peace
130.19 Barbed wire and electric fences
130.20 Disorderly assembly
130.21 Sale of cigarettes or tobacco to minors
130.22 Encouraging delinquency
130.23 Aiding an escape
130.24 Escapes
130.25 Aid to an offense
130.26 Concealed weapons
130.27 Discharging firearms or other weapons in village; exception
130.28 Impersonation of officer
130.29 Destruction of public property
130.30 Discarded refrigerators
130.31 Curfew
130.32 False police or fire alarms
130.33 Alarm systems
130.34 Limitations on burning yard waste
130.35 Regulations for Halloween
130.36 Yard sales
130.37 Insufficient funds policy
130.38 Products containing cannabidiol
130.99 Penalty
3
2018 S-1
4 Swansea - General Offenses
DEFINITIONS; CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED
§ 130.01 MEANING OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
For the purpose of this title, the words and phrases of the 720 ILCS 5/2-1 through 5/2-11, 5/2-
13 through 5/2-16, 5/2-19 and 5/2-20, as approved, adopted and amended, are hereby adopted by the
village, as fully as if set out herein.
(Prior Code, § 13-101)
§ 130.02 CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED.
The Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS, as passed, approved and amended by the Illinois General
Assembly, is hereby adopted by the village, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the
corporate limits of the village; provided, however, the penalties as provided by this Code shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 13-102)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.15 ABUSING A POLICE OFFICER.
No person in the village shall, by violent, tumultuous or obstreperous conduct or carriage, or by
loud and unusual noises, disturb any police officer in the discharge of his or her duties, and no
person shall use unseemly, profane, obscene or offensive language in the presence of a police officer;
nor shall any person assault, strike or fight with any police officer in the discharge of his or her
duties or permit such conduct in or upon any house or premises in the village, owned or possessed by
him or her or under his or her management and control.
(Prior Code, § 13-201) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.16 DISTURBING CHURCH SERVICES.
No person in the village shall disturb or disquiet any congregation or assembly met for religious
worship, by making any noise or by rude and indecent behavior, by profane or obscene discourse or
in any other manner, within or near their place of worship.
(Prior Code, § 13-202) Penalty, see § 130.99
General Provisions 5
§ 130.17 DISTURBING ASSEMBLIES.
No person shall disturb the good order of society, the peace of any private family or of any
congregation within the village by any noise or amusement, by vulgar or profane language or by any
disorderly or immoral conduct.
(Prior Code, § 13-203) Penalty, see § 130.99
Cross-reference:
Assembling at public places and restaurants, see § 134.21
Disorderly assembly, see § 130.20
§ 130.18 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
No person in the village shall disturb any school or any other lawful assembly of people, or any
funeral assembly or procession, by rude or indecent behavior or otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 13-204) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.19 BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any electric fence or any fence
constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire or to use barbed wire or an electric fence as a guard to
any parking lot, stairway or entrance to a building, unless in an agricultural district.
(Prior Code, § 13-205) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.20 DISORDERLY ASSEMBLY.
A person is guilty of disorderly assembly when he or she knowingly fails to obey a lawful order
of dispersal by a person known to him or her to be a peace officer under circumstances where three
or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are
likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm.
(Prior Code, § 13-206) Penalty, see § 130.99
Cross-reference:
Assembling at public places and restaurants, see § 134.21
Disturbing assemblies, see § 130.17
§ 130.21 SALE OF CIGARETTES OR TOBACCO TO MINORS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, buy for or furnish any cigar or cigarette or tobacco in
any of its forms to any minor under 18 years of age.
(Prior Code, § 13-207) Penalty, see § 130.99
6 Swansea - General Offenses
§ 130.22 ENCOURAGING DELINQUENCY.
It shall be unlawful for any person, by an act or neglect, to encourage, aid or cause delinquency
in a child; and it shall likewise be unlawful for any person, after notice that a driver’s license of any
child has been suspended or revoked, to permit such child to operate a motor vehicle during the
period that such driver’s license is suspended; and it shall likewise be unlawful for any person to
knowingly permit any child to operate a motor vehicle without a license.
(Prior Code, § 13-208) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.23 AIDING AN ESCAPE.
It shall be unlawful to rescue or attempt to rescue, or to abet or encourage the rescue or escape,
of any person from the custody of any officer or other person legally having him or her in charge, or
to molest or interfere with any officer or other person so legally having him or her in charge, or to
aid, abet or encourage, in any manner, the rescue or the attempt to escape from any person legally
committed thereto, or to supply or attempt to supply any such person with any weapon or with any
implement or means whereby an escape might be affected, or to supply with any intoxicating liquors,
drugs or other article(s) without the consent to the officer in charge.
(Prior Code, § 13-209) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.24 ESCAPES.
It shall be unlawful for any person convicted of any offense or in lawful custody to escape or
attempt to escape from custody.
(Prior Code, § 13-210) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.25 AID TO AN OFFENSE.
It shall be unlawful for any person in any way or manner, to aid, abet, counsel, advise or
encourage any other person in the commission of any of the acts mentioned herein or in any manner,
encourage the commission of such offense hereby defined.
(Prior Code, § 13-211) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.26 CONCEALED WEAPONS.
Except as otherwise authorized by the Firearm Concealed Carry Act, 430 ILCS 66/1 et seq., no
person shall, within the village, carry or wear under his or her clothes, or concealed about his or her
person, any pistol, sling-shot, cross knuckles, knuckles of lead, brass or other metal, any switch
blade knife or razor, Bowie knife, dirk, dagger or any other dangerous or deadly weapon. This
section does
General Provisions 7
not apply to the officers or members of the Police Department, nor to any Sheriff or Deputy Sheriff
or constable of the state, nor to any United States Marshal.
(Prior Code, § 13-213) Penalty, see § 130.99
Cross-reference:
Unlawful use of weapons, see § 134.01
§ 130.27 DISCHARGING FIREARMS OR OTHER WEAPONS IN VILLAGE; EXCEPTION.
(A) No person, except authorized law enforcement personnel, shall, within the village limits,
fire or discharge any firearm (defined, for the purposes of this section, as any device, by whatever
name known, which is designed to expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosion,
expansion of gas or escape of gas coil spring, elastic material), or crossbows, common or
compound, bows, speargun or air gun, except under the circumstances listed below:
(1) When within an OSHA and NRA approved indoor range;
(2) When at a shotgun event sponsored by a not-for-profit organization and when in
compliance with the restrictions below.
(a) Events must be held with strict safety requirements.
(b) Each site at which such events are planned shall apply to the Chief of Police of the
village for permission to conduct the event. An application form as provided by the Chief of Police
shall be filed no less than 30 days prior to the event, submitted with the following documents:
1. A diagram of the shotgun event site indicating the direction of shotgun fire, the
dimensions of the backstop and the distances between the firing line and the clear area perimeter to
the left, right and behind the backstop; and
2. A certificate of liability insurance for the shotgun event issued to the shotgun
event venue in the amount of $1,000,000.
(c) No more than eight events may be held at one location per calendar year.
(d) Each site at which such events are planned must furnish the Chief of Police with a
schedule of proposed shoots and the name of the individual from the site organization who will be
present during each event and responsible for compliance with regulations. Any changes occurring
after the filing of said schedule shall be provided to the Chief of Police no less than three days in
advance.
8 Swansea - General Offenses
(e) Shooting at any such event shall not begin prior to 12:00 noon and shall end by
5:00 p.m.
(f) Shotguns shall not be fired in the direction of a highway, road, bike path or
building, which is less than 500 feet from the target.
(g) A proper backstop, which completely absorbs the shot, shall be erected beyond the
target area, ten feet wide by seven feet high.
(h) The entire area between the firing point and backstop shall be marked off and
protected so as to prohibit participants, observers and others from entering said area.
(i) Only target loads, also known as light loads, shall be used with no more than 3.25
dram equivalent of black powder and only #7-1/2 or smaller shot in each shell.
(j) Shells shall be provided by sponsor one at a time at firing line.
(k) Shotguns not in use shall be placed within a gun case or dismantled.
(l) No intoxicated person shall be allowed to discharge a shotgun at these events.
(B) Crossbows, common or compound bows, spearguns and air guns may be discharged within
the village limits under the following conditions:
(1) On one’s own property or the property of another with written permission from all of
the property owners; and
(2) Weapon is not discharged in the direction of a highway, road, bike path, residence or
business that is less than 200 yards from the target.
(Prior Code, § 13-214) (Ord. 1635, passed 2-6-2012; Ord. 1682, passed 7-15-2013) Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
Unlawful use of weapons, see § 134.01
§ 130.28 IMPERSONATION OF OFFICER.
No person in the village shall falsely represent himself or herself to be an officer of the village
or shall, without being duly authorized by the village, exercise or attempt to exercise any of the
duties, functions or powers of a village officer, or hinder, obstruct, resist or otherwise interfere with
any village officer in the discharge of the duties of his or her office, or attempt to prevent any such
officer from arresting any person, either by force or by giving notice to such person, or attempt to
rescue from such officer any person in his or her custody, or impersonate any of the members of the
police force of the village, or maliciously, or with the intention of deceiving any person, wear the
uniform of or a uniform
General Provisions 9
similar to that worn by the members of the Police Department, or use any of the signs, signals or
devices adopted and used by the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 13-215) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.29 DESTRUCTION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
No person in the village shall deface, destroy or, in any way, injure any public property or any
other apparatus of the village.
(Prior Code, § 13-216) Penalty, see § 130.99
Cross-reference:
Offenses Against Property, see Ch. 133
§ 130.30 DISCARDED REFRIGERATORS.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave or permit to remain outside of
any dwelling, building or other structure or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling
or other structure under his, her or its control in a place accessible to children, any abandoned
unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or other container which has an air-tight door or lid,
snap-lock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside without first removing
the door or lid, snap-lock or other device from the ice box, refrigerator or container.
(Prior Code, § 13-217) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.31 CURFEW.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CURFEW HOURS.
(a) Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;
(b) Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday; and
(c) Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on the
following day.
EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls
for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an
automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or
loss of life.
10 Swansea - General Offenses
ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which
the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN.
(a) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
(b) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
MINOR. Any person under 17 years of age.
PARENT. A person who is:
(a) A natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of another person; or
(b) At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and
custody of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has
access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and the common areas of schools,
hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.
REMAIN. To:
(a) Linger or stay; or
(b) Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner,
operator or other person in control of the premises.
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that
causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of
any bodily member or organ.
(B) Offenses.
(1) A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place or on the premises
of any establishment during curfew hours.
(2) A parent or guardian of a minor or other person in custody or control of a minor
commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits the minor to remain in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment during curfew hours.
General Provisions 11
(C) Exemptions. It is an exemption to prosecution under division (B) above that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian or other person in custody or control of
the minor;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, without any detour or
stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home from an employment
activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the residence of a next-door
neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the Police Department about the minor’s presence;
(7) Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults
and sponsored by a government or governmental agency, a civic organization or another similar
entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour
or stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored
by a government or governmental agency, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as
the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or
(9) Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the Emancipation of
Minors Act.
(D) Enforcement.
(1) Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a law enforcement officer shall
ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place.
(2) The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the
officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other
circumstances, no exemption in division (C) above is present.
(Prior Code, § 13-219) (Ord. 1422, passed 6-20-2005) Penalty, see § 130.99
12 Swansea - General Offenses
§ 130.32 FALSE POLICE OR FIRE ALARMS.
No person in the village shall willfully make or give any false police or fire alarm or willfully
and falsely call, send for or cause to be called or sent for any police officer or fire equipment.
(Prior Code, § 13-220) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.33 ALARM SYSTEMS.
(A) Transmission. It shall be unlawful for any person, business or corporation doing business in
the village, and having on his, her or its premises a burglar or fire alarm system, to permit or allow
the transmission of a false alarm if the alarm in question has already transmitted five or more false
burglar alarms within that calendar year, or three or more false fire alarms within that calendar year.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BURGLAR ALARMS SYSTEMS. Any alarm system designed to detect and signal the
presence of a burglar, thief, interloper or person breaching the peace, which terminates in any
manner at the Police Department of the village or emits an audible sound at the physical premises on
which the alarm is installed.
FALSE ALARM. Any and all detonations of burglar and fire alarms (when in fact no
burglar, thief, interloper, flame, smoke or intense heat is detected) if the detonation was caused by
human error or equipment malfunction at the physical premises on which the alarm is installed, but
not if the detonation was caused by a malfunction in the telephone lines or equipment not located at
the physical premises on which the alarm is installed.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. Any alarm system designed to detect the presence of smoke,
flame or temperature, to signal the presence of or conditions conducive to a fire, to which the Fire
Department is dispatched.
(Prior Code, § 13-221) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.34 LIMITATIONS ON BURNING YARD WASTE.
(A) (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or allow to be burned any leaves, twigs or
similar yard waste, except for yard waste generated on the site may be burned between the hours of
11:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Wednesday and Saturdays between April 1 and June 15, and between
October 1 and November 30. If weather conditions do not allow for the burning of yard waste on the
established days of burning an alternate day will be established by the Board of Trustees.
General Provisions 13
(2) No special burn permits allowing burning outside the above dates and times shall be
issued by any village officer or employee. Burn permits issued by the State Environmental Protection
Agency are exempt from the date and time requirement recited above.
(B) (1) No burning shall be allowed on any public street surface or within any open storm
water ditch within the public right-of-way.
(2) Any person causing damage to a street surface from burning will be assessed for the
cost of repairs.
(3) Fires shall be attended at all times.
(Prior Code, § 13-223) (Ord. 1722, passed 4-20-2015) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.35 REGULATIONS FOR HALLOWEEN.
It shall be illegal for any person to engage in the Halloween practice commonly referred to as
“Trick or Treat”; provided, however, that, children may legally engage in “Trick or Treat” on
October 31 of each year until the hour of 9:00 p.m., or on any other day and until any other time set
by the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 13-224) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.36 YARD SALES.
(A) Defined. The term YARD SALE shall mean any display of merchandise for the purpose of
exchanging it for legal tender or barter at a location not otherwise regularly used or specifically
designated for the sale or exchange of merchandise. Events commonly known as “garage sales”,
“tailgate sales”, “flea markets”, “house sales”, “moving sales” and the like shall be defined as
YARD SALES under the provisions of this section.
(B) Licenses. No person or organization shall operate a yard sale within the village without first
obtaining a license therefor. The license for multi-family (three or more families) must be obtained at
least five days prior to the date of the yard sale. Individuals holding single-family yard sales need
only to apply for a license one day prior to the date of the yard sale.
(1) The person desiring a license may obtain the same by making application to the Village
Clerk and providing the following information:
(a) The name of the applicant;
(b) The address of the applicant;
(c) The phone number of the applicant; and
14 Swansea - General Offenses
(d) The duration of the yard sale.
(2) A license issued pursuant to this section shall be valid only for the particular sale and
premises designated on the license. The license shall be posted in the front yard area, visible to the
police from the roadway. Licenses are non-transferable.
(C) License exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to bankruptcy, estate or
other sales under judicial process, licensed and authorized auctions and sales conducted at and by
organizations affiliated with churches, schools, federal, state, city, county and township government
units provided that those organizations are non-profit, religious, civic and/or charitable in nature.
(D) Limitations.
(1) No yard sale shall be conducted for a period greater than three successive calendar
days.
(2) Yard sales shall be conducted only during the periods from 7:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on
the day(s) of the sale.
(3) Yard sales shall be held no more than three times within the same calendar year at the
same location.
(4) Yard sales shall be held no sooner than 30 days subsequent to the close of a previous
yard sale at the same location.
(5) It shall be unlawful for anyone to conduct a retail selling business pursuant to a permit
issued under this section, or to engage in any sales other than those of junk, secondhand, antique or
other used or discarded items of property.
(6) No booths or concession stands shall be placed in the roadway.
(7) Yard sale signs shall be constructed in accordance with § 154.149 of this code of
ordinances. No signs or advertising shall be posted on utility poles or village-owned poles (i.e., stop
signs, speed restriction signs, no parking signs, street signs and the like). Signs must contain the
name and address of the of the license holder along with the license holder’s signature.
(Prior Code, § 13-225) (Ord. 1392, passed 11-16-2001; Ord. 1416, passed 6-6-2005) Penalty, see §
130.99
General Provisions 15
§ 130.37 INSUFFICIENT FUNDS POLICY.
(A) The penalty for providing either a check or authorizing an electronic withdrawal from a
person’s account that is returned to the village due to insufficient funds shall be as follows.
(1) The penalty for the first offense is a $25 fee in addition to any other penalty that may be
assessed in accordance with other rules and regulations of the village.
(2) The penalty for the second offense is a $25 fee in addition to any other penalty that may
be assessed in accordance with other rules and regulations of the village.
(3) The penalty for the third offense is a $25 fee in addition to any other penalty that may
be assessed in accordance with other rules and regulations of the village. In addition, no further
checks or electronic withdrawal transactions will be accepted from the same party who issued the
insufficient fund check or was responsible for the rejection of the electronic withdrawal transaction
due to insufficient funds during the forthcoming year from the date of the initial offense.
(B) Payment will be accepted in the form of cash, a money order or a cashier’s check.
(Prior Code, § 13-226) (Ord. 1383, passed 8-16-2004)
§ 130.38 PRODUCTS CONTAINING CANNABIDIOL.
(A) (1) As tetrahydrocannabinol is illegal in any amount in any product offered for sale not in
conjunction with 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq., any product containing tetrahydrocannabinol is a nuisance
in the village and shall be illegal for sale, marketing, or distribution in the village. Any person or
entity who markets, manufactures, sells, distributes, purchases or possesses any products containing
tetrahydrocannabinol shall be guilty of violating this section. Each individual product shall constitute
a separate violation of this section.
(2) Those individuals who are specifically authorized by the laws of the State of Illinois to
possess, manufacture, distribute, market, sell or purchase products containing tetrahydrocannabinol
are exempt from this section.
(B) The sale of products containing cannabidiol without tetrahydrocannabinol will be permitted
by those who have a license to do so. Those entities and individuals who desire to sell products that
they claim contain cannabidiol without tetrahydrocannabinol shall have the burden of proving that the
product is actually produced from legal portions of the cannabis plant, that the product contains no
amounts of tetrahydrocannabinol, and shall apply with the village for a permit to sell cannabidiol
products.
(Ord. 1796, passed 10-16-2017)
2018 S-1
16 Swansea - General Offenses
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is
prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(B) (1) The first violation of any of the restrictions for shotgun events, as per § 130.27(A) of
this chapter, shall prohibit the operation of such events at the violating site for a period of one year
and subject the site to a fine not exceeding $500. A second violation at the same site of any of the
above restrictions shall permanently prohibit the operation of such events at that site.
(2) Any person violating § 130.27 of this chapter by discharging a firearm or other weapon
other than under the exceptions in either § 130.27(A)(1), (A)(2) or (B) of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine not exceeding $500.
(Prior Code, § 13-214)
(C) Any person or corporation violating any provision of § 130.33 of this chapter shall be fined
$500 and a separate offense shall be deemed committed each and every time fire and police officers
of the village respond to a false alarm made unlawful by § 130.33 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-221)
(D) Any who violates the provisions of § 130.34 of this chapter is subject to the following fines:
(1) One hundred dollars for the first occurrence;
(2) Three hundred dollars for the second occurrence; and
(3) Five hundred dollars for each occurrence thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 13-223)
(E) Any one found guilty of violating any of the provisions of § 130.36 of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $50, or more than $750.
(Prior Code, § 13-225)
(Ord. 1392, passed 11-16-2001; Ord. 1416, passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 1635, passed 2-6-2012; Ord.
1658, passed 8-20-2012; Ord. 1682, passed 7-15-2013; Ord. 1722, passed 4-20-2015)
2018 S-1
CHAPTER 131: SEX OFFENSES
Section
131.01 Nudity in public
131.02 Public indecency
131.03 Obscenity
131.04 Harmful material
131.05 Tie-in sales of obscene publications to distributors
§ 131.01 NUDITY IN PUBLIC.
No person in the village shall appear in any public place in a state of nudity or in an indecent or
lewd dress or shall make any indecent or lewd act or behavior.
(Prior Code, § 13-301) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.02 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
Any person who performs any of the following acts in a public place commits a public
indecency:
(A) An act of sexual intercourse;
(B) An act of deviate sexual conduct;
(C) A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of the
person; or
(D) A lewd fondling caress of the body of another person of either sex.
(Prior Code, § 13-302) Penalty, see § 10.99
17
18 Swansea - General Offenses
§ 131.03 OBSCENITY.
(A) Elements of the offense. A person commits obscenity when, with knowledge of the nature or
content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed
the nature or content thereof, he or she:
(1) Sells, delivers, provides or offers or agrees to sell, deliver or provide any obscene
writing, picture, record or other representation or embodiment of the obscene;
(2) Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or participates directly
in that portion thereof which makes it obscene;
(3) Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything obscene;
(4) Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition of his or her body
for gain;
(5) Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material with intent to
disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction;
or
(6) Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented or held out by him or
her to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
(B) “Obscene” defined. A thing is OBSCENE if, considered as a whole, its predominant appeal
is prurient interest, that is, shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion, and if it goes
substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters. A
thing is OBSCENE even though the obscenity is latent, as in the case of undeveloped photographs.
(C) Interpretation of evidence.
(1) Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary audits; except that, it shall be
judged with reference to children or other especially susceptible audiences if it appears from the
character of the material or the circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or
directed to such an audience.
(2) In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence shall be admissible to
show:
(a) The character of the audience for which the material was designed or to which it
was directed;
(b) What the predominate appeal of the material would be for ordinary adults or a
special audience and what effect, if any, it would probably have on the behavior of such people;
Sex Offenses 19
(c) The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other merits of the material, or the
absence thereof;
(d) The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in the state;
(e) Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising or other promotion of
the material; and
(f) Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or disseminator.
(D) Prima facie evidence. The creation, purchase, procurement or possession of a mold,
engraved plat or other embodiment of obscenity, specially adapted for reproducing multiple copies,
or the possession of more than three copies of obscene material shall be prima facie evidence of an
intent to disseminate.
(Prior Code, § 13-303) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.04 HARMFUL MATERIAL.
(A) Elements of the offense. A person who, with knowledge that a person is a child, that is a
person under 18 years of age, or who fails to exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of
a child, knowingly distributes to or sends or causes to be sent to, or exhibits to or offers to distribute
or exhibit any harmful material to a child, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DISTRIBUTE. To transfer possession of, whether with or without consideration.
HARMFUL. Material is harmful if, to the average person applying contemporary standards,
its predominant appeal, taken as a whole is to prurient interest, that is a shameful or morbid interest
in nudity, sex or excretion, which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in
description or representation of such matters, and is material, the redeeming social importance of
which is substantially less than its prurient appeal.
KNOWINGLY. Having knowledge of the contents of the subject matter, or recklessly
failing to exercise reasonable inspection, which would have disclosed the contents thereof.
MATERIAL. Any writing, picture, record or other representation of embodiment.
20 Swansea - General Offenses
(C) Interpretation of evidence.
(1) The predominant appeal to prurient interest of the material shall be judged with
reference to average children of the same general age of the child to whom such material was
offered, distributed, sent or exhibited, unless it appears from the nature of the matter or the
circumstances of its dissemination, distribution or exhibition, that it is designed for specially
susceptible groups, in which case, the predominant appeal of the material shall be judged with
reference to its intended or probably recipient group.
(2) In prosecutions under this section, where circumstances of production, presentation,
sale, dissemination, distribution or publicity, indicate the material is being commercially exploited
for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is probative with respect to the nature of the
material and can justify the conclusion that the redeeming social importance of the material is, in
fact, substantially less than its prurient appeal.
(D) Affirmative defenses.
(1) Nothing in this section shall prohibit any public library or any library operated by an
accredited institution of higher education from circulating harmful material to any person under 18
years of age; provided, such circulation is in aid of a legitimate scientific or educational purpose, and
it shall be an affirmative defense in any prosecution for a violation of this section that the act charged
was committed in aid of legitimate scientific or educational purposes.
(2) Nothing in this section shall prohibit any parent from distributing to his or her child any
harmful material.
(3) Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown and acted in reliance upon any of the
following documents as proof of the age of a child shall be a defense to any criminal prosecution
under this section: a document issued by the federal government or any state, county or municipal
government, or subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle
operator’s license, registration certificate issued under the Federal Selective Service Act or an
identification card issued to a member of the armed forces.
(4) In the event an advertisement of harmful material, as defined in this section, culminates
in the sale or distribution of such harmful material to a child, under circumstances where there was
no personal confrontation of the child by the defendant, his or her employees or agents, as where the
order or request for such harmful material was transmitted by mail, telephone or similar means of
communication and delivery of such harmful material to the child was by mail, freight or similar
means of transport, it shall be a defense in any prosecution for violation of this section that the
advertisement contained the following statement or a statement substantially similar thereto, and that
the defendant
Sex Offenses 21
required the purchaser to certify that he or she was not under the age of 18 years, and that the
purchaser falsely stated that he was not under the age of 18 years of age:
Notice: It is harmful for any person under the age of 18 years to purchase the matter herein
advertised. Any person under 18 years of age who falsely states that he or she is not under 18 years
of age for the purpose of obtaining the material advertised herein, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(E) Child falsifying age. Any person under 18 years of age who falsely states, either orally or in
writing that he or she is not under the age of 18 years, or who presents or offers to any person any
evidence of age and identity which is false of not actually his or her own for the purpose of ordering,
obtaining, viewing or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any harmful material is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 13-304) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.05 TIE-IN SALES OF OBSCENE PUBLICATIONS TO DISTRIBUTORS.
Any person, firm or corporation, or any agent, officer or employee thereof, engaged in the
business of distributing books, magazines, periodicals, comic books or other publications to retail
dealers, who shall refuse to furnish to any retail dealer such quantity of books, magazines,
periodicals, comic books or other publications as such retail dealer normally sells because the retail
dealer refuses to sell, or offer for sale, any books, magazines, periodicals, comic books or other
publications which are obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent is guilty of an offense. Each
publication sold or delivered in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 13-305) Penalty, see § 10.99
22 Swansea - General Offenses
CHAPTER 132: BODILY HARM
Section
132.01 Assault
132.02 Aggravated assault
132.03 Battery
132.04 Criminal housing management
132.05 Tattooing body of minor
§ 132.01 ASSAULT.
A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he or she engages in conduct which
places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. It shall be unlawful to commit an
assault.
(Prior Code, § 13-401) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/12-1
§ 132.02 AGGRAVATED ASSAULT.
A person commits an aggravated assault when, in committing an assault, he or she:
(A) Uses a deadly weapon;
(B) Is hooded, robed or masked in such a manner to conceal his or her identity;
(C) Knows the individual assaulted to be a teacher or other person employed in any school and
such teacher or other employee is upon the grounds of a school or grounds adjacent thereto, or is in
any part of a building used for school purposes;
(D) Knows the individual assaulted to be a supervisor, director, instructor or other person
employed in any park district and such supervisor, director, instructor or other employee is upon the
grounds of the park or grounds adjacent thereto, or is in any part of a building used for park
purposes;
23
24 Swansea - General Offenses
(E) Knows the individual assaulted to be a caseworker, investigator or other person employed
by the State Department of Public Aid or a County Department of Public Aid and such caseworker,
investigator, or other person is upon the grounds of a public aid office or grounds adjacent thereto,
or is in any part of a building used for public aid purposes, or upon the grounds of a home of a
public aid applicant, recipient or any other person being interviewed or investigated in the
employee’s discharge of his or her duties, or on grounds adjacent thereto, or is in any part of the
building in which the applicant, recipient or other such person resides or is located;
(F) Knows the individual assaulted to be a peace officer, or a person summoned and directed by
him or her or a correctional officer, while such officer is engaged in the execution of any of his or
her official duties;
(G) Knows the individual assaulted to be a firefighter engaged in the execution of any of his or
her official duties;
(H) Knows the individual assaulted to be the driver, operator, employee or passenger of any
transportation facility or system engaged in the business of transportation of the public for hire and
the individual assaulted is then performing in such capacity or then using such public transportation
as a passenger or using any area of any designated by the transportation facility or system as a
vehicle boarding, departure or transfer location;
(I) Or the individual assaulted is on or about a public way, public property or public place of
accommodation or amusement; or
(J) Knows the individual assaulted to be an employee of the state, a municipal corporation,
therein or a political subdivision thereof, engaged in the performance of his or her authorized duties
as such employee.
(Prior Code, § 13-402) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.03 BATTERY.
(A) A person commits battery if he or she intentionally or knowingly, without legal justifications
and by any means:
(1) Causes bodily harm to an individual; or
(2) Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual.
(B) It shall be unlawful to commit a battery.
(Prior Code, § 13-403) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/12-3
Bodily Harm 25
§ 132.04 CRIMINAL HOUSING MANAGEMENT.
A person commits the offense of criminal housing management when, having personal
management or control of residential real estate, whether as a legal or equitable owner of residential
real estate or as a managing agent or otherwise, he or she knowingly permits, by his or her gross
carelessness or neglect, the physical condition or facilities of the residential real estate to become or
remain so deteriorated that the health or safety of any inhabitant is endangered.
(Prior Code, § 13-404) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.05 TATTOOING BODY OF MINOR.
Any person, other than a person licensed to practice medicine in all its branches, who tattoos or
offers to tattoo a person under the age of 18 years is guilty of an offense. As used in this section, TO
TATTOO means to insert pigment under the surface of the skin of a human being, by pricking with a
needle or otherwise, so as to produce an indelible mark of figure visible through the skin.
(Prior Code, § 13-405) Penalty, see § 10.99
26 Swansea - General Offenses
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
133.01 Theft
133.02 Theft of labor services
133.03 Deceptive altering or sale of coins
133.04 Criminal damage to property
133.05 Criminal damage to firefighting apparatus, hydrants or equipment
133.06 Criminal trespass to land
§ 133.01 THEFT.
(A) A person commits a petty theft when the value of the property is under $300 and he or she
knowingly:
(1) Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner;
(2) Obtains by deception, control over property of the owner;
(3) Obtains by threat, control over property of the owner; or
(4) Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been stolen by
another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him or her to believe that the
property was stolen; and:
(a) Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property;
(b) Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as to deprive
the owner permanently of such use or benefit; and/or
(c) Uses, conceals or abandons the property, knowing such use, concealment or
abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit.
(B) It shall be unlawful to commit a petty theft.
(Prior Code, § 13-501) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/16-1
27
28 Swansea - General Offenses
§ 133.02 THEFT OF LABOR SERVICES.
(A) A person commits theft when he or she obtains the temporary use of property, labor or
services of another which are available only for hire, by means of threat or deception or knowing
that such use is without the consent of the person providing the property, labor or services.
(B) A person commits theft when, after renting or leasing a motor vehicle under an agreement
in writing, which provides for the return of the vehicle to a particular place at a particular time, he or
she fails to return the vehicle to the place within the time specified, and is thereafter served with a
written demand, or upon whom oral demand is thereafter personally made to return the vehicle
within 72 hours from the time of the service or personal communication of such demand, and who
fails to return the vehicle to any place of business of the lesser within the period, shall be punishable
accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 13-502) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/16-3
§ 133.03 DECEPTIVE ALTERING OR SALE OF COINS.
(A) A person commits a deceptive altering of coins when he or she, in any manner, alters any
coin to increase the value of the coin to coin collectors.
(B) A person commits a deceptive sale of coins when he or she sells or advertises for sale any
coin he or she knows has been deceptively altered for a higher rate of value than is indicated by the
denomination of the coin.
(Prior Code, § 13-503) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 133.04 CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
Any of the following acts shall be a misdemeanor:
(A) Knowingly damages any property of another without his or her consent;
(B) Recklessly by means of fire or explosive, damages property of another;
(C) Knowingly starts a fire on the land of another without his or her consent;
(D) Knowingly injures a domestic animal of another without his or her consent;
(E) Knowingly deposits on the land or in the building of another, without his or her consent,
any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby intends to interfere with the use by
another of the land or building; and/or
Offenses Against Property 29
(F) Knowingly damages the property of another by defacing, deforming or otherwise damaging
such property by use of paint or any other similar substance.
(Prior Code, § 13-504) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/21-1
§ 133.05 CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO FIREFIGHTING APPARATUS, HYDRANTS OR
EQUIPMENT.
No person shall willfully and maliciously cut, injure, damage, tamper with or destroy or deface
any fire hydrant or any fire hose or any fire engine, or other public or private firefighting equipment,
or any apparatus appertaining to such equipment, or intentionally open any fire hydrant without
proper authorization.
(Prior Code, § 13-505) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/21-1.01
§ 133.06 CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO LAND.
(A) Whoever enters upon the land or any part thereof of another after receiving, immediately
prior to such entry, notice from the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden, or remains upon
the land of another after receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart, commits a
misdemeanor.
(B) A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the meaning of division (A)
above if he or she has been notified personally, either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written
notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such
land or the forbidden part thereon.
(C) This section does not apply to any person, whether a migrant worker or otherwise, living on
the land with permission of the owner or of his or her agent having apparent authority to hire
workers on the land and assigned them living quarters or a place of accommodation for living
thereon, nor to anyone living on the land at the request of, or by occupancy, leasing or other
agreement or arrangement with the owner of his or her agent, nor to anyone invited by such migrant
worker or other person living on such land to visit him or her at the place he or she is so living upon
the land.
(Prior Code, § 13-506) Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
Trespass, see Ch. 136
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/21-3
30 Swansea - General Offenses
CHAPTER 134: PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND DECENCY
Section
Weapons and Firearms
134.01 Unlawful use of weapons
134.02 Unlawful sale of firearms
134.03 Register of sales by dealer
134.04 Defacing identification marks of firearms
General Regulations
134.15 Mob action
134.16 Disorderly conduct; elements of the offense
134.17 Harassment by telephone
134.18 Gambling
134.19 Resisting or obstructing a peace officer
134.20 Refusing to aid an officer
134.21 Assembling at public places and restaurants
WEAPONS AND FIREARMS
§ 134.01 UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS.
Except as otherwise authorized by the Firearm Concealed Carry Act, 430 ILCS 66/1 et seq.:
(A) A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons when he or she knowingly:
(1) Sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses or carries any bludgeon, black-jack, slingshot,
sand-club, sand-bag, metal knuckles or any knife, commonly referred to as a switchblade knife,
which has a blade that opens automatically, by hand pressure applied to a button spring, or other
device in handle of the knife; or
31
32 Swansea - General Offenses
(2) Carries or possesses with intent to use the same unlawfully against another, a dagger,
billy, dangerous knife, dirk, razor, stiletto, broken bottle, other piece of glass or any other dangerous
or deadly weapon or instrument of like character;
(3) Carries on or about his or her person or in any vehicle, a tear gas gun projector or
bomb or any object containing noxious liquid gas or substance;
(4) Carries, concealed in any vehicle or concealed on or about his or her person, except
when his or her land or in his or her own abode or fixed place of business, any pistol, revolver or
other firearm;
(5) Sets a spring gun;
(6) Possesses any device or attachment of any kind designed, used or intended for use in
silencing the report of any firearm;
(7) Carries or possesses any firearm or other deadly weapon in any place which is licensed
to sell intoxicating beverages, or at any public gathering held pursuant to a license issued by any
governmental body or any public gathering at which an admission is charged, excluding a place
where exhibition of unloaded firearms is conducted; or
(8) Carries or possesses in a vehicle or on or about his or her person within the corporate
limits of a city, village or incorporated town, except when on his or her land or in his or her own
abode, or fixed place of business, any loaded pistol, revolver or other firearm.
(B) The presence in an automobile other than a public omnibus of any weapon, instrument or
substance referred to in this section is prima facie evidence that it is in the possession of, and is being
carried by all persons occupying such automobile at the time such weapon, instrument or substance is
found, except under the following circumstances:
(1) If such weapon, instrument or instrumentality is found upon the person of one of the
occupants therein; or
(2) If such weapon, instrument or substance is found in an automobile operated for hire by
a duly-licensed driver in the due, lawful and proper pursuit of his or her trade, then such
presumption shall not apply to the driver.
(Prior Code, § 13-601) Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
Concealed weapons, see § 130.26
Discharging firearms or other weapons in village; exceptions, see § 130.27
Public Health, Safety and Decency 33
§ 134.02 UNLAWFUL SALE OF FIREARMS.
A person commits the offense of unlawful sale of firearms when he or she knowingly:
(A) Sells or gives any firearm of a size which may be concealed upon the person to any person
under the age of 18 years;
(B) Sells or gives any firearm to a person under 21 years of age who has been convicted of a
misdemeanor, other than a traffic offense, or adjudged delinquent;
(C) Sells or gives any firearm to any narcotic addict;
(D) Sells or gives any firearm to any person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws
of this or any other jurisdiction within five years from release from the penitentiary or within five
years of conviction if penitentiary sentence has not been imposed;
(E) Sells or gives any firearm to any person who has been a patient in a mental hospital within
the past five years;
(F) Sells or gives any firearms to any person who is mentally retarded; or
(G) Delivers any firearm of a size which may be concealed upon the person, incidental to a sale,
without withholding delivery of such firearm for at least 72 hours after application for its purchase
has been made, or delivers any rifle, shotgun or other long gun, incidental to sale, without
withholding delivery of such rifle, shotgun or other long gun for at least 24 hours after application
for its purchase has been made. However, this division (G) shall not apply to:
(1) The sale of a firearm to a law enforcement officer or a person who desires to purchase a
firearm for use in promoting the public interest incident to his or her employment as a bank guard,
armed truck guard or other similar employment;
(2) A mail order sale of a firearm to a non-resident of the state under which the firearm is
mailed to a point outside the boundaries of the state;
(3) The sale of a firearm to a non-resident of the state while at a firearm showing or display
recognized by the State Department of Law Enforcement; or
(4) The sale of a firearm to a dealer licensed under the Federal Firearms Act of the United
States.
(Prior Code, § 13-602) Penalty, see § 10.99
34 Swansea - General Offenses
§ 134.03 REGISTER OF SALES BY DEALER.
(A) Any seller of firearms of a size which may be concealed upon the person, other than a
manufacturer selling a bona fide wholesaler or retailer or a wholesaler selling to a bona fide retailer,
shall keep a register of all firearms sold or given away.
(B) Such register shall contain the date of the sale or the gift, the name, address, age and
occupation of the person to whom the weapon is sold or given, the price of the weapon, the kind,
description and number of the weapon, and the purpose for which it was purchased and obtained.
(C) Such seller, in demand of a peace officer, shall produce for inspection, the register and
allow such peace officer to inspect such register and all stock on hand.
(Prior Code, § 13-603) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/24-4
§ 134.04 DEFACING IDENTIFICATION MARKS OF FIREARMS.
(A) Any person who shall change, alter, remove or obliterate the name of the maker, model,
manufacturer’s number or other mark of identification of any firearm commits a misdemeanor.
(B) Possession of any firearm upon which any such mark shall have been changed, altered,
removed or obliterated shall be prima facie evidence that the possessor has changed, altered,
removed or obliterated the same.
(Prior Code, § 13-604) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/24-4
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 134.15 MOB ACTION.
(A) Mob action consists of any of the following;
(1) The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace by two or more persons acting
together and without authority of law;
(2) The assembly of two or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
Public Health, Safety and Decency 35
(3) The assembly of two or more persons without authority of law, for the purpose of doing
violence to the person or property of anyone supposed to have been guilty of a violation of the law or
for the purpose of exercising correctional powers or regulative powers over any person by violence.
(B) Any participant in a mob action who does not withdraw on being commanded to do so by
any peace officer commits a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 13-605) Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
Disorderly the peace and assemblies, see §§ 130.17, 130.18, 130.20
Disorderly conduct, see § 134.16
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/25-1
§ 134.16 DISORDERLY CONDUCT; ELEMENTS OF THE OFFENSE.
A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she knowingly:
(A) Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a
breach of the peace;
(B) With intent to annoy another, makes a telephone call, whether or not conversation thereby
ensues;
(C) Transmits in any manner to the Fire Department of any city, town and village or fire
protection district a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no
reasonable ground for believing that such fire exists;
(D) Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other
explosive of any nature is concealed in such a place that is explosion would endanger human life,
knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such
bomb or explosive is concealed in such a place;
(E) Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public employee a report to
the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is
no reasonable ground for believing that such an offense has been committed; and/or
36 Swansea - General Offenses
(F) Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose, deliberately looks
into a dwelling on the property through any window or other opening in it.
(Prior Code, § 13-606) Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
Disorderly the peace and assemblies, see §§ 130.17, 130.18, 130.20
Mob action, see § 134.15
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 65 ILCS5/11-5-3 and 720 ILCS 5/26-1
§ 134.17 HARASSMENT BY TELEPHONE.
Harassment by telephone is use of a telephone communication for any of the following purposes:
(A) Making any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is obscene, lewd, lascivious,
filthy or indecent with an intent to offend;
(B) Making a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, with intent to abuse, threaten
or harass any person at the called number;
(C) Making or causing the telephone of another repeatedly to ring, with intent to harass any
person at the called number;
(D) Making repeated telephone calls, during which conversation ensues, solely to harass any
person at the called number; or
(E) Knowingly permitting any telephone under one’s control to be used for any of the purposes
mentioned herein.
(Prior Code, § 13-607) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.18 GAMBLING.
(A) A person commits gambling when he or she:
(1) Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing of value, unless excepted in
this Code;
(2) Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or any political nomination,
appointment or election;
(3) Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells, bargains for the sale or
lease of, manufactures or distributes any gambling device;
Public Health, Safety and Decency 37
(4) Contracts to have or give himself or another the operation to buy or sell, or contracts to
buy or sell at a future time, any grain or other commodity whatsoever, or any stock or security of
any company, where it is, at the time of making such contract, intended by both parties thereto that
the contract to buy or sell, or the option, whenever exercised, or the contract resulting there from,
shall be settled, not by the receipt or delivery of such property, but by the payment only of
differences in prices thereof; however, the issuance, purchase, sale, exercise, endorsement or
guarantee, by or through a person registered with the Secretary of State, pursuant to 815 ILCS 5/8 or
by or through a person exempt from such registration under 815 ILCS 5/8, of a put, call or other
option to buy or sell securities which have been registered with the Secretary of State, or which are
exempt from such registration under 815 ILCS 5/8 is not gambling within the meaning of this
paragraph;
(5) Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument or apparatus by means of which
bets or wages have been or are recorded or registered, or knowingly possesses any money which he
has received in the course of a bet or wager;
(6) Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of skill or chance, political
nomination, appointment or election;
(7) Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell or transfers any ticket or share for
any lottery;
(8) Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell or knowingly possesses or
transfers any policy ticket, slip, record, document or other similar device; or
(9) Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game or drafts, prints or publishes any
lottery ticket or share, or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or similar device, or any
advertisement of any lottery or policy game;
(10) Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds, or chances in betting odds
by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore, or similar means; or knowingly installs or maintains
equipment for the transmission or receipt of such information; except that nothing in this subsection
prohibits transmission or receipt of such information for use in news reporting of sporting events of
contests.
(B) Participants in any of the following activities shall not be considered to have committed the
offense of gambling:
(1) The game commonly known as "Bingo" when conducted by certain non-profit
organizations holding a license and prescribing to the provisions of the 230 ILCS 25/1.
(2) Raffles when conducted in accordance with Ch. 14 of this Municipal Code and any and
all provisions of 230 ILCS 15/2.
(3) Placement and use of a video gaming terminal, if done in accordance with the 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq. as currently enacted and hereinafter amended.
38 Swansea - General Offenses
(4) Lotteries conducted in accordance with the Illinois Lottery Law, 20 ILCS 1605/1 et.
seq.
(C) There is hereby established a $25 annual fee for the operation of each video gaming terminal
located in the village pursuant to the provisions of the act.
(D) The annual video gaming terminal fee, as established hereby, shall be paid to The village on
or before the initial date of terminal operation, and for terminals then in operation, on, or before,
April 30 of each year thereafter. The annual video gaming terminal fee shall not be prorated for
periods of less than 12 months.
(Ord. 1723, passed 6-15-2015)
§ 134.19 RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER.
A person knowingly resists or obstructs the performance of one known to the person to be a
peace officer of any authorized act within his or her official capacity commits an offense.
(Prior Code, § 13-609) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/31-8
§ 134.20 REFUSING TO AID AN OFFICER.
Whoever, upon command, refuses or knowingly fails reasonably to aid a person known by him
or her to be a peace officer in the following commits a misdemeanor:
(A) Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to apprehend; or
(B) Preventing the commission by another of any offense.
(Prior Code, § 13-610) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/31-8
§ 134.21 ASSEMBLING AT PUBLIC PLACES AND RESTAURANTS.
(A) Drive-in restaurant. A DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT, within the meaning of this section, shall
be deemed to be any restaurant where meals, sandwiches, cold drinks, beverages, ice cream or other
food or drink is served directly to or is permitted to be consumed by patrons in or upon automobiles,
motorcycles or other vehicles parked on the premises.
Public Health, Safety and Decency 39
(B) Declared public place. For the purpose of preserving public peace, health and safety, the
entire premises occupied by a drive-in restaurant, together with means of ingress or egress, are
hereby declared to be a public place.
(1) No person on the premises of a drive-in restaurant shall race the motor of any motor
vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop any motor vehicle, blow any horn of any motor
vehicle or cause to be made any loud or unseemly noise, nuisance or disturbance whereby the quiet
and good order of the premises or the neighborhood are distributed.
(2) The following acts or conduct of any persons entering a drive-in restaurant or premises
are hereby declared to be unlawful, and any person found guilty of any such acts shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor:
(a) Entering the premises of any drive-in restaurant with any motor vehicle of any
description and parking such vehicle and leaving the premises (thereby leaving such vehicle parked
and unoccupied) without express consent of the owner or operator of such restaurant in which event,
such motor vehicle shall be subject to a parking citation or may be impounded subject to a parking
citation or may be impounded subject to the usual impounding charges;
(b) Entering the premises in or upon a motor vehicle and using said premises for
cruising, racing, as a shortcut to another street or to annoy or endanger any person or persons or
other vehicle or vehicles lawfully on said premises;
(c) For three or more persons to congregate on premises and linger or loiter at any
location on the premises of any location on the premises of a drive-in restaurant, other than in the
restaurant building or in a legally parked motor vehicle; and/or
(d) For any person who, while on the premises of any drive-in restaurant, in the
presence of hearing of another, to curse or abuse such person or use any violently abusive language
under circumstances reasonable calculated to provoke a breach of the peace.
(C) Posting sign. It shall be the duty of the restaurant operator to post on the premises in a
conspicuous location, one or more signs bearing the following legend in letters at least two or more
inches high and readable:
Cruising in or congregating and loitering outside a motor vehicle is unlawful no unoccupied vehicles
may be left on the restaurant premises without the consent of the restaurant owner.
(Prior Code, § 13-611)
40 Swansea - General Offenses
CHAPTER 135: LITTER
Section
135.01 Definitions
135.02 Littering prohibited
135.03 Prevention of scattering
135.04 Upsetting or tampering with receptacles
135.05 Sidewalks and alleys to be kept free from litter
135.06 Owner to maintain private premises
135.07 Littering from vehicles
135.08 Littering from aircraft
135.09 Litter in parks
135.10 Handbills
135.11 Posting notices prohibited
135.12 Construction sites
135.13 Loading and unloading docks
135.14 Parking lots
135.15 Clearing of litter from open private property by village
135.16 Enforcement
§ 135.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
AIRCRAFT.
(1) Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for navigation or
for flight in the air.
(2) The word AIRCRAFT shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air powered craft and
balloons.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A container of water-tight construction with a tight
fitting lid or cover capable of preventing the escape of contents within. Such RECEPTACLES shall
have
41
42 Swansea - General Offenses
handles or other means for safe and convenient handling and be of such size or sufficient capacity to
hold all litter generated between collection periods and shall be in compliance with the regulations
promulgated.
CONSTRUCTION SITES. Any private or public property upon which repairs to existing
buildings, construction of new buildings or demolition of existing structures is taking place.
HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet,
pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed matter of literature which is not delivered by U.S.
mail, including, but not limited to, those which:
(1) Advertise for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
(2) Direct attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or other
activity for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
(3) Direct attention to or advertise any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event
of any kind for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit.
LITTER. Garbage, refuse and rubbish, grass clippings, vegetative materials and all other waste
material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health,
safety and welfare.
LOADING AND UNLOADING DOCK. Any dock space or area used by any moving vehicle for
the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares, commodities and persons located
on or adjacent to any stream, river or and.
PRIVATE PREMISES. All property including, but not limited to, vacant land or any land,
building or other structure designed or used for residential, commercial, business, industrial,
institutional or religious purposes, together with any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, fence, porch,
steps, vestibule, mailbox and other structure appurtenant thereto.
PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways, lakes,
rivers, watercourses or fountains and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
PUBLIC RECEPTACLES. Any receptacles provided by or authorized by the village.
VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported
or drawn upon land or water, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Prior Code, § 13-701) (Ord. 1625, passed 9-6-2011)
Litter 43
§ 135.02 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
No person shall deposit any litter within the village, except in public receptacles, in authorized
private receptacles for collection or in any duly-licensed disposal facility.
(Prior Code, § 13-702) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 135.03 PREVENTION OF SCATTERING.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such
a manner as to prevent litter from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place
or private premises.
(Prior Code, § 13-703) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 135.04 UPSETTING OR TAMPERING WITH RECEPTACLES.
No person shall upset or tamper with a public or private receptacle designed or used for the
deposit of litter or cause or permit its contents to be deposited or strewn in or upon any public place
or private premises.
(Prior Code, § 13-704) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 135.05 SIDEWALKS AND ALLEYS TO BE KEPT FREE FROM LITTER.
Persons owning, occupying or in control of public place or private premises shall keep the
sidewalks and alleys adjacent thereto free of litter.
(Prior Code, § 13-705) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 135.06 OWNER TO MAINTAIN PRIVATE PREMISES.
(A) The owner or person in control of any private premises shall at all times maintain the
premises free of litter.
(B) The owner or person in control of private premises shall, if public receptacles are
unavailable, maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place or private premises.
(Prior Code, § 13-706) Penalty, see § 10.99
44 Swansea - General Offenses
§ 135.07 LITTERING FROM VEHICLES.
(A) No person, while the operator of or passenger in a vehicle, shall deposit litter upon any
public place or private premises.
(B) No person shall drive or move any loaded or partly-loaded truck or other vehicle within the
village unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any part of its load, contents or
litter from being blown or deposited upon any public place or private premises. Nor shall any person
drive or move any vehicle or truck within the village, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or
deposit in any public place or private premises, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter
of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 13-707) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 135.08 LITTERING FROM AIRCRAFT.
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the village any litter.
(Prior Code, § 13-708) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 135.09 LITTER IN PARKS.
No person shall deposit litter in any park within the village, except in receptacles and in such a
manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
part of the park or upon any other public place or private premises. Where receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be removed from the park by the person responsible for its presence
and properly disposed of elsewhere in a lawful manner.
(Prior Code, § 13-709) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 135.10 HANDBILLS.
(A) Public places. No person shall deposit or sell any handbill in or upon any public places;
provided, however, that, it shall not be unlawful on any public place for any person to hand out or
distribute without charge to the receiver, any handbill to any person willing to accept it.
(B) Private premises.
(1) General. No person shall deposit or unlawfully distribute any handbill in or upon
private premises, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the occupant of such
private premises; provided, however, that, in case of private premises which are not posted against
the receiving of handbills or similar material, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such
premises not to do so, may securely place any such handbill in such a manner as to prevent such
handbill from being deposited by the elements upon any public place or other private premises,
except mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
Litter 45
(2) Exemptions for newspapers and political literature. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to the distribution upon private premises only of newspapers or political literature; except
that, newspapers and political literature shall be placed in such a manner as to prevent their being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place or other private premises.
(C) Placing handbills on vehicles. No person shall deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle
unless the occupant of a vehicle is willing to accept it.
(D) Cleanup. It shall be the responsibility of any person distributing handbills to maintain the
area which he or she is utilizing free of any litter caused by or related to said handbill distribution.
(Prior Code, § 13-710) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 135.11 POSTING NOTICES PROHIBITED.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the
attention of the public upon any public place, except as may be authorized or required by law. No
person, except the owner or tenant, shall post any such notice on private property, without the
permission of the owner or tenant.
(Prior Code, § 13-711) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 135.12 CONSTRUCTION SITES.
(A) Each contractor shall be responsible for the job site so that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place or other private premises.
(B) Litter or other debris, including dirt and mud, deposited as the result of normal construction
process upon any public place or private premises shall be removed by the contractor by 5:00 p.m.
each day.
(C) In the event that the litter or other debris, including dirt and mud, is not removed as stated
above, the village shall arrange for the cleaning of such litter or other debris, including dirt and mud,
and the cost of such action shall be recovered from the owner or owners of such real estate.
(D) Charges for such cleaning and/or removal, including equipment usage and attorney’s fees
and costs, if any, shall be a lien upon the premises.
(E) A bill representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service shall be
presented to the owner.
(F) If this bill is not paid within 30 days of submission of the bill, a notice of lien for the cost
and expenses incurred by the village shall be recorded in the following manner:
(1) A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof;
46 Swansea - General Offenses
(2) The amount of money representing the costs and expenses incurred or payable for the
services;
(3) The date or dates when said costs and expenses were incurred by the village; and
(4) Said lien shall be filed within 60 days after expenditure.
(Prior Code, § 13-712) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 135.13 LOADING AND UNLOADING DOCKS.
The person owning, operating or in control of a loading or unloading dock shall maintain private
receptacles for collection of litter, and shall at all times, maintain the dock area free of litter in such a
manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public
place or other private premises.
(Prior Code, § 13-713) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 135.14 PARKING LOTS.
(A) Litter receptacles required. Any public place or private premises containing any provision
for parking vehicles shall be equipped with litter receptacles in compliance with this section. Such
premises shall include, but not be limited to, such places as shopping centers, outdoor theaters,
drive-in restaurants, gasoline service stations, apartment developments, parking lots and any other
place where provision is made for vehicles to stop or park in a designated area for any purpose.
(B) Number of receptacles. All premises having parking lots shall provide, in an easily
accessible location, a minimum of one refuse container for every 50 parking spaces.
(C) Specifications. Litter receptacles shall have tight-fitting lids or tops and shall be weighted or
attached to the ground or other fixed structures as necessary to prevent spillage. A minimum
container size of 20 gallons or 75.7 liters shall be used.
(D) Cleanliness. Premises used for the purpose designated herein shall be kept in a litter-free
condition and all litter shall be removed periodically from the receptacles.
(E) Obligation to use receptacles. It shall be the duty and obligation of all persons using parking
areas to use such litter receptacles as herein above provided for the purposes intended, and it shall be
unlawful for any person or persons to deposit upon any such parking lot any litter.
(Prior Code, § 13-714) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 135.15 CLEARING OF LITTER FROM OPEN PRIVATE PROPERTY BY VILLAGE.
The procedure for the removal of litter from private premises and the charging of expense
thereof
Litter 47
as a lien upon such property to be collected shall be in accordance with the state statutes. The Street
Supervisor and the Police Chief shall be responsible for the implementation of this enforcement
program.
(Prior Code, § 13-715)
§ 135.16 ENFORCEMENT.
The Chief of Police and the Code Administrator are authorized and empowered to administer
and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1625, passed 9-6-2011)
48 Swansea - General Offenses
CHAPTER 136: TRESPASS
Section
136.01 Trespasses prohibited
136.02 Specifically enumerated trespasses; suppression
Cross-reference:
Criminal trespass to land, see § 133.06
§ 136.01 TRESPASSES PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to commit a trespass within the village
upon either public or private property.
(Prior Code, § 13-801) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 136.02 SPECIFICALLY ENUMERATED TRESPASSES; SUPPRESSION.
Without constituting any limitation upon the provisions of § 136.01 of this chapter, any of the
following acts by any person, firm or corporation shall be deemed included among those that
constitute trespasses in violation of the provisions of § 136.01 of this chapter, and appropriate action
may be taken hereunder at any time, or from time to time, to prevent or suppress any violation or
violations of this section, the aforesaid enumerated acts so included, being as follows, to-wit:
(A) An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another, including any public property,
in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to the premises or at any point of
approach or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing, by any
owner occupant thereof;
(B) The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making of an entry upon the
land of another in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to the premises or at
any point of approach or entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in
writing by any owner or occupant thereof;
(C) A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case of being requested, either
orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or occupant thereof; or
49
50 Swansea - General Offenses
(D) Any entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made without the consent of the
person having the right to leave any such vehicle, aircraft or watercraft after being requested to leave
by the person having such right.
(Prior Code, § 13-802) Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 137: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
Section
137.01 Definitions
137.02 Parents and guardians responsible for acts
§ 137.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ACTS OF VANDALISM AND SIMILAR OFFENSE. Any of the following acts:
(1) Maliciously, recklessly, negligently or knowingly damaging or destroying or defacing
any property within the village, whether such property is owned by the state, county, village or
governmental body or owned by any private person, firm, partnership or association;
(2) Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly, by means of fire or explosive device, damaging,
debasing or destroying any property of another person;
(3) Maliciously, recklessly, negligently or knowingly starting a fire on land of another
person without his or her consent;
(4) Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly depositing on the land or in the building of
another person, without his or her consent, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and
thereby interfering with the use and occupancy of another of the land or building; or
(5) Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly, and without authority, entering into or obtaining
control over any building, house, trailer, motor vehicle, aircraft or watercraft or any part thereof, of
another person without his or her consent.
LEGAL GUARDIAN. A foster parent, a person appointed guardian of a person or given custody
of a minor by a Circuit Court of the state, but does not include a person appointed guardian only to
the estate of a minor, or appointed guardian, or even given custody of a minor under the State
Juvenile Court Act.
51
52 Swansea - General Offenses
MINOR. A person who is above the age of 11 years, but not yet 19 years of age.
PARENT. The lawful father and mother of a minor child, whether by birth or adoption.
PROPERTY. Any real estate including improvements thereon, and tangible personal property.
(Prior Code, § 13-901)
§ 137.02 PARENTS AND GUARDIANS RESPONSIBLE FOR ACTS.
The parent or legal guardian of an un-emancipated minor residing with such parent or legal
guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to exercise
proper parental responsibility and said minor shall be deemed to have committed the acts described
above with the knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian, in violation of this section, upon
the occurrence of the events described in divisions (A), (B) and (C) below:
(A) An un-emancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian shall either be
adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts
causing injury to a person or property, or shall have incurred non-judicial sanctions from another
official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of a violation of any ordinance, law or statute
prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property;
(B) Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice thereof, either by certified
or registered mail, return receipt required, or by personal service, with a certificate of personal
service returned from the Police Department of the village, following said adjudication or nonjudicial
sanctions; and
(C) If, at any time within one year following receipt of notice set forth in division (B) above,
said minor is either adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described in
division (A) above, or shall have incurred non-judicial sanctions from another official agency
resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described in
division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 13-902)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
150. BUILDING CODE; REGULATIONS
151. MANUFACTURED HOMES
152. FLOODPLAINS
153. SUBDIVISION CODE
154. ZONING CODE
1
2 Swansea - Land Usage
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODE; REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
150.001 Code Administrator; administration and enforcement; appointment and term of office;
compensation; duties and responsibilities
150.002 Inspection of existing commercial property
150.003 Inspection and permit fees
150.004 Table of fees
150.005 Board of Building Appeals
150.006 Owner, agent of owner defined
150.007 Nuisance conditions
150.008 Registration of owners
150.009 Notice of nuisance conditions
Building Regulations
150.020 Adoption of Building Code
150.021 Building Code; additions, insertions and changes
150.022 Adoption of Residential Building Code
150.023 Residential Building Code; additions, insertions and changes
150.024 Compliance with the Code
150.025 Applications, licenses and permits
150.026 Inspections and certificates of occupancy
Demolition Regulations
150.030 Permit required
150.031 Fee required
150.032 Procedure
150.033 Conditions of demolition
3
2018 S-1
4 Swansea - Land Usage
Electrical Regulations
150.040 Adoption of Code
150.041 General exceptions
150.042 Additional regulations, manufactured homes
150.043 Compliance with the Code
150.044 Applications, licenses and permits
150.045 Inspections and certificates of approval
150.046 Annual and semiannual inspections
Mechanical Regulations
150.060 Adoption of Mechanical Code
150.061 Mechanical Code; additions, insertions and changes
150.062 Adoption of Fuel Gas Code
150.063 Fuel Gas Code; additions, insertions and changes
150.064 Compliance with the Code
150.065 Applications, licenses and permits
150.066 Inspections and certificates of occupancy
Plumbing Regulations
150.080 Definitions
150.081 Adoption of Code
150.082 Conformity to state license statute required
150.083 Administrative authority
150.084 Office of Plumbing Inspector
150.085 Plumbing permits
150.086 Inspections, defective work, re-inspection
150.087 Requirement of bond
150.088 Violations
150.089 Sump pumps
150.090 Adoption of the Existing Building Code
150.091 Existing Building Code; additions, insertions and changes
Fire Code Regulations
150.105 Adoption of the International Fire Code
150.106 Additions, insertions and changes
150.107 Compliance with Code
150.108 Additional inspections and fees
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 4A
Property Maintenance Code
Scope and Administration
150.120 General
150.121 Applicability
150.122 [Reserved]
150.123 Department of Property Maintenance Inspection
150.124 Duties and powers of the code official
150.125 Approval
150.126 Violations
150.127 Notices and orders
150.128 Unsafe structure and equipment
150.129 Emergency measures
150.130 Demolition
150.131 Means of appeal
150.132 Stop work order
Definitions
150.133 General
150.134 Definitions
General Requirements
150.135 General
150.136 Exterior property areas
150.137 Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs
150.138 Exterior structure
150.139 Interior structure
150.140 Component serviceability
150.141 Handrails and guardrails
150.142 Rubbish and garbage
150.143 Pest elimination
150.144 [Reserved]
Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations
150.145 General
150.146 Light
150.147 Ventilation
150.148 Occupancy limitations
2018 S-1
4B Swansea - Land Usage
Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements
150.149 General
150.150 Required facilities
150.151 Toilet rooms
150.152 Plumbing systems and fixtures
150.153 Water system
150.154 Sanitary drainage system
150.155 Storm drainage
Mechanical and Electrical Requirements
150.156 General
150.157 Heating facilities
150.158 Mechanical equipment
150.159 Electrical facilities
150.160 Electrical equipment
150.161 Dust systems
Fire Safety Requirements
150.162 General
150.163 Means of egress
150.164 Fire-resistance ratings
150.165 Fire protection systems
150.166 Lien
150.167 Payment
150.168 Foreclosure of lien
150.999 Penalty
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 5
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 CODE ADMINISTRATOR; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT;
APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION; DUTIES AND
RESPONSIBILITIES.
(A) General.
(1) The Code Administrator, established under § 32.07 of this code of ordinances, is
hereby authorized and empowered to administer and enforce provisions of this chapter, and shall
assure that all structures and buildings hereafter built in the village comply with all applicable
building codes.
(2) The President of the Village Board of Trustees may, with approval of the Board of
Trustees, appoint a deputy or deputies to assist the Code Administrator in fulfillment of his or her
duties.
(3) When so appointed, a deputy to the Code Administrator shall have the same authority
and power granted herein to the Code Administrator, and any reference herein to the “Code
Administrator” shall be construed as a reference to any deputies so appointed.
(Prior Code, § 15-101)
(B) Appointment and term of office. Procedures for the appointment of the Code Administrator,
and his or her respective term of office, shall be governed by the provisions of § 32.07 of this code
of ordinances, and are not altered by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-102)
(C) Compensation. Any compensation paid to the Code Administrator shall be governed by the
provisions of § 32.07 of this code of ordinances, and are not altered by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-103)
(D) Duties and responsibilities.
(1) The Code Administrator shall review every application for a building permit, electrical
permit, mechanical permit or plumbing permit and assure that the proposed improvement, structure
or building complies with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The Code Administrator shall collect all fees for building permits and promptly forward
them to the office of the Village Treasurer. The Code Administrator shall include notification of such
fees, along with information relative to the permit applications, in a monthly report to the Board of
Trustees.
(3) Upon determining compliance, the Code Administrator shall issue a permit authorizing
the proposed improvement, building or structure in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
6 Swansea - Land Usage
(4) The Code Administrator shall thereafter coordinate the scheduling of inspections at the
appropriate stages and maintain the results of those inspections in a permanent file in his or her
office.
(Prior Code, § 15-104)
§ 150.002 INSPECTION OF EXISTING COMMERCIAL PROPERTY.
(A) As referenced in this section, COMMERCIAL PROPERTY shall be defined as any property
located within the Highway Business, Planned Business, Light Industrial or Heavy Industrial Zoning
Districts used for non-residential purposes. In addition, any residential property wherein a home
occupation has been authorized by the Zoning Administrator is not subject to the provisions of this
section.
(B) Prior to every occupancy of every existing commercial property or part thereof, the Code
Administrator and the Fire Chief shall cause an inspection to be made of the exterior and interior of
the building and the property on which it is located to determine that the building and property are in
compliance with all zoning, building and fire safety codes of the village.
(C) The building owner, owner’s agent, tenant or other person responsible for the building or
part of the building to be occupied shall notify the Code Administrator of the intent to occupy the
building.
(D) The designated representatives of the Code Administrator and the Fire Chief shall provide
verbal notice of the inspection date and time to the owner, owner’s agent, tenant or other person
responsible for the building or part of the building to be occupied. The owner, owner’s agent, tenant
or other person responsible for the property and building or part thereof to be occupied shall not
deny entry onto the property or the premises. If entry is refused, the Code Administrator or Fire
Chief shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
(E) The Fire Chief, upon completion of the inspection by the Fire Department, shall report his
or her findings to the Code Administrator. The Code Administrator shall notify the owner of the
results of the inspections by the Building and Zoning Department and the Fire Department.
(F) If the building and property are in compliance with all zoning, building and fire safety codes
of the village, and if payment of the inspection fees has been received, the Code Administrator shall
be authorized to allow occupancy of the building.
(G) If violations of the various building and fire safety codes are determined to exist, a written
notice of violation and order to correct, in accordance with the applicable codes, shall be issued to
the building owner by the Code Administrator. The building owner shall correct all violations prior
to the occupancy. Authorization to occupy the building shall not be granted by the Code
Administrator and the Fire Chief until an inspection has been conducted by the appropriate
department(s) verifying that the violations have been corrected.
Building Code; Regulations 7
(H) If, at the time the building is re-inspected, code violations are found to exist, and in the
judgment of the Code Administrator and Fire Chief, the conditions that are determined not to be in
compliance would not materially affect the safety of the occupants and the public, the building owner
may request permission to conditionally occupy the building. Said conditional occupancy may be
authorized by the Code Administrator for a period not to exceed 30 days, and may be revoked at any
time if the condition of the building or property warrants closure for the safety of the public and
occupants. All violations shall be corrected within 30 days.
(I) The building owner may appeal the inspection findings in the manner provided in building
and fire safety codes.
(Prior Code, § 15-105) (Ord. 1536, passed 12-1-2008)
§ 150.003 INSPECTION AND PERMIT FEES.
All fees reguired to be paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are contained in the table
of fees listed under § 150.004 of this chapter. All such fees shall be paid to the Code Administrator,
who shall issue no permit until all applicable fees are paid.
(Prior Code, § 15-106) (Ord. 1536, passed 12-1-2008)
§ 150.004 TABLE OF FEES.
(A) The following is a listing of building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and fire inspection
and permit fees.
Building Electrical Plumbing Mechanical
Permit fee per square foot $0.11 $0.10 $0.09 $0.08
Minimum charge $35 $35 $35 $35
Excess charge for additional inspections $35 $35 $35 $35
Fire (Does Not Apply to 1- and 2-Family Dwellings)
Permit fee per square foot $0.06
Minimum charge $35
Excess charge for additional inspections $35
(B) In calculating fees based upon square footage, the Code Administrator shall determine the
total square footage of all floors of the structure in question, excluding unfinished basements, but
including garages, and multiply that area by the fee per square foot listed in the table above.
2018 S-1
8 Swansea - Land Usage
(1) If, in calculating fees based upon square footage, the Code Administrator determines
that the calculated fee is less than the minimum charge listed in the table above, the minimum fee
shall be charged.
(2) If the fee for a specific improvement or upgrade to an existing building or structure,
because of its nature, cannot be calculated on the basis of square footage, the minimum fee shall be
charged.
(3) If an inspector is required to perform additional inspections as a result of a previous
failure to pass inspection, the applicant shall be subject to an additional charge, as listed in the table
above, for each additional inspection required until the work has been approved.
(C) (1) The fee for the inspection of existing commercial property shall be as follows:
5,000 square feet of floor space or less $50, includes one re-inspection
More than 5,000 square feet of floor space $60, includes one re-inspection
Excess charge for additional inspections $20
(2) The appropriate fee shall be paid prior to the inspection.
(D) The fees for rental property inspections and related fees shall be as follows:
Annual rental dwelling ownership registration $10
Annual rental dwelling ownership registration late fee $25
(Prior Code, § 15-107)
(E) Tap-in fee.
(1) Sewer connection to the sanitary sewer mains or laterals of the village located within
same shall be made by application filed with the Village Clerk. The applicant for such sewer
connection shall pay all costs of labor and materials for installing the sewer connection and
installation may be made only after the issuance by the village of a permit authorizing the sewer
connection and specifying the size, grade and material thereof. Such sewer connection shall impose
liability for a period sewer charge.
(2) The permit fee for such sewer connection shall be as follows:
(a) Single-family residential: $1,000 per unit within the village corporate limits;
(b) Multiple-family, residential: $1,000 per unit within the village corporate limits;
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 9
(c) Mobile home: $1,000 for each mobile home within the village corporate limits;
(d) Public building, schools and churches: $1,000 per unit within the village corporate
limits;
(e) Commercial: $1,500 for first 1,200 square feet and $750 for each additional 1,200
square feet or fraction thereof, to a maximum of $5,000;
(f) Hotels, motels, hospitals and nursing homes: $600 for first 1,200 square feet and
$400 for each additional 1,200 square feet or fraction thereof;
(g) Ravenel Subdivision: $1,200 per unit, paid as follows:
1. Two thousand four hundred dollars for each duplex, whether or not both units
of the duplex are to be “finished off”;
2. One thousand two hundred dollars per unit, with a minimum of $4,800 for
each condominium building of up to four units, regardless of the final number of units in each
building, or whether or not every unit within the building will be “finished off”;
3. One thousand two hundred dollars for each single-family lot;
4. One thousand two hundred dollars for the Hobby and Garden Center; and
5. One thousand two hundred dollars for the Club House.
(h) All fees stated in this section shall be one and one-half the amount for units outside
the village corporate limits, excluding the county’s Township Facility Planning Area, which is 1.3.
(Prior Code, § 6-1108)
(3) The inspection fees are as follows:
(a) Single-family, residential: $25 per unit within the village corporate limits;
(b) Multiple-family, residential: $25 per unit within the village corporate limits;
(c) Mobile home: $25 for each mobile home, whether or not within a mobile home
court within the village corporate limits;
(d) Public building, schools, churches: $25 per unit within the village corporate limits;
and
(e) Commercial: $25 per unit within the village corporate limits.
2018 S-1
10 Swansea - Land Usage
(4) All fees stated in this section shall be one and one-half the amount for units outside the
village corporate limits, excluding the county’s Township Facility Planning Area, which is 1.3. This
section shall be effect for all currently platted subdivision on 7-1-2001.
(Prior Code, § 6-1110)
(F) Occupant fee for each dwelling is $30, additional copies are $10.
(G) The fire code inspection of the automatic suppression systems (wet and dry sprinkler, hood
system, chemical agent and the like) shall be tested by the installer and witnesses by the Fire
Department Code Official. The fee is $100.
(H) Demolition. For the demolition of a residential structure a fee of $55 shall be charged, and
for all commercial structures a fee of $0.05 per square foot shall be charged with a minimum charge
of $55.
(Ord. 1365, passed 4-5-2004; Ord. 1536, passed 12-1-2008; Ord. 1613, passed 6-6-2011; Ord.
1790, passed 9-18-2017; Ord. 1828, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 150.005 BOARD OF BUILDING APPEALS.
(A) Establishment. There is hereby established a Board of Building Appeals to render decisions
on appeals that the meaning and intent of the Building Code, Residential Code, Fire Code,
Mechanical Code, Electrical Code or Property Maintenance Code are being incorrectly interpreted,
the provisions of the applicable code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of
construction is proposed. The Board of Building Appeals shall also render decisions on appeals of the
meaning or interpretation of municipal code sections pertaining to rental property inspections.
(B) Right of appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Code
Administrator (Code Official) to the Board of Building Appeals. An application for appeal shall be
made in writing and submitted to the Code Administrator within 20 calendar days of the date of the
decision of the Code Administrator which is being appealed.
(C) Membership.
(1) The Board of Building Appeals shall consist of three members, one member appointed
by the Mayor, with advice and consent of the Village Board, one member chosen by the applicant
and a third member mutually chosen by the Mayor and the applicant. The appointee of the Mayor
shall not be the Village Engineer, an employee of the village’s consulting engineering firm or an
employee of the village. The Board members shall be appointed within 30 days of an appeal being
filed with the Code Administrator. Credentials of the chosen members shall be exchanged between
the Code Administrator and the applicant within the 30-day period. If, within the 30-day period, the
village and applicant have been unable to agree upon the third Board member, the two chosen
members shall chose a qualified third member.
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 11
(2) If the two Board members are unable to reach agreement upon a third member, the
Village Engineer shall appoint the third qualified member.
(D) Qualifications.
(1) For appeals pertaining to the Building Code, Residential Code, Mechanical Code,
Electrical Code or Property Maintenance Code, each member of the Board shall be either:
(a) An architect licensed by the state;
(b) An engineer licensed by the state; and
(c) A journeyman, contractor or a superintendent of construction possessing a
minimum three years experience in designing, building or installing the systems, equipment or types
of construction which the appeal concerns.
(2) For appeals pertaining to the administration of § 150.006 of this chapter, each member
of the Board shall be either:
(a) An attorney experienced in landlord-tenant affairs;
(b) A trained arbitrator; or
(c) A licensed social worker.
(E) Compensation of members. Compensation, if any is provided, shall be determined by the
Board of Trustees. Compensation shall be based on the estimated or actual amount of time expended
to hear the appeal and render a decision on the appeal, and the customary rates of compensation of
the members.
(F) Chairperson. The Board shall select one of its members to serve as chairperson.
(G) Secretary. The Code Administrator shall designate a qualified clerk to serve as Secretary to
the Board. The Secretary shall file a detailed record of all proceedings in the office of the Code
Administrator.
(H) Procedure. The appellant, the appellant’s representative, the Code Administrator and any
person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The Board shall not
require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall require that only relevant information be
received.
(I) Board decision. The Board shall concur in, modify or reverse the decision of the Code
Administrator by a concurring vote of two members. The decision of the Board shall be reduced to
writing, and mailed to the appellant within seven days of the hearing. The Code Administrator shall
take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Board.
2018 S-1
12 Swansea - Land Usage
(J) Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party to the appeal, shall have the
right to apply to the Circuit Court for a review of the Board’s decision.
(Prior Code, § 15-109) (Ord. 1582, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 1615, passed 6-6-2011; Ord. 1652,
passed 6-18-2012)
§ 150.006 OWNER, AGENT OF OWNER DEFINED.
For the purposes of §§ 150.007 and 150.009, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AGENT OF THE OWNER. The person or entity authorized by the owner to rent, lease,
manage, maintain, make expenditures, collect rent, receive notices, and correspondence from
government agencies or courts or engage in any other activity required in the use and occupancy of a
rental dwelling, and shall mean the person representing the agent or owner at a multi-family
apartment building, multi-family apartment complex, duplex, triplex, single family residence, or
other rental dwelling.
OWNER shall mean the person or entity maintaining a legal or equitable interest in the property;
or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property;
or otherwise having control of the property on which the structure(s) itself resides, and shall include,
but is not limited to, any part owner, joint owner, mortgagee in possession, tenant in common, joint
tenant, beneficiary of a land trust, tenant in partnership, or tenant by the legal entity.
(Ord. 1823, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 150.007 NUISANCE CONDITIONS.
In addition to any other act declared to be a nuisance within the municipal code or other
ordinances of the village, NUISANCES are hereby defined and declared to be as follows: Any
dwelling unit(s), including common areas and premises, upon which three or more instances of any
one or any combination of the actions listed below have occurred during any 180-day period, which
have resulted in three or more separate factual events that have been investigated by any law
enforcement agency, which have resulted in an arrest, issuance of a warrant for any arrest, issuance
of a citation, or the filing of a police report, which have been alleged actions of the owner,
occupants, or persons frequenting or congregating about the premises:
(A) Disorderly conduct as defined in 720 ILCS 5/26-1, as amended, or subsequent statute;
(B) Unlawful use of weapons as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24-1;
(C) Mob action as defined in 720 ILCS 5/25-1;
(D) Discharge of a firearm as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24-1.2;
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 13
(E) Gambling as defined in 720 ILCS 5/28-1;
(F) Possession, manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance as defined in 720 ILCS
570/401;
(G) Assault or battery or any related offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-1;
(H) Sexual abuse or related offenses as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-1.50;
(I) Public indecency as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-30;
(J) Prostitution as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-14;
(K) Criminal damage to properly as defined in 720 ILCS 5/21-1;
(L) Possession, cultivation, manufacture or delivery of cannabis in violation of the Cannabis
Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.;
(M) Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol as defined in the Liquor Control Act of 1934,
235 ILCS 5/10-1 et seq.;
(N) Any of the above statutes referenced, as amended, or any subsequent statute of the same
subject matter; or
(O) Violation of any municipal ordinance of the same subject matter as the above referenced
state statute.
(Ord. 1823, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 150.008 REGISTRATION OF OWNERS.
(A) Owners of all rental dwellings shall annually register with the zoning administrator all rental
dwellings in their ownership located within the village. The registration fee shall be paid at the time
of the submission of the registration application. All registrations made pursuant to this section shall
be valid for the twelve month period beginning January 1 and ending December 31. Registration
applications submitted on any date after January 1 shall expire December 31. When the last day of
December falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the registration shall be valid until the first Tuesday in
January. Registrations shall become invalid upon the sale of the property or reconstruction of the
entity in which name the property is owned.
(B) It shall be a violation of this section for any owner to fail submit registration application and
pay the required fee.
2018 S-1
14 Swansea - Land Usage
(C) The late fee provided by § 150.004(D) shall be imposed for any application received after
January 15.
§ 150.009 NOTICE OF NUISANCE CONDITIONS.
Whenever the Chief of Police or the Zoning Administrator believes that a nuisance condition, as
defined in § 150.007 of this chapter is occurring at any dwelling or on the premises therein, the
Chief of Police or the Zoning Administrator shall issue a written notice of violation and correction
order to the person or persons believed to be causing the nuisance or permitting the nuisance to
occur. If the person causing a nuisance is a tenant or person or persons associating with a tenant of a
rental dwelling, the Chief of Police or the Zoning Administrator shall direct the notice to the tenant.
In the case of a nuisance notice directed to a tenant, the owner or agent of the owner shall also be
notified. Service of the notice shall be effected by mailing certified a written copy of such notice to
the last known address of each individual or entity to be notified.
(Ord. 1823, passed 5-7-2018) Penalty, see § 150.999
BUILDING REGULATIONS
§ 150.020 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.
(A) The International Building Code, 2015, as published by the International Code Council, is
hereby adopted as the Building Code for the village and shall hereafter regulate the construction of
buildings and structures as herein provided. Exception: detached one- and two-family dwellings and
multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above the grade plane in
height with a separate means of egress, and their accessory structures, shall comply with the
Residential Building Code listed in § 150.022 of this chapter.
(B) Each and all of the codes, provisions, appendices, penalties and terms of the International
Building Code, 2015, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed by § 150.021 of this
chapter.
(C) All periodic revisions of the International Building Code, 2015, are hereby adopted as
revisions of the Building Code of the village prospectively.
(D) The Village Clerk shall keep at least three copies of the adopted Building Code on file in his
or her office for public use, inspection and examination.
(E) Responsibility for assuring that plans for any proposed construction comply with the
provisions of the adopted code shall rest solely with the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 15-201) (Ord. 1465, passed 8-21-2006)
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 14A
§ 150.021 BUILDING CODE; ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
The following provisions of the International Building Code, 2015, are hereby revised through
addition, insertion or change:
(A) In § 101.1 (page 1), insert “the Village of Swansea, Illinois”;
(B) In § 101.4.3, Plumbing, replace “International Plumbing Code” with “Illinois State
Plumbing Code”;
(C) Amend § 102.1, General, by adding the following sentence to the end of the existing
paragraph;
(D) Amend § 1101.2, Design, to read as follows:
“1101.2 STANDARD: Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to be
accessible in accordance with this code and the Illinois Accessibility Code, as published by
the State of Illinois Capital Development Board.”
(E) Add § 310.7, General - Concrete and Masonry Construction,
“In all Use Group R-1, R-2 and R-4 structures containing four or more units, the following
shall apply:
(a) Use of Brick - A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the exterior side of exterior
walls shall be faced with brick. Door and window openings shall be excluded from the
calculation.”
(F) Replace Chapter 29 with the following:
“The provisions of the Illinois State Plumbing Code shall govern the erection, installation,
alteration, repairs, relocation, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing equipment and
systems.”
2018 S-1
14B Swansea - Land Usage
Building Code; Regulations 15
§ 150.022 ADOPTION OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE.
(A) The International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the building code for detached one- and two-family
dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above the
grade plane in height with a separate means of egress, and their accessory structures, within the
village, and shall hereafter regulate the construction, alteration, enlargement, replacement,
maintenance, removal and demolition of these buildings or structures as herein provided.
(B) Each and all of the codes, provisions, appendices, penalties and terms of the International
Residential Code, 2015, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed by § 150.023 of this
chapter.
(C) All periodic revisions of the International Residential Code, 2015, are hereby adopted as
revisions of the Building Code of the village prospectively.
(D) The Village Clerk shall keep at least three copies of the adopted Residential Code on file in
his or her office for public use, inspection and examination.
(E) Responsibility for assuring that plans for any proposed construction comply with the
provisions of the adopted code, shall rest solely with the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 15-203) (Ord. 1465, passed 8-21-2006)
§ 150.023 RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE; ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
The following provisions of the International Residential Code, 2006, are hereby revised through
addition, insertion or change:
(A) In § R101.1, insert “the Village of Swansea, Illinois”;
(B) Delete Tables R302.1(1) and R302.1(2) and replace with the following:
TABLE R302.1 EXTERIOR WALLS
Exterior Wall Element Minimum Fire
Resistance Rating
Minimum Fire
Separation Distance
Walls
Fire resistance rated 1-hour tested in accordance
with ASTM E 119 UL 263
with exposure from the
outside
0 feet
Not fire resistance rated 0 hours 3 feet
16 Swansea - Land Usage
TABLE R302.1 EXTERIOR WALLS
Exterior Wall Element Minimum Fire
Resistance Rating
Minimum Fire
Separation Distance
Projections Not allowed N/A <2 feet
Fire-resistance rated 1 hour on the underside b,c 2 feeta
Not fire-resistance rated 0 hours 3 feet
Openings in walls
Not allowed N/A <3 feet
Unlimited 0 hours 3 feet
Penetrations
All
Comply with Section
R302.4
<3 feeta
None required 3 feet
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
N/A = Not Applicable.
a. For residential subdivisions where all dwellings are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system
installed in accordance with Section P2904, the fire separation distance for nonrated exterior walls and rated
projections shall be permitted to be reduced to 0 feet, and unlimited unprotected openings and penetrations shall
be permitted, where the adjoining lot provides an open setback yard that is 6 feet or more in width on the
opposite side of the property line.
b. The roof eave fire-resistance rating shall be permitted to be reduced to 0 hours on the underside of the eave if
fireblocking is provided from the wall top plate to the underside of the roof sheathing.
c. The roof eave fire-reststanee rating shall be permitted to be reduced to 0 hours on the underside of the eave
provided that gable vent openings are not installed.
(C) Remove the following text from R302.5.1:
“Equipped with a self-closing device.”
(D) Delete Section R302.13.
(E) Delete Section R313.
(F) Delete Section R322.3.5.1.
(G) Delete Section R324.7.2.5.
(H) Add to Section R403.1.6 the text:
“3. Where the basic wind speed in accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A does not exceed
115 miles per hour (51 m/s), the seismic design category is A or B and Method GB in
accordance with Section R602.10 is used for a braced wall line on the interior of the
dwelling, anchor bolts shall not be required for the wood sole plates of the braced wall
panels. Positive anchorage with approved fasteners shall be provided.”
Building Code; Regulations 17
(I) Should there be any conflicts between the provisions of Chapters 25 through 32 (inclusive)
and the Illinois State Plumbing Code, the Illinois State Plumbing Code shall take precedence.
(J) Add to Section 3406.3 the text:
“The minimum size of conductors for feeders and branch circuits shall be 12 AWG
copper.”
§ 150.024 COMPLIANCE WITH THE CODE.
All persons, firms or corporations hereafter constructing any building or structure in the village
shall comply with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-205) (Ord. 1465, passed 8-21-2006)
§ 150.025 APPLICATIONS, LICENSES AND PERMITS.
(A) Any person, firm or corporation desiring or intending to make any improvements or
construct any building or structure in the village shall file an application with the Code Administrator
for a permit to do so, prior to initiating any such work.
(B) Application shall be made on forms provided by the Code Administrator which shall at least
include a detailed description of the work to be done, the materials to be used, the locality of the
premises by street name and number, and the name of the contractor, architect or engineer.
(C) No permit so issued shall be transferable.
(D) No permit shall be required for the following minor alterations to existing structures:
(1) Construction of a carport;
(2) Erection of a utility shed, if less than 200 square feet in size;
(3) Erection of a fence not to exceed 6 feet 6 inches in height, not using material that
exceeds six feet in length;
(4) Decks that are not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at any point and do not
serve the exit door required by International Residential Code Section R311.4;
(5) Replacement of windows;
(6) Replacement of siding;
2018 S-1
18 Swansea - Land Usage
(7) Replacement of shingles; and
(8) Replacement of roof decking.
(Prior Code, § 15-206) (Ord. 1465, passed 8-21-2006; Ord. 1830, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 150.026 INSPECTIONS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
(A) All construction performed after the issuance of a permit shall be inspected by the Code
Administrator or his or her legally authorized representative at the following stages:
(1) Upon completion of the footings and foundation;
(2) Prior to the covering of structural members; and
(3) Following completion, but prior to occupancy.
(B) Responsibility for notifying the Code Administrator that a specific stage of construction has
been reached and an inspection is requested shall rest solely with the applicant.
(C) No new building, structure or commercial tenant space shall be occupied or used unless it
has passed each inspection and a certificate of occupancy has been issued.
(D) All fees, as set forth in § 150.004 of this chapter, for any inspection required by this chapter
shall be paid, in advance, prior to the issuance of a permit, at the Swansea Government Center.
(Prior Code, § 15-207) (Ord. 1465, passed 8-21-2006)
DEMOLITION REGULATIONS
§ 150.030 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person, firm, corporation or entity shall demolish any building in excess of 200 square feet
without first securing a demolition permit.
(Ord. 1828, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 150.031 FEE REQUIRED.
A demolition permit fee as set forth in § 150.004 shall be paid to the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 1828, passed 6-18-2018)
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 19
§ 150.032 PROCEDURE.
Applications for a demolition permit shall be made with the Building Official, upon forms to be
supplied. As conditions for the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall furnish proof that he or she
has notified all utility companies of the impending demolition and secured from them releases
indicating that all utility connections have been either removed or plugged. Demolition shall not be
started without the issuance of the permit.
(Ord. 1828, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 150.033 CONDITIONS OF DEMOLITION.
(A) The permit holder shall comply with all statutes and rules and regulations of the Illinois and
U.S. Environmental Protection Agencies.
(B) Foundations shall be demolished to a level at least three feet below the final surface level.
Basement floors shall be broken so as to drain.
(C) No fill shall be permitted unless it is compacted and will retain compaction permanently
without settling, which would include but not be limited to soil, masonry rubble smaller than one foot
in the largest dimension, or rock. All other material shall be considered waste and shall be removed
from the site and disposed of at a state approved landfill, and landfill receipts shall be exhibited for
the Building Official before completion shall be approved.
(D) Burning of waste material is prohibited.
(E) Upon completion, the area shall be covered with a minimum of six inches of soil capable of
encouraging vegetation, compacted, graded and seeded. This division (E) shall be waived at the
discretion of the Building Inspector, where the owner has on file with the village an issued building
permit to construct a building to replace the one being demolished, and construction under the
building permit is started within six months of the completion of the demolition; in which event,
however, the permit holder during any interim period before construction begins is required to either
provide a temporary fill to approximate ground level or provide a fence around any open excavated
area of sufficient size and strength to protect against persons being injured because of the excavation.
(F) Surface drainage shall not adversely affect adjoining property.
(G) All work shall start upon issuance of the permit and proceed in a reasonably continuous
manner to completion, with a 30-day maximum completion time from the date of the permit.
2018 S-1
20 Swansea - Land Usage
(H) The permit holder shall be solely liable for all claims of third persons for damage to persons
or property, and the village by issuing the permit makes no representations concerning the permit
holder’s performance of the work or that he or she has fully complied with all laws, rules and
regulations applicable.
(I) The permit holder shall leave the premises in a clean and presentable condition, per division
(E) above, and notify the Building Official of completion. Completion shall not be acceptable until
the Building Official issues a certificate of completion.
(J) The permit holder shall assure that suitable barriers, fences, flagging tape or other methods
shall be erected to deny the public reasonable access to excavations during the entire period of
demolition.
(Ord. 1828, passed 6-18-2018)
ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS
§ 150.040 ADOPTION OF CODE.
(A) The National Electrical Code, 2014, as published by the National Fire Protection
Association, is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code for the village and shall hereafter regulate the
installation and alteration of electrical wiring and fixtures as herein provided.
(B) Each and all of the codes, provisions, penalties and terms of the National Electrical Code,
2014, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes if any, prescribed by § 150.041 of this chapter.
(C) All periodic revisions of the National Electrical Code, 2014, are hereby adopted as revisions
of the Electrical Code of the village prospectively.
(D) The Village Clerk shall keep at least three copies of the adopted Electrical Code on file in
his or her office for public use, inspections and examination.
(E) Responsibility for assuring that plans for any proposed electrical installation or alteration
comply with the provisions of the adopted code shall rest solely with the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 15-301) (Ord. 1602, passed 1-5-2011)
§ 150.041 GENERAL EXCEPTIONS.
(A) It shall be prohibited to use aluminum wire or copper clad aluminum wire in any branch
circuit wiring within the village. Aluminum wiring or copper clad aluminum wiring shall be
permitted for main
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 20A
service entrance feeders up to the distribution panel(s) only. All aluminum or copper-clad aluminum
wiring shall be AA-8000 series aluminum alloy meeting the requirements of A.S.T.M. B800 and
A.S.T.M. B801. When used, all aluminum or copper-clad aluminum wiring shall be installed in
accordance with the adopted Electrical Code and the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
(B) No branch circuit wires smaller than AWG No. 12 may be installed or connected to any
device serving lighting or power loads, unless the branch circuit voltage is less than normal voltage
supplied by Ameren Illinois and has been transformed down for use on low voltage control circuits.
(C) The minimum electrical service amperage shall be 100 Amps.
(D) Ground wire shall be copper wire in PVC conduit from meter socket to ground rod.
(E) Entrance conductors and neutral shall be of the same wire gauge and amperage rating.
(F) (1) All dwellings shall have smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors that are hard
wired (110V) with battery backup and shall be interconnected. Smoke detectors shall be located
within every bedroom and in halls outside of bedrooms within 15 feet of the bedroom door and in
each level of the dwelling. Carbon monoxide detectors shall be located within 15 feet of every
bedroom door.
(2) Exception. Existing dwellings that have been unaltered shall not be required to have
hard wired and interconnected systems, they must however have smoke and carbon monoxide
detectors in the aforementioned locations. Once an existing dwelling is altered any altered area shall
comply with general exception division (F) completely.
(G) Single dedicated receptacles for refrigeration, sump pumps, and all other exclusions outlined
in the National Electrical Code, 2005 edition for ground fault current interruption protection shall be
permitted.
(H) The National Electrical Code, 2005 edition language regarding arc fault protection relating
to arc fault placement within dwellings shall be permitted.
(I) Annex G, Administration and Enforcement, Section 80.15, Electrical Board, paragraph (B),
Appointments, paragraph (C), Terms, paragraph (D), Compensation, and paragraph (E), Quorum,
are deleted. The Village Board of Building Appeals, as established in § 150.005, shall serve as the
Electrical Board of the village.
(J) Annex G, Administration and Enforcement, Section 80.23, Notice of Violation Penalties,
paragraph B, Penalties, (3) is deleted. Sections 150.01 through 150.005 and 150.999 of this chapter
shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 15-302) (Ord. 1514, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 1602, passed 1-5-2011; Ord. 1810,
passed 2-20-2018)
2018 S-1
20B Swansea - Land Usage
§ 150.042 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS, MANUFACTURED HOMES.
(A) The provisions of Art. 550 of the National Electrical Code, 2014, “Mobile Homes and
Mobile Home Parks”, shall be applicable to the requirements of this chapter.
(B) There are two types of manufactured home, temporary or permanent electrical service, as
follows.
(1) Temporary. A manufactured home electrical service installation will be classed as
temporary if it is installed for 30 calendar days or less.
(2) Permanent. A manufactured home electrical service installation will be classed as
permanent if it is installed for more than 30 calendar days. Regardless of whether the manufactured
home is moved from one location to another within the village, the days are accumulative.
(C) The installation of all service entrance equipment and conductors shall conform to this
Electrical Code.
(1) All wiring shall be installed in rigid heavy wall galvanized conduit or service 40 P.V.C.
rigid conduit from pole or pedestal to service panel in manufactured homes.
(2) Service 40 P.V.C. rigid conduit shall be permitted on the service entrance, only at a
point under the manufactured home or chassis.
(3) Exposed conduit shall only be rigid heavy wall galvanized conduit or service 40 P.V.C.
conduit.
(4) Conduit locknuts shall be installed on each side of the meter pedestal metal box and
service panel and conduit bushings, bonding type inside of panels and locknuts and bushings shall be
galvanized.
(5) Bonding ground conductor can be bare copper or identified by green color or
continuous green color with one or more yellow stripes.
(6) The use of water pipe or water pipe fitting in the wire installation is not permissible.
(D) (1) The wiring from the manufactured home service panel to an air-conditioner unit shall be
in conduit and shall have a disconnect switch located at the compressor unit.
(2) No more than 36 inches of P.V.C. flex conduit shall be allowed.
(E) When outdoor or under-chassis line-voltage wiring is exposed to moisture or physical
damage it shall be protected by rigid conduit. The conductor shall be suitable for wet locations in
conformity with the National Electrical Code § 550-8-10-h(1).
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 20C
(F) The grounding of both electrical and non-electrical parts on the manufactured home shall be
through connection to a grounding bus in a manufactured home distribution panel.
(1) The grounding bus shall be grounded through the green colored conductor in the supply
cord or the feeder wiring to the service ground in the service entrance equipment located adjacent to
the manufactured home location.
(2) Neither the frame of the manufactured home nor the frame of any appliance may be
connected to the neutral conductor in the manufactured home so as to comply with § 550-11 of the
National Electrical Code.
(Prior Code, § 15-303) (Ord. 1602, passed 1-5-2011)
2018 S-1
20D Swansea - Land Usage
Building Code; Regulations 21
§ 150.043 COMPLIANCE WITH THE CODE.
All persons, firms or corporations hereafter installing or altering any electrical wiring or fixture
in the village shall comply with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-304)
§ 150.044 APPLICATIONS, LICENSES AND PERMITS.
(A) All persons, firms or corporations desiring to install electrical wiring, apparatus or
machinery for the use of electrical current shall file an application with the Code Administrator for a
permit to do so, prior to installing any new wiring or altering any existing wiring.
(B) Application shall be made on forms provided by the Code Administrator which shall at least
include a detailed description of the work to be done, the materials to be used, the locality of the
premises by street name and number and a statement whether or not the person making the
application is a qualified electrical contractor or electrician.
(C) If the applicant is the owner of a dwelling wherein he or she resides or proposes to reside,
and said applicant proposes to install or replace electrical wiring himself or herself, he or she shall
fully inform the Code Administrator of his or her qualifications for performing the work proposed
and the Administrator must approve the qualifications before any permit is issued.
(D) (1) No permit so issued shall be transferable.
(2) Temporary permits may be used when, in the judgment of the Code Administrator, such
are deemed advisable.
(3) No permit shall be issued to any unqualified person, and the judgment of the Code
Administrator as to the qualifications shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 15-305)
§ 150.045 INSPECTIONS AND CERTIFICATES OF APPROVAL.
(A) All electrical installation or alteration performed after the issuance of a permit shall be
inspected by the Code Administrator or his or her legally authorized representative at the following
stages:
(1) Upon installation of any temporary service;
(2) Upon completion of rough in, but prior to covering;
(3) Upon completion of permanent service; and
22 Swansea - Land Usage
(4) Following completion, but prior to occupancy.
(B) Responsibility for notifying the Code Administrator that a specific stage of construction has
been reached and an inspection is requested shall rest solely with the applicant.
(C) (1) No new building or structure shall be occupied or used unless it has passed each
inspection and a certificate of occupancy has been issued.
(2) No new or remodeled electrical installations shall be connected with the electrical power
supply lines until the same have received a final inspection and certificate of approval from the Code
Administrator.
(D) All fees, as set forth in § 150.004 of this chapter, for any inspection required by this chapter
shall be paid, in advance, prior to the issuance of a permit, at the Swansea Government Center, 1400
North Illinois Street, Swansea, IL.
(Prior Code, § 15-306)
§ 150.046 ANNUAL AND SEMIANNUAL INSPECTIONS.
(A) All buildings and structures, other than residential buildings, located within the corporate
limits of the village and using electricity for lighting or power, shall be subject to annual inspection
by the Code Administrator.
(1) The Administrator may inspect the wiring and electrical installations and shall issue to
the person in charge of the premises a notice, in writing, setting forth any changes or alterations
which are to be made so that the wiring will comply with the safety regulations of the village.
(2) All such changes or alterations shall be made and completed within 30 days of the
receipt of the notice, unless, in the opinion of the Code Administrator, they shall be made
immediately.
(3) After the changes or alterations are accomplished they shall be re-inspected by the Code
Administrator for approval.
(B) All industrial plants and factories shall be subject to semi-annual inspections of all electrical
wiring and installations.
(1) The Administrator may inspect the wiring and electrical installations and issue to the
person in charge of the premises a notice, in writing, setting forth any changes or alterations which
are to be made so that the wiring will comply with the safety regulations of the village.
(2) All such changes or alterations shall be made and completed within 30 days of the
receipt of the notice, unless, in the opinion of the Code Administrator, they shall be made
immediately.
Building Code; Regulations 23
(3) After the changes or alterations are accomplished, they shall be re-inspected by the
Code Administrator for approval.
(Prior Code, § 15-307)
MECHANICAL REGULATIONS
§ 150.060 ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL CODE.
(A) The International Mechanical Code, 2015, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code for the village and shall
hereafter regulate the installation and alteration of mechanical systems as herein provided.
(B) Each and all of the codes, provisions, penalties and terms of the International Mechanical
Code, 2015, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section,
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes if any, prescribed by § 150.061 of this chapter.
(C) All periodic revisions of the International Mechanical Code, 2015, are hereby adopted as
revisions of the Mechanical Code of the village prospectively.
(D) The Village Clerk shall keep at least three copies of the adopted Mechanical Code on file in
his or her office for public use, inspections and examination.
(E) Responsibility for assuring that plans for any proposed construction comply with the
provisions of the adopted code shall rest solely with the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 15-401) (Ord. 1587, passed 7-6-2010)
§ 150.061 MECHANICAL CODE; ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
The following provisions of the International Mechanical Code, 2015, are hereby revised
through addition, insertion or change:
(A) In Chapter 1, Administration, § 101, General, Subsection 101.1, Title, insert: “the Village
of Swansea, Illinois”;
(B) In Chapter 1, Administration, § 106, Permits, Subsection 106.5.2, Fee Schedule, insert the
following: “See § 150.004 of the Swansea Code of Ordinances”;
(C) In Chapter 1, Administration, § 108, Violations, Subsection 108.4, Violation penalties,
insert the terms: “Misdemeanor” and “$750.00”; and delete the phrase: “or by imprisonment not
exceeding [SPECIFY TIME], or both such fine and imprisonment”;
24 Swansea - Land Usage
(D) In Chapter 1, Administration, § 108.4, Violation Penalties, “$25.00” and “$750.00”;
(E) In Chapter 8, Chimneys and Vents, § 504.803, Connectors, Subsection 894.803.10.3,
Connection, add to the paragraph:
“A vent connector shall not be connected to a chimney flue of a solid fuel burning fireplace
unless the fireplace is permanently sealed.”
(Prior Code, § 15-402) (Ord. 1587, passed 7-6-2010)
§ 150.062 ADOPTION OF FUEL GAS CODE.
(A) The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015, as published by the International Code Council is
hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code for the village and shall hereafter regulate the installation and
alteration of fuel gas systems as herein provided.
(B) Each and all of the codes, provisions, penalties and terms of the International Fuel Gas
Code, 2015, are hereby referred to. adopted and made a part of, as fully set out in this section, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed by § 150.063 of this chapter.
(C) All periodic revisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015, are hereby adopted as
revisions of the Mechanical Code of the village prospectively.
(D) The Village Clerk shall keep at least three copies of the adopted Mechanical Code on file in
his or her office for public use, inspection and examination.
(E) Responsibility for assuring that plans for any proposed construction comply with the
provisions of the adopted code shall rest solely with the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 15-403) (Ord. 1589, passed 8-16-2010)
§ 150.063 FUEL GAS CODE; ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
(A) In Chapter 1, Administration, Section 101, General, Subsection 101.1 Title, insert: “the
Village of Swansea. Illinois”.
(B) In Chapter 1, Administration, Section 106, Permits, Subsection 106.5.2, Fee schedule, the
text shall read as follows: “The fees shall be as indicated in § 150.004 of ths Swansea Municipal
Code”.
(C) In Chapter 1, Administration, Section 106, Permits, Subsection 106.5.3, Fee refunds,
paragraph 2 and paragraph 3 are deleted.
Building Code; Regulations 25
(D) In Chapter 1, Administration, Section 108, Violations, Subsection 108.4, Violation
penalties, insert the terms: “Ordinance violation” and “$750.00”; and delete the phrase: “or by
imprisonment not exceeding [SPECIFY TIME] or both such fine and imprisonment”.
(E) In Chapter 1, Administration, Section 109, Means of appeal, is deleted.
(F) In Chapter 2, Definitions, § 202.0, General Definitions, add:
“Install: To connect any gas or oil-consuming device to a fuel line of approved size or type;
or to place any solid fuel device into position for service or use in accordance with all
instructions provided by the manufacturer for such installation.”
(Prior Code, § 15-404) (Ord. 1589, passed 8-16-2010)
§ 150.064 COMPLIANCE WITH THE CODE.
All persons, firms or corporations hereafter installing or altering any mechanical system within
the village shall comply with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-405)
§ 150.065 APPLICATIONS, LICENSES AND PERMITS.
(A) Any person, firm or corporation, desiring or intending to install or alter any mechanical
system in the village shall file an application with the Code Administrator for a permit to do so, prior
to initiating any such work.
(B) Application shall be made on forms provided by the Code Administrator which shall at least
include a detailed description of the work to be done, the materials to be used, the locality of the
premises by street name and number, and the name of the contractor, architect or engineer.
(C) No permit so issued shall be transferable.
(D) No permit shall be required for the following minor alterations to existing systems:
(1) Routine service including cleaning, lubrication, filter replacement, adding Freon or any
other minor maintenance task necessary to ensure proper system operation; or
(2) Replacement of individual parts such as compressors, controls, motors and the like.
(Prior Code, § 15-406)
26 Swansea - Land Usage
§ 150.066 INSPECTIONS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
(A) Any alteration or installation of a mechanical system performed after the issuance of a
permit shall be inspected by the Code Administrator or his or her legally authorized representative at
the following stages:
(1) Prior to covering or enclosing any part of the system; and
(2) Upon completion of installation.
(B) Responsibility for notifying the Code Administrator that a specific stage of alteration or
installation has been reached and an inspection is required shall rest solely with the applicant.
(C) No new building or structure shall be occupied or used unless it has passed each inspection
and a certificate of occupancy has been issued.
(D) All fees, as set forth in § 150.004 of this chapter, for any inspection required by this chapter
shall be paid, in advance, prior to the issuance of a permit, at the Swansea Government Center, 1400
North Illinois Street, Swansea, IL.
(Prior Code, § 15-407)
PLUMBING REGULATIONS
§ 150.080 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The definitions, as contained in this section, shall
take precedence over any other accepted meaning including those contained in any reference material
referred to in this subchapter.
PLUMBING. The practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance,
extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with any
of the following.
(1) PLUMBING FIXTURES. Installed receptacles, devices or appliances which are
supplied with water or which receive or discharge liquids or liquid-borne waste, with or without
discharge into the drainage system with which they may be directly or indirectly connected.
Building Code; Regulations 27
(2) PLUMBING SYSTEMS. Includes the water supply and distribution pipes, plumbing
fixtures and traps, soil, waste and vent pipes, building drains, including their respective connections,
devices and appurtenances within the property lines of the premises, and water-treating or waterusing
equipment.
(3) SANITARY DRAINAGE OR STORM DRAINAGE FACILITIES. The venting system,
and public or private water supply systems, within or adjacent to any building, structure or
conveyance; installation, maintenance, extension or alteration of storm water, liquid waste or
sewerage, and water supply systems of any premises to their connection with any point of public
disposal or other acceptable terminal.
(Prior Code, § 15-501)
§ 150.081 ADOPTION OF CODE.
(A) The State Plumbing Code, as revised, and all amendments and modifications thereto, is
hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code for the village and hereafter shall regulate the installation and
alteration of plumbing systems as herein provided.
(B) Each and all of the codes, provisions, penalties and terms of the State Plumbing Code are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes if any, prescribed herein.
(C) All periodic revisions of the State Plumbing Code are hereby adopted as revisions of the
Plumbing Code of the village prospectively.
(D) The Village Clerk shall keep at least three copies of the adopted Plumbing Code on file in
his or her office for public use, inspections and examination.
(E) Responsibility for assuring that plans for any proposed plumbing system installation or
alteration comply with the provisions of the adopted code shall rest solely with the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 15-502)
§ 150.082 CONFORMITY TO STATE LICENSE STATUTE REQUIRED.
No person, firm or corporation shall hereinafter engage in the business of plumbing in the
village, either as a plumbing contractor or employing plumbers, or as journeymen plumbers who
shall not comply with the license requirement of the Plumbing License Law of the state.
(Prior Code, § 15-503)
28 Swansea - Land Usage
§ 150.083 ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.
Authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this subchapter shall be vested in the office
of Plumbing Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 15-504)
§ 150.084 OFFICE OF PLUMBING INSPECTOR.
(A) (1) There is hereby created the office of Plumbing Inspector, who shall be appointed
annually by the President of the Board at the first regular meeting in May, with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees, and who shall serve for a term of one year or until his or her
successor has been appointed and qualified.
(2) No person shall be appointed Plumbing Inspector who shall not have been, at the time
of his or her appointment, a licensed plumber in accordance with the State Plumbers’ License Law.
(Prior Code, § 15-505)
(B) (1) The Plumbing Inspector shall sign and issue all notices, permits and certificates
required by this subchapter.
(2) He or she shall keep a record of the performance of his or her duties, which shall
include a record of all notices issued, applications received and permits granted.
(3) He or she shall keep a record of violations of this subchapter.
(4) He or she shall inspect and, for the purpose thereof, may enter all houses undergoing
alteration or repair as often as may be necessary to ensure conformance with the requirements of this
subchapter.
(5) He or she shall compel all work on plumbing to be performed in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.
(6) He or she shall cause to be kept a record of measurements of all sewer taps in relation
to property lines.
(Prior Code, § 15-506)
§ 150.085 PLUMBING PERMITS.
(A) No plumbing shall be installed, altered or changed in any building or structure within the
corporate limits of the village, until an application for permit has been filed with the Code
Administrator and a permit issued.
Building Code; Regulations 29
(B) Application shall be made on forms provided by the Code Administrator which shall at least
include a detailed description of the work to be done, the materials to be used, the locality of the
premises by street name and number and a statement whether or not the person making the
application is a licensed plumber in the state.
(C) A permit shall be issued only to persons specified in the State Plumbing Code.
(D) No permit so issued shall be transferable.
(Prior Code, § 15-507)
§ 150.086 INSPECTIONS, DEFECTIVE WORK, RE-INSPECTION.
(A) All plumbing installation or alteration performed after the issuance of a permit shall be
inspected by the Plumbing Inspector or his or her legally authorized representative at the following
stages:
(1) Upon completion of groundwork, but prior to covering;
(2) Upon completion of rough in, but prior to covering; and
(3) Following completion, but prior to use.
(B) Responsibility for notifying the Code Administrator that a specific stage of construction has
been reached and that inspection is requested shall rest solely with the applicant.
(C) No new building or structure shall be occupied or used unless it has passed each inspection
and a certificate of occupancy has been issued.
(D) All fees, as set forth in § 150.004 of this chapter, for any inspection required by this chapter
shall be paid, in advance, prior to the issuance of a permit, at the Swansea Government Center, 1400
North Illinois Street, Swansea, IL.
(Prior Code, § 15-508)
§ 150.087 REQUIREMENT OF BOND.
(A) Any person who shall engage in the business of plumbing as a journeyman plumber,
plumbing contractor or employing plumbers in the village shall provide a copy of an indemnification
bond as required by the State Department of Professional Regulation.
(B) The bond shall be conditioned upon full indemnity to the village against damage to same or
to any persons to whom the village may be liable by reason of:
(1) Failure of the firm to observe ordinances of the village pertaining to plumbing;
30 Swansea - Land Usage
(2) Failure of the firm to observe all rules and regulations established under the authority of
any ordinance of the village pertaining to plumbing; and
(3) Negligence of the firm or its employees in performing or protecting any plumbing
work.
(C) The bond shall be kept in full force during the time the plumbing contractor, employing
plumbers and self-employed journeyman perform plumbing work within the village.
(D) The surety providing the bond shall be approved by the President of the Village Board of
Trustees and the bond shall be filed with the Code Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 15-509)
§ 150.088 VIOLATIONS.
(A) Any person who shall engage in the business of plumbing as a journeyman plumber,
plumbing contractor or employing plumbers in the village without having obtained a license for
plumbing from the state shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with § 150.999 of this chapter
for each time he or she so engages in the business of plumbing in violation of this subchapter.
(B) Any person who shall not have obtained the permit required by this subchapter, prior to the
commencement of any plumbing work shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with § 150.999
of this chapter.
(C) (1) Any person who shall refuse or neglect to obey any order of the plumbing inspector to
correct or remove a nuisance existing by reason of unsanitary plumbing, or plumbing installed in
violation of this subchapter shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with § 150.999 of this
chapter.
(2) Each day that such nuisance shall continue to exist after the expiration of the time fixed
by the plumbing inspector for the removal thereof shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 15-510)
§ 150.089 SUMP PUMPS.
Any new construction in the village that commences after the effective date of this section shall
have sump pumps that are constructed in such a way as to not cause a nuisance, as defined in § 91.01
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-511) (Ord. 1498, passed 9-17-2007)
Building Code; Regulations 31
§ 150.090 ADOPTION OF THE EXISTING BUILDING CODE.
(A) The International Existing Building Code, 2015, as published by the International Code
Council is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code for the village and shall hereafter regulate
the alterations of existing structures as herein provided.
(B) Each and all of the codes, provisions, penalties and terms of the International Existing
Building Code, 2015, here hereby referred to adopted and made a part of, as fully set out in this
section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any as prescribed.
(C) All periodic revisions of the International Existing Building Code, 2015, are hereby adopted
as revisions of the Existing Building Code of the village prospectively.
(D) The Village Clerk shall keep at least three copies of the adopted Existing Building Code on
file in his or her office for public use; inspection and examination.
(E) Responsibility for assuring that plans for any proposed construction comply with the
provisions of the adopted code shall rest solely with the applicant.
§ 150.091 EXISTING BUILDING CODE; ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
(A) In Chapter 1, Administration, Section 101, General, Subsection 101.1 Title, insert:
“the Village of Swansea, Illinois.”
(B) In Chapter 1, Administration, Section 112, Board of Appeals, is deleted.
FIRE CODE REGULATIONS
§ 150.105 ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
(A) The International Fire Code, 2006, as published by the Building Officials and the
Administrators International, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code for the village for
the control of buildings, structures and premises as herein provided.
(B) Each and all of the codes, provisions, penalties and terms of International Fire Code, 2006,
are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes if any, prescribed by § 150.106 of this chapter.
32 Swansea - Land Usage
(C) All periodic revisions of International Fire Code, 2006, are hereby adopted as revisions of
the Fire Prevention Code of the village prospectively.
(D) The Village Clerk shall keep at least one copy of the adopted Fire Prevention Code on file
in his or her office for the public use, inspection and examination.
(E) Responsibility for assuring that plans for any proposed construction comply with the
provisions of the adopted code shall rest solely with the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 15-601) (Ord. 1461, passed 7-17-2006)
§ 150.106 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
The following provisions of the International Fire Code, 2006, are hereby revised through
addition, insertion or change:
(A) Section 105.6, delete in its entirety;
(B) Section 105.6.1, delete in its entirety;
(C) Section 105.6.3, delete in its entirety;
(D) Section 105.6.4, delete in its entirety;
(E) Section 105.6.5, delete in its entirety;
(F) Section 105.6.6, delete in its entirety;
(G) Section 105.6.7, delete in its entirety;
(H) Section 105.6.8, delete in its entirety;
(I) Section 105.6.9, delete in its entirety;
(J) Section 105.6.10, delete in its entirety;
(K) Section 105.6.11, delete in its entirety;
(L) Section 105.6.12, delete in its entirety;
(M) Section 105.6.13, delete in its entirety;
(N) Section 105.6.14, delete in its entirety;
Building Code; Regulations 33
(O) Section 105.6.15, delete in its entirety;
(P) Section 105.6.16, delete in its entirety;
(Q) Section 105.6.17, delete in its entirety;
(R) Section 105.6.18, delete in its entirety;
(S) Section 105.6.19, delete in its entirety;
(T) Section 105.6.20, delete in its entirety;
(U) Section 105.6.21, delete in its entirety;
(V) Section 105.6.22, delete in its entirety;
(W) Section 105.6.23, delete in its entirety;
(X) Section 105.6.24, delete in its entirety;
(Y) Section 105.6.25, delete in its entirety;
(Z) Section 105.6.26, delete in its entirety;
(AA) Section 105.6.27, delete in its entirety;
(BB) Section 105.6.28, delete in its entirety;
(CC) Section 105.6.29, delete in its entirety;
(DD) Section 105.6.30, delete in its entirety;
(EE) Section 105.6.31, delete in its entirety;
(FF) Section 105.6.32, delete in its entirety;
(GG) Section 105.6.33, delete in its entirety;
(HH) Section 105.6.34, delete in its entirety;
(II) Section 105.6.35, delete in its entirety;
(JJ) Section 105.6.36, delete in its entirety;
34 Swansea - Land Usage
(KK) Section 105.6.37, delete in its entirety;
(LL) Section 105.6.38, delete in its entirety;
(MM) Section 105.6.39, delete in its entirety;
(NN) Section 105.6.40, delete in its entirety;
(OO) Section 105.6.41, delete in its entirety;
(PP) Section 105.6.42, delete in its entirety;
(QQ) Section 105.6.43, delete in its entirety;
(RR) Section 105.6.44, delete in its entirety;
(SS) Section 105.6.45, delete in its entirety;
(TT) Section 105.6.46, delete in its entirety;
(UU) Section 105.7.3, delete in its entirety;
(VV) Section 105.7.6, delete in its entirety;
(WW) Section 105.7.7, delete in its entirety;
(XX) Section 105.7.8, delete in its entirety;
(YY) Section 105.7.9, delete in its entirety;
(ZZ) Section 105.7.13, delete in its entirety;
(AAA) Section 307, delete in its entirety; and
(BBB) Section 308.3, delete in its entirety.
(Prior Code, § 15-602) (Ord. 1461, passed 7-17-2006)
§ 150.107 COMPLIANCE WITH CODE.
All persons, firms or corporations hereafter constructing any building or structure in the village
shall comply with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-604)
Building Code; Regulations 35
§ 150.108 ADDITIONAL INSPECTIONS AND FEES.
(A) The following is a list of fire code inspections authorized and fees imposed:
Automatic suppression systems (wet and dry sprinkler, hood system, chemical
agent and the like) shall be tested by the installer and witnessed by the Fire
Department Code Official
$100
Fire Code inspection 0—2,500 square feet of floor space $25 per visit (on routine schedule of
the Fire Department Code Official)
Fire Code inspection 2,501—5,000 square feet $50
Fire Code inspection 5,001—10,000 square feet $100
Fire Code inspection 10,000 and larger $150
Re-inspection of automatic suppression system $50 per visit
(B) The Fire Code inspection fee shall be waived for schools, churches, facilities controlled by
not-for-profit organizations and governmental entities.
(C) A late fee in the amount of 50% of the inspection fee shall be assessed on any Fire Code
inspection fee that is due and payment is not received by the Code Administrator within 30 days after
the date of the invoice. An additional late fee of 50% of the inspection fee shall be imposed for any
fee not received within 90 days of the date of the original invoice.
(Prior Code, § 15-605) (Ord. 1567, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 1627, passed 10-3-2011)
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
§ 150.120 GENERAL.
(A) Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of Swansea,
Illinois hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
(B) Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential
structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises,
structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilations, space, heating, sanitation, protection from
the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance;
the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and
premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties.
2018 S-1
36 Swansea - Land Usage
(C) Intent. This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public
health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance
of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions
shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein.
(D) Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phase of this code is, for any
reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this code.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.121 APPLICABILITY.
(A) General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific
requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. Where differences occur between provisions of
this code and the reference standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Where, in a specific
case, different sections of this code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
(B) Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or a
previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or
repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any
service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut
off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as
necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this code are not intended
to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in
existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner’s designated agent
shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises.
(C) Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of
occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of Swansea Building
Code Regulations. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any
provisions of the Swansea Zoning Code.
(D) Existing remedies. The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or impair
existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition
of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and insanitary.
(E) Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused
directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be executed and installed in a
workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
(F) Historic buildings. The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings
or structures designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the
code official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare.
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36A
(G) Referenced codes and standards.
(1) (a) The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in §§
150.020 through 150.108 and are considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed
extent of each such reference and as further regulated in divisions (G)(2) and (G)(3) below.
(b) Exception. Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of
the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing shall apply.
(2) Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and the referenced
standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.
(3) Provisions in reference codes and standards. Where the extent of the reference to a
referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code, the
provisions of this code, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced
code or standard.
(H) Requirements not covered by code. Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or
proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and
general welfare, not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the code official.
(I) Application of references. References to chapter, or section numbers, or to provisions not
specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of
this code.
(J) Other laws. The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of
local, state or federal law.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.122 [RESERVED].
§ 150.123 DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION.
(A) General. The department of property maintenance inspection is hereby created and the
executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official.
(B) Appointment. The code official shall be appointed by the President of the Village Board of
Trustees of the jurisdiction.
(C) Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the
concurrence of the President of the Village Board of Trustees, the code official shall have the
authority to appoint a/an deputy(s). Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the code
official.
2018 S-1
36B Swansea - Land Usage
(D) Liability. The code official, member of the Board of Appeals or employee charged with the
enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be
rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing
to persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of
official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by
that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall
be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until final termination of the proceedings.
The code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that
is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code.
(E) Permit to occupy.
(1) Permit required.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person owner or agent thereof to occupy or use, or to
permit any person to occupy or use any premises for any purpose including the movement of
furniture, equipment or other personal property into said premises until a permit to occupy has been
issued by the code official. The permit so issued shall state that the condition of the premises and its
proposed occupation complies with all of the provisions of this code as far as can be determined by a
visual inspections of the premises and a review of the records.
(b) Exception. Persons legally and continually occupying a premise prior to December
1, 2015 shall not be required to obtain a permit to occupy.
(2) Application for occupancy. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any
false statements on an application for permit to occupy a dwelling unit as to the names, relationships,
ages, or number of occupants who will occupy the dwelling unit. One of the following documents
shall be submitted with application: copy of lease, sales contract or closing papers.
(3) Action on an application. The code official shall examine or cause to be examined all
applications for permits within a reasonable time after filing. No certificate of occupancy will be
issued until an inspection of the premises has been completed and approved. No inspection shall be
required for a dwelling unit that is less than five years of age.
(4) Suspension of permit. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the occupancy is not
commenced within six months after issuance of the permit.
(5) Revocation of permit. The code official may revoke a permit in case of any false
statement or misrepresentation of facts in the application on which a permit was based, or in the
event a structure or part thereof is condemned pursuant to this code.
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36C
(F) Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the Department in carrying out its
responsibilities under this code shall be indicated in the following schedule.
(1) Inspection permit fee of $50 per unit shall be paid prior to the village conducting an
inspection of a multi-family rental structure (apartments). It shall be the responsibility of the property
owner/agent to make advance payment of the fee and schedule the required inspection with the
village. An inspection shall be valid for a period of one year. The dwelling unit does not have to be
re-inspected during that period, even if the occupancy changes.
(2) Inspection permit fee of $100 shall be paid prior to the village conducting an inspection
of a single family residence. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner/agent to make
advance payment of the fee and schedule the required inspection with the village. An inspection shall
be valid for a period of one year. The dwelling unit does not have to be reinspected during that
period, even if the occupancy changes.
(3) Inspection permit fee of $75 shall be paid prior to the village conducting an inspection
of a manufactured/mobile home. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner/agent to make
advance payment of the fee and schedule the required inspection with the village. An inspection shall
be valid for a period of one year. The dwelling unit does not have to be re-inspected during that
period, even if the occupancy changes.
(4) Inspection permit fee of $100 shall be paid prior to the village conducting an inspection
of a duplex/condominium. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner/agent to make advance
payment of the fee and schedule the required inspection with the village. An inspection shall be valid
for a period of one year. The dwelling unit does not have to be reinspected during that period, even
if the occupancy changes.
(5) A copy of an existing certificate of occupancy shall be a fee of $20.
(6) The certificate of occupancy fee of $30 shall be paid at the time certificate is issued. It
shall be the responsibility of the tenant/occupant to apply for certificate of occupancy after
application for occupancy has been approved.
(7) (a) A re-inspection fee of $50 shall be paid when initial inspections fail or no access to
structure. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner/agent to make the advance payment
prior to scheduling a re-inspection.
(b) Exception. For inspections that fail for minor code violations the Building and
Zoning Director shall use their discretion in waiving the re-inspection fee.
(8) All fees shall be non-refundable.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
2018 S-1
36D Swansea - Land Usage
§ 150.124 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL.
(A) General. The code official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this
code. The code official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt
policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations,
policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such policies
and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this
code.
(B) Inspections. The code official shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept
reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in
writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible
individual. The code official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to
report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.
(C) Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this
code, or whenever the code official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or
upon a premises a condition in violation of this code, the code official is authorized to enter the
structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform duties imposed by this code, provided
that if such structure or premises is occupied the code official shall present credentials to the
occupant and request entry. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the code official shall first
make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure
or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the code official shall have recourse to the
remedies provided by law to secure entry.
(D) Identification. The code official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures
or premises in the performance of duties under this code.
(E) Notice and orders. The code official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure
compliance with this code.
(F) Department records. The code official shall keep official records of all business and
activities of the department specified in the provisions of this code. Such records shall be retained in
the official records for the period required for retention of public record.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.125 APPROVAL.
(A) Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the
provisions of this code, the code official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual
cases upon application of the owner or owner’s representative, provided the code official shall first
find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification
is in compliance
with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health, life and
fire
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36E
safety requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the
Department files.
(B) Alternative materials, methods and equipment. The provisions of this code are not intended
to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically
prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative
material or method of construction shall be approved where the code official finds that the proposed
design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the
material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that
prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
(C) Requesting testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the
provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements
of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the code official
shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the
jurisdiction.
(1) Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test
standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the code official shall be
permitted to approve appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency.
(2) Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the code official for the period
required for retention of public records.
(D) Used material and equipment. The use of used materials which meet the requirements of this
code for new materials is permitted. Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless
such elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in
good and proper working condition and approved by the code official.
(E) Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment and devices approved by the code
official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.
(F) Research reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or
assemblies not specifically provided for in this code, shall consist of valid research reports from
approved sources.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.126 VIOLATIONS.
(A) Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or
in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
(B) Notice of violation. The code official shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance
with § 150.127.
2018 S-1
36F Swansea - Land Usage
(C) Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order
served in accordance with § 150.127 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or civil infraction as
determined by the local municipality, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offence. If
the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official shall institute the appropriate
proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal
or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code
or of order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction
on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall
be a lien upon such real estate.
(D) Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with
any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in
violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to all fines, penalties, and
sentencing of a petty offense, as such term is defined in the Unified Code of Corrections Act (see
730 ILCS 5/5-4.5-75). Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense. (Penalty, see § 150.999.)
(E) Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude
the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a
violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal
act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.127 NOTICES AND ORDERS.
(A) Notice to person responsible. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a
violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in
the manner prescribed in divisions (B) and (C) below to the person responsible for the violation as
specified in this code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with § 150.128(B).
(B) Form. Such notice prescribed in division (A) above shall be in accordance with all of the
following:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
(3) Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued.
(4) Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs and
improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance with the provisions of
this code.
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36G
(5) Inform the property owner of the right to appeal.
(6) Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with § 150.126(C).
(C) Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
(1) Delivered personally;
(2) Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or
(3) If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall
be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice.
(D) Unauthorized tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the code official shall not
be mutilated, destroyed or tampered with, or removed without authorization from the code official.
(E) Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be set forth in §
150.126(C).
(F) Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure
who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell,
transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the
provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such
owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance
order or notice of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed
and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt
of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without
condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of
violation.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.128 UNSAFE STRUCTURE AND EQUIPMENT.
(A) General. When a structure or equipment is found by the code official to be unsafe, or when
a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be
condemned pursuant to the provisions of this code.
(1) Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life,
health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum
safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains
unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty
construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible.
2018 S-1
36H Swansea - Land Usage
(2) Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator,
moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the
premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a
hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure.
(3) Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy
whenever the code official finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to
which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested,
contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or
other essential equipment required by this code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a
hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public.
(4) Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be
occupied by more person than permitted under this code, or was erected, altered or occupied
contrary to law.
(5) Dangerous structure or premises. For the purpose of this code, any structure or
premises that has any or all of the conditions or defects described below shall be considered
dangerous:
(a) Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress that does not
conform to the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction as related to the requirements for
existing buildings as required in the 2015 International Existing Building Code.
(b) The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of
egress is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means
of egress.
(c) Any portion of a building, structure or appurtenance that has been damaged by fire,
earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism or by any other cause to
such an extent that it is likely to partially or completely collapse, or to become detached or
dislodged.
(d) Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the
exterior thereof that is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or
fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting natural or artificial loads of one and one-half the
original designed value.
(e) The building or structure, or part of the building or structure, because of
dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, the removal or movement of some portion of
the ground necessary for the support, or for any other reason, is likely to partially or completely
collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to
fail or give way.
(f) The building or structure, or any portion thereof, is clearly unsafe for its use and
occupancy.
(g) The building or structure is neglected, damaged, dilapidated, unsecured or
abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or
structure to their
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36I
danger, becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to
the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful act.
(h) Any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation
of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the
approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction, or of any law or ordinance to such an extent as to
present either a substantial risk of fire, building collapse or any other threat to life and safety.
(i) A building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because
of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement,
inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical or plumbing system, or otherwise, is determined by the
code official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause
sickness or disease.
(j) Any building or structure, because of a lack of sufficient or proper fire-resistancerated
construction, fire protection systems, electrical system, fuel connections, mechanical system,
plumbing system or other cause, is determined by the code official to be a threat to life or health.
(k) Any portion of a building remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of
the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned so as to constitute such
building or portion thereof as an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
(B) Closing of vacant structures.
(1) If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in
danger of structure collapse, the code official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the
premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the
owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the code official shall cause the
premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement
by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the
structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal
resource.
(2) Authority to disconnect service utilities. The code official shall have the authority to
authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this code
and the referenced codes and standards set forth in § 150.121(G) in case of emergency where
necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or when such utility connection has
been made without approval. The code official shall notify the serving utility and, whenever possible,
the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect
prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection the owner or occupant of the
building structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter.
(C) Notice. Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or equipment under the
provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure
affected by such notice and service on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the
structure or
2018 S-1
36J Swansea - Land Usage
equipment in accordance with § 150.127(C). If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be
placed on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in § 150.127(B).
(D) Placarding.
(1) Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions
within the time given, the code official shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a
placard bearing the word “Condemned” and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the
premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.
(2) Placard removal. The code official shall remove the condemnation placard whenever
the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been
eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the
code official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code.
(E) Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the code official
shall be vacated as ordered by the code official. Any person who shall occupy placarded premises or
shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who
shall let anyone occupy placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the
penalties provided by this code.
(F) Abatement methods. The owner, operator or occupant of a building, premises or equipment
deemed unsafe by the code official shall abate or cause to be abated or corrected such unsafe
conditions either by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or other approved corrective action.
(G) Record. The code official shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe condition. The report
shall state the occupancy of the structure and the nature of the unsafe condition.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.129 EMERGENCY MEASURES.
(A) Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of
failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a
structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual
or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of
explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or
operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby authorized and empowered
to order and require the occupants to vacant the premises forthwith. The code official shall cause to
be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: “This Structure Is Unsafe
and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Code Office.” It shall be unlawful for any person to
enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs,
removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same.
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36K
(B) Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever, in the
opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official
shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such
structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted;
and shall cause such other action to be taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such
emergency.
(C) Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the code official shall temporarily close
structures and close or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public
ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.
(D) Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the code official shall employ the
necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.
(E) Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be
paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against
the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs.
(F) Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order
forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the Appeals Board, be
afforded a hearing as described in this code.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.130 DEMOLITION.
(A) General. The code official shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any
structure, which in the code officials judgment after review is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has
become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and
remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and
make safe and sanitary, or to board up and hold for future repair or to demolish and remove at the
owner’s option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a
period of more than two years, the code official shall order the owner to demolish and remove such
structure, or board up until future repair. Boarding the building up for future repair shall not extend
beyond one year, unless approved by the building official.
(B) Notices and orders. All notices and orders shall comply with § 150.127.
(C) Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within
the time prescribed, the code official shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either
through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost
of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is
located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
2018 S-1
36L Swansea - Land Usage
(D) Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the
governing body or other designated officer under said contact or arrangement aforesaid shall have the
right to sell the salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of
such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted
with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items or expense and the amounts deducted,
for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not
remain to be turned over, the report shall so state, with the approval of the Village Board.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.131 MEANS OF APPEAL.
(A) Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a
notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals,
provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the decision, notice
or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this
code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means. The
fee for an application of appeal of $50 is to be paid at the time application is filed and shall be nonrefundable.
(B) Membership of the Board. The Board of Appeals shall consist of a minimum of five
members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to property
maintenance and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The code official shall be an ex-officio
member but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The Board shall be appointed by the
President of the Village Board of Trustees, and shall service staggered and overlapping terms as
follows: one for five years, one for four years, one for three years, one for two years, and one for
one year. Thereafter, each new member shall serve for five years or unit a successor has been
appointed.
(1) Alternate members. The chief appointing authority shall appoint a minimum of two
alternate members who shall be called by the Board of Appeals Chairman to hear appeals during the
absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required
for Board membership. Alternate members shall be appointed for five years or until a successor has
been appointed.
(2) Chairman. The Board shall annually select one of its members to serve as Chairman.
(3) Disqualification of member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member
has any personal, professional or financial interest.
(4) Secretary. The Building and Zoning Director shall serve as Secretary to the Board. The
Secretary shall file detailed record of all proceedings in the office of the President of the Village
Board of Trustees, and in the office of the code official.
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36M
(C) Notice of meeting. The Board shall meet upon notice from the Chairman, with ten days of
the filing of an appeal, or at state periodic meetings.
(D) Open hearing.
(1) All hearings before the Board shall be open to the public. The appellant, that appellant’s
representative, the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an
opportunity to be heard. A quorum shall consist of a minimum of two-thirds of the Board
membership.
(2) Procedure. The Board shall adopt and make available to the public through the
Secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require
compliance with strict rules of evidence but shall mandate that only relevant information is received.
(E) Postponed hearing. When the full Board is not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant
or the appellant’s representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing.
(F) Board decision. The Board shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official by a
concurring vote of three members.
(1) Resolution. The decision of the Board shall be by resolution. Certified copies shall be
furnished to the appellant and the code official.
(2) Administration. The code official shall take action within five working days in
accordance with the decision of the Board.
(G) Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the
right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for
review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filling of the decision in
the office of the chief administrative officer.
(H) Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than imminent damager notices)
shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until appeal is heard by the Appeals Board.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.132 STOP WORK ORDER.
(A) Authority. Whenever the code official finds any work regulated by this code being
performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner,
the code official is authorized to issue a stop work order.
(B) Issuance. A stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the
property, to the owner’s agent, or to person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the
cited work
2018 S-1
36N Swansea - Land Usage
shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the conditions
under which the cited work is authorized to resume.
(C) Emergencies. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a
written notice prior to stopping the work.
(D) Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a
stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $25 or more than $750. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
DEFINITIONS
§ 150.133 GENERAL.
(A) Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this
code, have the meanings shown in § 150.134.
(B) Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the
masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the
plural, the singular.
(C) Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in
the 2015 International Building Code, 2015 International Residential Code, 2015 International
Existing Building Code, 2006 International Fire Code, 2015 International Fuel Gas Code, 2015
International Mechanical Code, State of Illinois Plumbing Code, or 2014 National Electrical Code,
such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes.
(D) Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this
section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.
(E) Parts. Whenever the words “dwelling unit,” “dwelling,” “premises,” “building,” “rooming
house,” “rooming unit,” “housekeeping unit,” or “story” are stated in this code, they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.134 DEFINITIONS.
ANCHORED. Secured in a manner that provides positive connection.
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36O
APPLIANCE. A device or apparatus that is manufactured and designed to utilize energy and for
which this code provides specific requirements.
APPROVED. Approved by the code official.
BASEMENT. That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade.
BATHROOM. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.
BEDROOM. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes in either a
dwelling or sleeping unit.
CODE OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this
code, or any duly authorized representative.
COMBUSTION AIR. The air provided to fuel-burning equipment including air for fuel
combustion, draft hood dilution and ventilation of the equipment enclosure.
CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
DETACHED. When a structural element is physically disconnected from another and that
connection is necessary to provide a positive connection.
DETERIORATION. To weaken, disintegrate, corrode, rust or decay and lose effectiveness.
DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or
more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or
agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The EASEMENT shall be permitted to be
for use under, on or above a said lot or lots.
EQUIPMENT. All piping, ducts, vents, control devices and other components of systems other
than appliances that are permanently installed and integrated to provide control of environmental
conditions for buildings. This definition shall also include other systems specifically regulated in this
code.
EQUIPMENT SUPPORT. Those structural members or assemblies of members or
manufactured elements, including braces, frame, lugs, snugger, hangers or saddles, that transmit
gravity load, lateral load and operating load between the equipment and the structure.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the
control of owners or operators of such premises.
2018 S-1
36P Swansea - Land Usage
GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food.
GRAFFITI. Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, or design or collections thereof, which
marked, etched, scratched, painted, drawn or printed on any structural component of any building,
structure, or other facility, regardless of the nature of the material of that structural component.
GROUP R. Residential occupancies containing sleeping units or more than two dwelling units
where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature.
GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open
sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to
a lower level.
HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms,
toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered
HABITABLE SPACES.
HAZARDOUS LOCATION. Any location considered to be a fire hazard for flammable vapors,
dust, combustible fibers or other highly combustible substances.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped
and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain, within such
a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
IGNITION SOURCE. A flame, spark or hot surface capable of igniting flammable vapors or
fumes. Such sources include appliance burners, burner ignitions and electrical switching devices.
IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or
death at any time.
INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats,
vermin or other pests.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets
for reason including but not limited to being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair,
or incapable of being moved under its own power.
LABELED. Equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed a label, seal, symbol
or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other
organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production
of the above-labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the equipment, material or product
meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36Q
LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET. To permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or structure by a person who is or is not the
legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the
sale of land.
LIVING SPACE. Space within a dwelling unit utilized for living, sleeping, eating, cooking,
bathing, washing and sanitation purposes.
NEGLECT. The lack of proper maintenance for a building or structure.
OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.
OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space
within a building.
OPENABLE AREA. That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed
ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR. Any agent of the owner, manager, contract purchaser, executor, administrator,
trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner, person who is in charge, care or control of such
premises in which buildings or dwelling units are rented shall be bound to comply with this
subchapter and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto to the same extent as if he or she
where the owner.
OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in
the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to
the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take
possession of real property by a court.
PERSON. Any natural person, agent, association, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity
capable of owning, occupying, or using property in the village.
PEST ELIMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by
eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serves as their
food or water; by the approved pest elimination methods.
PREMISES. The lot, plot or parcel of land, and includes the buildings, structures, and dwelling
units thereon.
PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the
ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public
for public use.
2018 S-1
36R Swansea - Land Usage
ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for
compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling.
ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or
intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes.
RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall
include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper,
rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include permanent
provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and
spaces that are part of a dwelling unit are not SLEEPING UNITS.
STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is
not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant
either did an act which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally
required to do.
STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or portion thereof.
TENANT. A person, occupant of leased or rented premises, corporation, partnership or group
whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower.
ULTIMATE DEFORMATION. The deformation at which failure occurs and which be deemed
to occur if the sustainable load reduces to 80% or less of the maximum strength.
VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned
air to, or removing such air from, any space.
WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line,
undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
YARD. An open space located on the same lot with a building, structure or use, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground up, except for accessory buildings, or such projections as are expressly
permitted in these regulations.
YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and
nearest line or point of the principal building.
YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the
nearest line or point of the principal building.
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36S
YARD, SIDE. A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the side lot line
and the nearest line or point of the building.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 150.135 GENERAL.
(A) Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the minimum conditions and the
responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property.
(B) Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property
in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall
not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a
sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this subchapter.
Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit, or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a
clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or
premises which they occupy and control.
(C) Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall
be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a
blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.136 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.
(A) Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and
sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant
occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.
(B) Grading and draining.
(1) All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to
prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon.
(2) Exception. Approved retention areas and reservoirs.
(C) Sidewalks and driveways. All private sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking
spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous
conditions.
2018 S-1
36T Swansea - Land Usage
(D) Weeds.
(1) All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth
in excess of 12 inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses,
annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers or gardens.
(2) Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy
weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with §
150.126 and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the
notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the
jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds
growing thereon, and the cost of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for
the property.
(E) Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent
harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by
approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After pest elimination, proper
precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation.
(F) Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam,
vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or
adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant.
(G) Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls,
shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
(H) Motor vehicles.
(1) Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle
shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of
major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles
is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth.
(2) Exceptions.
(a) A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body
work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed
and approved for such purposes.
(b) A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body
work, on the premises of a place of business engaged in and licensed to wreck, junk or repair
vehicles for a period of time not to exceed 45 days.
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36U
(c) A vehicle over 30 years of age kept and registered as an antique vehicle shall be
permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body work for a period of time not to exceed 180
days, provided that the owner of the vehicle provides to the village sufficient burden of proof.
(I) Parking motor vehicles.
(1) The parking of vehicles on any surface that is not an improved surface in the front or
side yard areas of a residential zone district is prohibited. Boats, travel trailers and utility trailers are
subject to § 154.059(C).
(2) Improved surface. Means an area, excluding a driveway, the surface of which is
comprised of a selected materials constructed to a depth sufficient to distribute the weight of a
vehicle over such area to preclude deterioration and deflection of the area due to vehicle load,
adverse weather, or other conditions.
(J) Graffiti. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from graffiti. The existence
of graffiti on building, or on structures, including but not limited to fences or walls located upon any
property is declared a nuisance. Where graffiti is found, a notice shall be issued describing the
nuisance and shall establish a reasonable time limit for the abatement thereof by such owner, which
time shall be not less than five days nor more than 14 days after service of such notice. The notice
shall also specify clearly that graffiti established on a painted surface shall be painted over with a
color consistent with the predominant tone of the building or structure, and that graffiti established
on any unpainted masonry or wood surface shall be removed by cleaning so that such unpainted
surface is returned.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018; Ord. 1825, passed 5-21-2018)
§ 150.137 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS.
(A) Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and
good repair.
(B) Enclosures.
(1) Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than 24 inches (610
mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 48 inches (1,219 mm) in
height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool.
Openings in the fence or barrier shall not allow the passage of a four-inch-diameter (102 mm)
sphere. The vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the fence or barrier shall not exceed
two inches (51 mm) for grade surfaces that are not solid, such as grass or gravel, where measured on
the side of the fence or barrier that faces away from the vessel. Gates and doors in such barriers shall
be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is a minimum of 54 inches (1372
mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the
gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close
and latch when released
2018 S-1
36V Swansea - Land Usage
from an open position of six inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. No existing pool enclosure shall be
removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier.
(2) Exception. Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F 1346 shall
be exempt from the provisions of this section.
(C) Barrier. Where a wall of a dwelling serve as part of barrier, one of the following conditions
shall be met: (IRC AG 105.2(9))
(1) The pool shall be equipped with a powered safety cover in compliance with ASTM F
1346;
(2) Doors with direct access to the pool through that wall shall be equipped with an alarm
which produces an audible warning when the door and/or its screen, if present, are opened. The
alarm shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2017. The deactivation switch(es) shall be
located at least 54 inches (1,372 mm) above the threshold of the door; or
(3) Other means of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-latching devices, which
are approved by the governing body, shall be accepted as long as the degree of protection afforded is
not less than the protection afforded by division (C)(1) and (C)(2) described herein.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.138 EXTERIOR STRUCTURE.
(A) General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound
and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
(B) Unsafe conditions.
(1) The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced
to comply with §§ 150.020 through 150.108 of the Swansea Code of Ordinances as required for
existing buildings:
(a) The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal loads, the
load effects or the required strength;
(b) The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls and columns
to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or load effects;
(c) Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit state;
(d) Siding and masonry joints including joints between the building envelope and the
perimeter of windows, doors and skylights are not maintained, weather resistant or water tight;
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36W
(e) Structural members that have evidence of deterioration or that are not capable of
safely supporting all nominal loads and load effects, including tie down devices for manufactured
homes;
(f) Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings, are not plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all
nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
(g) Exterior walls that are not anchored to supporting and supported elements or are
not plumb and free of holes, cracks or breaks and loose or rotting materials, are not properly
anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
(h) Roofing or roofing components that have defects that admit rain, roof surfaces with
inadequate drainage, or any portion of the roof framing that is not in good repair with signs of
deterioration, fatigue or without proper anchorage and incapable of supporting all nominal loads and
resisting all load effects;
(i) Flooring and flooring components with defects that affect serviceability or flooring
components that show signs of deterioration or fatigue, are not properly anchored or are incapable of
supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
(j) Veneer, cornices, belt courses, corbels, trim, wall facings and similar decorative
features not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all
nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
(k) Overhang extensions or projections including, but not limited to, trash chutes,
canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts not properly
anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and
resisting all load effects;
(l) Exterior stairs, decks, porches, balconies and all similar appurtenances attached
thereto, including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly anchored or that are
anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
or
(m) Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenance not structurally
sound or not properly anchored, or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all
nominal loads and resisting all load effects.
(2) Exceptions.
(a) When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
(b) Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the code
official.
2018 S-1
36X Swansea - Land Usage
(C) Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and
window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences, shall be maintained in good
condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the
elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and
chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints, as well as
those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights, shall be
maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be
coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion, and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized
and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior
surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.
(D) Premises identification. Building shall have approved address numbers placed in a position
to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall
contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters.
Number shall be a minimum of four inches (102 mm) in height with a minimum stroke width of onehalf
inch (12.7 mm).
(E) Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and
shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads.
(F) Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks
and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.
(G) Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting
materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent
deterioration.
(H) Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that
admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or
interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good
repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a
public nuisance.
(I) Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and
similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe
condition.
(J) Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited to canopies,
marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in
good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all
exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by
periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
(K) Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony,
and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with
proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36Y
(L) Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of
supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. Handrails shall be
provided on at least one side of each continuous run of treads or flight with four or more risers.
(M) Opening limitations. Required guards shall not have openings from the walking surface to
the required guard height which allow passage of a sphere four inches (102 mm) in diameter.
(N) Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in
sound condition, good repair and weather tight.
(1) Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes.
(2) Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable
and capable of being held in position by window hardware.
(O) Insect screens.
(1) During the period from April 1 to October 31, every door, window and other outside
opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any
areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of minimum
16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a
self-closing device in good working condition.
(2) Exception. Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air
curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
(P) Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies, operator systems if provided, and hardware
shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and sleeping units
shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with §
150.163(Q).
(Q) Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance
of rodents, rain and surface drainage water.
(R) Guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied
with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents.
(S) Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or
housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and
property within.
(1) Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit
that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock designed to be readily openable
from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort
and shall
2018 S-1
36Z Swansea - Land Usage
have a minimum lock throw of one inch (25 mm). Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to
the manufacturer’s specifications and maintained in good working order. For the purpose of this
division (S)(1), a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock.
(2) Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part with six feet (1,828 mm) above
ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking device.
(3) Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit,
rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices that
secure the units from unauthorized entry.
(T) Gates. All exterior gates, gate assemblies, operator systems if provided, and hardware shall
be maintained in good condition. Latches at all entrances shall tightly secure the gates.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.139 INTERIOR STRUCTURE.
(A) General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure
which they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing
a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or
more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or
public areas of the structure and exterior property.
(1) Unsafe conditions. The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be
repaired or replaced to comply with §§ 150.020 through 150.108 as required for existing buildings:
(a) The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal loads, the
load effects or the required strength;
(b) The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls and columns
to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads and loads effects;
(c) Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit state;
(d) Structural members are incapable of supporting nominal loads and load effects;
(e) Stairs, landings, balconies and all similar walking surfaces, including guards and
handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly anchored or are anchored with connections not
capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36AA
(f) Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings are not plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all
nominal loads and resisting all load effects.
(2) Exceptions.
(a) When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
(b) Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the code
official.
(B) Structure members. All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be
capable of supporting the imposed loads.
(C) Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including window and doors, shall be maintained in
good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired,
removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions
shall be corrected.
(D) Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other
walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair.
(E) Open risers. Open risers are permitted provided that the opening between treads does not
permit the passage of a four-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere. (IRC R311.7.5.1)
(F) Under-stair protection. Enclosed accessible space under-stairs shall have walls, under-stair
surface and any soffits protected on the enclosed side with one-half-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board.
(IRC R302.7)
(G) Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of
supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair.
Handrails shall be provided on at least one side of each continuous run of treads or flight with four or
more risers. (IRC R311.7.8)
(H) Opening limitations. Required guards shall not have openings from the walking surface to
the required guard height which allow passage of a sphere four inches (102 mm) in diameter. (IRC
R312.1.3)
(I) Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its s frame and shall be
capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or
tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware.
(J) Dwelling/garage opening penetration protection. Openings and penetrations through the
walls or ceilings separating the dwelling from the garage shall be in accordance with division (J)(1)
through (J)(3) below. (IRC R302.5)
2018 S-1
36BB Swansea - Land Usage
(1) Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for
sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage and residence shall be
equipped with solid wood doors not less than one and three-eighths-inches (35 mm) thick, or 20-
minute fire-rated doors, equipped with a self-closing device.
(2) Duct penetration. Ducts in the garage and ducts penetrating the walls or ceiling
separating the dwelling from the garage shall be constructed of a minimum No. 26 gage (0.48 mm)
sheet steel or other approved material and shall have no openings into the garage. (IRC R302.5.2)
(3) Other penetrations.
(a) Penetrations through the separation required in division (K) below shall be
protected as required by division (J)(3)(b) below. (IRC R302.5.3)
(b) At opening around vents, pipes, ducts, cables and wires at ceiling and floor level,
with an approved material to resist the free passage of flame and products of combustion. The
material filling this annular space shall not be required to meet the ASTM E 136 requirements. (IRC
R302.11 item 4)
(K) Garage ceiling.
(1) Fire-rated sheathing for garage ceiling beneath habitable rooms shall be installed in
accordance with the 2015 International Residential Code.
(2) Exception. Not required where an approved certified sprinkler systems is installed.
(L) Automatic garage door openers.
(1) Automatic garage door openers, if provided, shall be listed and labeled in accordance
with UL 325.
(2) Note. Automatic garage door openers must have receptacle, the use of an extension cord
is prohibited.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.140 COMPONENT SERVICEABILITY.
(A) General. The components of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition.
(B) Unsafe conditions. Where any of the following conditions cause the component or system to
be beyond its limit state, the component or system shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired
or replaced to comply with §§ 150.020 through 150.108 as required for existing buildings:
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36CC
(1) Soils that have been subjected to any of the following conditions:
(a) Collapse of footing or foundation systems;
(b) Damage to footing, foundation, concrete or other structural element due to soil
expansion;
(c) Adverse effects to the design strength of footing, foundation, concrete or other
structural element due to a chemical reaction from the soil;
(d) Inadequate soil as determined by a geotechnical investigation;
(e) Where the allowable bearing capacity of the soil is in doubt; or
(f) Adverse effects to the footing, foundation, concrete or other structural element due
to the ground water table.
(2) Concrete that has been subject to any of the following conditions:
(a) Deterioration;
(b) Ultimate deformation;
(c) Fractures;
(d) Fissures;
(e) Spalling;
(f) Exposed reinforcement; or
(g) Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
(3) Aluminum that has been subject to any of the following conditions:
(a) Deterioration;
(b) Corrosion;
(c) Elastic deformation;
(d) Ultimate deformation;
(e) Stress or stain cracks;
2018 S-1
36DD Swansea - Land Usage
(f) Joint fatigue; or
(g) Detached, dislodge or failing connections.
(4) Masonry that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
(a) Deterioration;
(b) Ultimate deformation;
(c) Fractures in masonry or mortar joints;
(d) Fissures in masonry or mortar joints;
(e) Spalling;
(f) Exposed reinforcement; or
(g) Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
(5) Steel that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
(a) Deterioration;
(b) Elastic deformation;
(c) Ultimate deformation;
(d) Metal fatigue; or
(e) Detached, dislodge or failing connections.
(6) Wood that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
(a) Ultimate deformation;
(b) Deterioration;
(c) Damage from insects, rodents and other vermin;
(d) Fire damage beyond charring;
(e) Significant splits and cracks;
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36EE
(f) Horizontal shear cracks;
(g) Vertical shear cracks;
(h) Inadequate support;
(i) Detached, dislodged or failing connections; or
(j) Excessive cutting and notching.
(7) Exceptions.
(a) When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
(b) Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the code
official.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.141 HANDRAILS AND GUARDRAILS.
(A) General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers shall have a
handrail on one side of the stairs and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck,
ramp or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade
below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) in height or more than
42 inches (1,067 mm) in height measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the
finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) in
height above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface.
Handrails shall be provided on at least one side of each continuous run of treads or flight with four or
more risers. (IRC R311.7.8)
(B) Opening limitations. Required guards shall not have openings from the walking surface to
the required guard height which allow passage of a sphere four inches (102 mm) in diameter. (IRC
R312.1.3)
(C) Exception. Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building code.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.142 RUBBISH AND GARBAGE.
(A) Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of
every structure shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
(B) Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and
sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers.
2018 S-1
36FF Swansea - Land Usage
(1) Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every occupied premise shall supply approved
covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall be responsible for the removal of
rubbish.
(2) Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not operation shall not be discarded,
abandoned or stored on premises without first removing the doors.
(C) Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish garbage in a
clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal facility or
approved garbage containers.
(1) Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of the following:
(a) An approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit;
(b) An approved incinerator unit in the structure available to the occupants in each
dwelling unit; or
(c) An approved leakproof, covered, outside garbage container.
(2) Containers. The operator of every establishment producing garbage shall provide, and
at all times cause to be utilized, approved leakproof containers provided with close-fitting covers for
the storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.143 PEST ELIMINATION.
(A) Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures
in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will
not be injurious to human health. After pest elimination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
reinfestation.
(B) Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for pest elimination within the
structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.
(C) Single occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential
structure shall be responsible for pest elimination on the premises.
(D) Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units, a
multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for pest
elimination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is
caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant and
owner shall be responsible for pest elimination.
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36GG
(E) Occupant.
(1) The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent and pest-free
condition of the structure.
(2) Exception. Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall
be responsible for pest elimination.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.144 [RESERVED].
LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
§ 150.145 GENERAL.
(A) Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern minimum conditions and standards for
light, ventilation and space for occupying a structure.
(B) Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and
space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owneroccupant,
or permit another person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the
requirements of this subchapter.
(C) Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed,
artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with §§ 150.020 through 150.108 shall be
permitted.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.146 LIGHT.
(A) Habitable spaces.
(1) Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved size facing directly to
the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8% of
the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any
room and such obstructions are located less than three feet (914 mm) from the window and extend to
a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the
outdoors not to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total
window area for the room.
2018 S-1
36HH Swansea - Land Usage
(2) Exception. Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is
provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least
8% of the floor area of the interior room or space, but a minimum of 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The
exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served.
(B) Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies,
other than in one- and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at least a 60-watt
standard incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet (19 m2) of floor area or equivalent
illumination, provided that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet (9,144 mm).
In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of egress, stairways
shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by the means of egress is occupied with the
minimum of one footcandle (11 lux) at floors, landings and treads.
(C) Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to
permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of
the appliances, equipment and fixtures.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.147 VENTILATION.
(A) Habitable spaces.
(1) Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window. The total openable area
of the window in every room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum glazed area required in §
150.146(A).
(2) Exception. Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated
through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8% of
the floor area of the interior room or space, but a minimum of 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The
ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated.
(B) Bathrooms and toilet rooms.
(1) Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation requirements for
habitable spaces as required by § 150.147(A), except that a window shall not be required in such
spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation
system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated.
(2) Exception. This division (B) shall not apply to existing non-conforming buildings or
structures.
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36II
(C) Cooking facilities.
(1) Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in
any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be
present in the rooming unit or dormitory unit.
(2) Exceptions.
(a) Where specifically approved in writing by the code official.
(b) Devices such as coffee pots and microwave ovens shall not be considered cooking
appliances.
(D) Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or
mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating
agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.
(E) Clothes dryer exhaust.
(1) Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall be
exhausted outside the structure in accordance with the manufacturer’s instruction.
(2) Exception.:Listed and labeled condensing (ductless) clothes dryers.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.148 OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS.
(A) Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory units
shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces.
(B) Minimum room widths.
(1) A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall be a minimum of seven feet (2,134 mm) in
any plan dimension. Kitchen shall have a minimum clear passageway of three feet (914 mm) between
counterfronts and appliances or counterfronts and walls.
(2) Exception. This division (B) shall not apply to existing non-conforming buildings or
structures.
(C) Minimum ceiling heights.
(1) Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and
habitable basement area shall have a minimum clear ceiling height of seven feet (2,134 mm).
2018 S-1
36JJ Swansea - Land Usage
(2) Exceptions.
(a) In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced a minimum of four feet
(1,219 mm) on center and projecting a maximum of six inches (152 mm) below the required ceiling
height.
(b) Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings constructed after January 1,
1980 occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a minimum ceiling
height of six feet eight inches (2,033 mm) with a minimum clear height of six feet four inches (1,932
mm) under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions. One- and two-family dwellings
constructed prior to January 1, 1980 shall have no minimum ceiling height for basement rooms.
(c) Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a
sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a minimum clear ceiling height of seven feet (2,134
mm) over a minimum of one-third of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area
of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a minimum clear ceiling height of five feet
(1,524 mm) shall be included.
(d) Compliance with this division (C) for existing non-conforming buildings or
structures shall be at the discretion of the Building and Zoning Director.
(D) Bedroom and living room requirements. Every bedroom and living room shall comply with
the requirements of division (D)(1) through (D)(6) below.
(1) Room area. Every living room shall contain at least 120 square feet (11.2 mm) and
every bedroom shall contain a minimum of 70 square feet (6.5 m2) and every bedroom occupied by
more than one person shall contain a minimum of 50 square feet (4.6 mm2) of floor area for each
occupant thereof.
(2) Closet. Bedrooms shall contain at least one closet contain at least nine square feet or an
approved wardrobe cabinet.
(3) Access from bedroom.
(a) Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or
habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces.
(b) Exceptions.
1. Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.
2. Non-conforming use.
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36KK
(4) Water closet accessibility.
(a) Every bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet and one lavatory
without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at
least one water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story.
(b) Exception. Non-conforming use.
(5) Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping
purposes.
(6) Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this code
including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width
requirements of §§ 150.145 through 150.148; the plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities
requirements of §§ 150.149 through 150.155; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle
requirements of §§ 150.156 through 150.161; and the smoke detector and emergency escape
requirements of §§ 150.162 through 150.163.
(E) Overcrowding. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by
the minimum area requirements:
MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS
SPACE MINIMUM AREA IN SQUARE FEET
1-2 occupants 3-5 occupants 6 or more occupants
Living rooma., b. 120 120 150
Dining rooma., b. No requirement 80 100
Bedrooms Shall comply with § 150.148(D)(1)
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.093 m2.
a. See § 150.148(E)(2) for combined living rooming/dining room spaces.
b. See § 150.148(E)(1) for limitations on determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes.
(1) Sleeping area.
(a) The minimum occupancy area required by the above table shall not be included as a
sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas
shall comply with division (D) above.
(b) Exceptions.
1. Non-conforming use.
2018 S-1
36LL Swansea - Land Usage
2. Manufactured homes.
A. All bedrooms shall have at least 50 square feet of floor area.
B. Bedrooms designed for two or more people shall have 70 square feet of
floor area plus 50 square feet for each person in excess of two. (HUD 3280.109)
(2) Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the
requirements of the above table if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the
space is located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room.
(F) Efficiency unit. Nothing in §§ 150.145 through 150.148 shall prohibit an efficiency living
unit from meeting the following requirements:
(1) A unit occupied by not more than one occupant shall have a minimum clear floor area
of 120 square feet (11.2m2). A unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a minimum
clear floor area of 220 square feet (20.4m2). A unit occupied by three occupants shall have a
minimum clear floor area of 320 square feet (29.7m2). These required areas shall be exclusive of the
areas required by division (F)(21) and (F)(3) below.
(2) The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration
facilities, each having a minimum clear working space of 30 inches (762 mm) in front. Light and
ventilation conforming to this code shall be provided.
(3) The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory
and bathtub or shower.
(4) The maximum number of occupants shall be three.
(G) Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain
suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be
adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities
for temporary storage.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS
§ 150.149 GENERAL.
(A) Scope. The provisions of §§ 150.149 through 150.155 shall govern the minimum plumbing
systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided.
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36MM
(B) Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing
facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as
owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply
with the requirements of §§ 150.149 through 150.155.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.150 REQUIRED FACILITIES.
(A) Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water
closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory
shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading
directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a
substitute for the required lavatory.
(B) Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied
for each four rooming units.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.151 TOILET ROOMS.
(A) Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only
passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be
provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.
(B) Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to be
a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-25-2018)
§ 150.152 PLUMBING SYSTEMS AND FIXTURES.
(A) General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order,
and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function
for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe,
sanitary and functional condition.
(B) Fixtures clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and
cleaning.
(C) Pressure-relief valve. Boilers shall be equipped with pressure-relief valves with minimum
rated capacities for equipment served. Pressure-relief valves shall be set at the maximum rating of
the boiler.
2018 S-1
36NN Swansea - Land Usage
Discharge shall be piped to drains by gravity to within 18 inches (457 mm) of the floor or to an open
receptor.
(D) Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure
constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate
venting, cross connection, backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for
similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.153 WATER SYSTEM.
(A) General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other
plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved
private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be
supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the State of Illinois
Plumbing Code.
(B) Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water
inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin
faucets, janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in
place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved
permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
(C) Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of
water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenance in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate
to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.
(D) Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and
capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory,
bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a minimum temperature of 110° F. (43 ° C.). A gas-burning
water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room
normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination
temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and
maintained on water heaters, discharge pipe within six inches of floor. (IRC P2803.6)
(E) Water heaters installed in garages.
(1) Water heaters having an ignition source shall be elevated such that the source of ignition
is not less than 18 inches (457 mm) above the garage floor. (IRC P2801.6)
(2) Exception. Elevation of the ignition source is not required for appliances that are listed
as flammable vapor ignition resistant (documentation of certification is required).
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36OO
(F) Supply freeze protection. Water supply system components subject to temperatures below 32°
F. (0° C.) shall be equipped with an approved freeze protection device.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.154 SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
(A) General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system
or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
(B) Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and
be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defeats.
(C) Grease interceptors. Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall be
maintained in accordance with this code and manufacturer’s installation instructions. Grease
interceptors and automatic grease removal devises shall be regularly serviced and cleaned to prevent
the discharge of oil, grease, and other substances harmful or hazardous to the building drainage
system, the public sewer, the private sewage disposal system or the sewer treatment plant or
processes. All records of maintenance, cleaning and repairs shall be available for inspection by the
code official.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.155 STORM DRAINAGE.
Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises shall
not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 150.156 GENERAL.
(A) Scope. The provisions of §§ 150.156 through 150.161 shall govern minimum mechanical
and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.
(B) Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and
electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy
as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the
requirements of §§ 150.156 through 150.161.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
2018 S-1
36PP Swansea - Land Usage
§ 150.157 HEATING FACILITIES.
(A) Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this
section.
(B) Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of
maintaining a room temperature of 68° F. (20° C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms
based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in section R303.9 of the
International Residential Code. Cooking appliances shall not be used, nor shall portable unvented
fuel-burning space heaters be used, as a means to provide required heating.
(C) Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or
more dwelling units, or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the
occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 1 to April 30 to maintain a
minimum temperature of 68° F. (20° C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
(D) Installation of materials. All materials used shall be installed in strict accordance with the
standards under which the materials are accepted and approved. In the absence of such installation
procedures, the manufacturer’s instructions shall be followed. Where the requirements of referenced
standards or manufacturer’s instructions do not conform to minimum provisions of this code, the
provisions of this code shall apply. (IRC G2415.1)
(E) Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures shall be measured three
feet (914 mm) above the floor near the center of the room and two feet (610 mm) inward from the
center of each exterior wall.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.158 MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT.
(A) Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances,
cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe
working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function.
(B) Removal of combustion products.
(1) All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney
or vent.
(2) Exception. Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented
operation.
(C) Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained.
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36QQ
(D) (1) Equipment and appliances having ignition source shall be elevated such that the source
of ignition is not less than 18 inches (457 mm) above the floor in hazardous locations. For the
purpose of this division (D), rooms or spaces that are not part of the living space of a dwelling unit
and that communicate directly with a private garage through openings shall be considered to be part
of the private garage. (IRC G2408.2)
(2) Exception. Elevation of the ignition source is not required for appliances that are listed
as flammable vapor ignition resistant.
(3) Installation in residential garages. In residential garages where appliances are installed
in a separate, enclosed space having access only from outside of the garage, such appliances shall be
permitted to be installed at floor level, provided that the required combustion air is taken from the
exterior of the garage. (IRC G2408.1)
(E) Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in
effective operation.
(F) Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of
the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment.
(G) Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to
a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping
therefrom, shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically
approved.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.159 ELECTRICAL FACILITIES.
(A) Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in
compliance with the requirements of this section and § 150.160.
(B) Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for
determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with NFPA 70 listed in §§ 150.162
through 150.165. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single phase electrical
service having a minimum rating of 100 amperes.
(C) Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure
constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper
fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or
damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate
the hazard.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
2018 S-1
36RR Swansea - Land Usage
§ 150.160 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.
(A) Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and
maintained in a safe and approved manner.
(B) Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate and
remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounding-type receptacle or
a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one
receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection.
All receptacles outlets shall have the appropriate faceplate cover for the location.
(1) Bathrooms within six feet of water source.
(2) Kitchens within six feet of water source.
(3) All outside receptacles shall be weatherproof and GFCI.
(C) Luminaires. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry
room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric luminaire. Pool and spa
luminaries over 15 V shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection.
(D) Wiring. Flexible cords shall not be used for permanent wiring, or for running through
doors, windows, or cabinets, or concealed within walls, floors, or ceilings.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.161 DUST SYSTEMS.
Dust systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable of performing the
required function.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
§ 150.162 GENERAL.
(A) Scope. The provisions of §§ 150.162 through 150.168 shall govern minimum conditions and
standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities
and equipment to be provided.
(B) Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety
facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owneroccupant
or
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 36SS
permit another person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of §§
150.162 through 150.168.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.163 MEANS OF EGRESS.
(A) General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any
point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the International
Fire Code.
(B) Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the International Fire Code shall be
unobstructed.
(C) Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which
egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door
hardware conforms to that permitted by the International Building Code.
(D) Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in
accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following. Required
emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the
use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over
emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with
the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or
removable from the inside without the use of key, tool or force greater than that which is required
for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening.
(E) Fire partitions.
(1) Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for
sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage and residence shall be
equipped with either solid wood doors not less than one and three-eighths-inch (35 mm) in thickness,
solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than one and three-eighths-inch (35 mm) thick, or 20-
minute fire-rated doors. (IRC 309.1 2003)
(2) Floor surfaces. Garage floor surfaces shall be of approved noncombustible material.
(IRC 309.3 2003)
(3) Separation required. The garage shall be separated from the residence and its attic area
by not less than one-half-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board applied to the garage side. Garages beneath
habitable rooms shall be separated from all habitable rooms above by not less than five-eighths-inch
(15.9 mm) Type X gypsum board or equivalent. Where the separation is a floor-ceiling assembly, the
structure supporting the separation shall also be protected by not less than one-half-inch (12.7 mm)
gypsum board or equivalent. (IRC 309.2 2003)
2018 S-1
36TT Swansea - Land Usage
(4) Duplex. Dwelling units in two-family dwellings shall be separated from each other by
wall and/or floor assemblies having not less than one-hour fire-resistance rating when tested in
accordance with ASTM E 119. Fire-resistance-rated floor-ceiling and wall assemblies shall extend to
and be tight against the exterior wall, and wall assemblies shall extend to the underside of the roof
sheathing. (IRC 317.1 2003)
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.164 FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS.
(A) Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required fire-resistance rating of fire-resistance-rated
walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained.
(B) Opening protective. Required opening protective shall be maintained in an operative
condition. All fire and smokestop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and
smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.165 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
(A) General.
(1) All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or
control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in a operable condition at all times in
accordance with the 2006 International Fire Code.
(2) Automatic sprinkler systems. Inspection, testing and maintenance of automatic sprinkler
systems shall be in accordance with NFPA 25.
(B) Smoke alarms. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in
Group R or I-1 occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations:
(1) On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of
bedrooms.
(2) In each room used for sleeping purposes.
(3) In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including
crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings and dwelling units with split levels and without an
intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice
for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper
level.
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 37
(C) Power source.
(1) In Group R or I-1 occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary
power from the building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source and
shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low.
Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent
protection.
(2) Exception. Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in buildings where
no construction is taking place, buildings that are not served from a commercial power source and in
existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of
interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or
basement available which could provide access for building wiring without the removal of interior
finishes.
(D) Interconnection.
(1) Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual
dwelling unit in Group R or 1-1 occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such
manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all the alarms in the individual unit. Physical
interconnection of smoke alarms shall not be required where listed wireless alarms are installed and
all alarms sound upon activation of one alarm. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms
over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
(2) Exceptions.
(a) Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not undergoing alterations,
repairs or construction of any kind.
(b) Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where
alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the
structure, unless there is an attic crawl space or basement available which could provide access for
interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
(E) Carbon monoxide detectors. Effective January 1, 2007, every Illinois home was required to
have at least one carbon monoxide alarm in an operating condition within 15 feet of every room used
for sleeping purposes. Homes that do not rely on the burning of fuel for heat, ventilation or hot
water; are not connected to a garage; and are not near a source of carbon monoxide (as determined
by the code official) are not required to install carbon monoxide detectors. (Public Act 94-741)
(Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.166 LIEN.
(A) Charges for such building removal, repair or alteration including attorney’s fees and costs
shall be a lien upon the premises.
2018 S-1
38 Swansea - Land Usage
(B) A bill representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service shall be
presented to the owner.
(C) If this bill is not paid within 30 days of submission of the bill, a notice of lien for the cost
and expenses incurred by the village shall be recorded in the following manner:
(1) A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof;
(2) The amount of money representing the costs and expenses incurred or payable for the
service;
(3) The date or dates when said costs and expenses were incurred by the village; and
(4) The lien shall be filed within 60 days after expenditure.
(Prior Code, § 150.125, § 15-706) (Ord. 1466, passed 8-21-2006; Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.167 PAYMENT.
Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his or her address is
known. Upon payment of the cost and expense after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be
released by the village or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release shall be filed
or recorded in the same manner as filing notice of the lien.
(Prior Code, §150.126, § 15-707) (Ord. 1466, passed 8-21-2006; Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.168 FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.
Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for non-payment of the same, after
deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be in the
name of the village, after the lien is in effect for 60 days.
(Prior Code, § 150.127, § 15-708) (Ord. 1466, passed 8-21-2006; Ord. 1806, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
(A) Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25, nor
more than $750, plus costs. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall
be considered a separate offense. (Prior Code, § 15-108)
(B) Any person or entity convicted of a violation of §§ 150.120 through 150.168 of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100, nor more than $750, for each such offense.
2018 S-1
Building Code; Regulations 39
(C) Persons who shall violate a provision of §§ 150.105 through 150.108 of this chapter or shall
fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do
work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a
permit or certificate used under the provisions of §§ 150.105 through 150.108 of this chapter, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a minimum fine of $25 and not more than $750. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. (Prior
Code, § 15-603)
(Ord. 1461, passed 7-17-2006; Ord. 1536, passed 12-1-2008; Ord. 1613, passed 6-6-2011; Ord.
1823, passed 5-7-2018)
2018 S-1
40 Swansea - Land Usage
CHAPTER 151: MANUFACTURED HOMES
Section
General Provisions
151.001 General applicability
151.002 Compliance with Zoning Code
151.003 Dependent manufactured homes
151.004 Transformation of manufactured home
151.005 Emergency parking
151.006 Sales and inspection
151.007 Additions to manufactured homes
151.008 Jacks and stabilizers
151.009 Stands
151.010 Anchors and tie downs
151.011 Skirting
151.012 Compliance with district regulations
151.013 Display of title
151.014 State requirements
151.015 Age of manufactured homes
151.016 Recreational vehicle in manufactured home parks
Manufactured Home Park License and Permit Requirements
151.030 Purpose
151.031 Manufactured home parks
151.032 Issuance of license, expiration and renewal
151.033 Permit to construct or alter
151.034 Required inspections
151.035 Rejection of application
151.036 Amendment of site plan
151.037 Inspection and licensing requirement
151.038 Revocation or suspension of license
151.039 Right to public hearing
151.040 Continuing compliance with regulations
151.041 Enforcement
41
42Swansea - Land Usage
Manufactured Home Park Design Standards
151.055 Site location
151.056 Site layout
151.057 Service buildings and requirements
151.058 Water supply
151.059 Sewage disposal
151.060 Plumbing regulations
151.061 Refuse disposal and pest control
151.062 Liquid and gas fuel piping and storage
151.063 Electrical distribution and service
151.064 Manufactured home space; minimum size
151.065 Speed limit
151.066 On-street parking
151.067 Public hazards
151.068 Maintenance of park facilities
Manufactured Home Residential Subdivision
151.080 Purpose and intent
151.081 Incorporation of Subdivision Code
151.082 Additional requirements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 GENERAL APPLICABILITY.
All manufactured and mobile homes, wherever situated within the village, shall conform to the
regulations contained in this chapter. For the purposes of this chapter, the terms “manufactured
home” and “mobile home” shall be considered to include the other.
(Prior Code, § 18-101)
§ 151.002 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING CODE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or locate a manufactured home on any street, alley or
other public place, or on any lot or other area of land within the village, except as provided in Ch.
154 of this code of ordinances and as otherwise permitted by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 18-102) Penalty, see § 10.99
Manufactured Homes 43
§ 151.003 DEPENDENT MANUFACTURED HOMES.
No dependent manufactured home, as defined in § 154.019(B) of this code of ordinances, shall
be used as a dwelling within any manufactured home park or upon any lot or property located within
the village.
(Prior Code, § 18-103) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.004 TRANSFORMATION OF MANUFACTURED HOME.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating a manufactured home park, or any
person owning or occupying a manufactured home located in a manufactured home park, to remove
or cause to have removed the wheels or any similar transportation device from any manufactured
home or otherwise permanently affix it to the ground in a manner which would prevent the ready
removal of said manufactured home from the manufactured home park, without first obtaining a
permit to do so.
(B) Any alteration to any manufactured home, as above set forth, shall be construed as an
attempt to make the manufactured home immobile and remove it from the requirements of provisions
regarding manufactured home parks.
(Prior Code, § 18-104) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.005 EMERGENCY PARKING.
No manufactured home shall be parked anywhere in the village, except in accordance with this
chapter, Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances and other applicable chapters of this code of ordinances;
provided, however, that, emergency parking of manufactured homes for less than 72 hours is
permissible, if such parking does not impede or obstruct the normal flow of traffic.
(Prior Code, § 18-105) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.006 SALES AND INSPECTION.
A manufactured home may be parked for inspection and sale on property other than a street,
alley or public way, if it otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter and Ch. 154 of this
code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 18-106)
§ 151.007 ADDITIONS TO MANUFACTURED HOMES.
(A) No permanent addition shall be built onto or become part of any manufactured home.
44 Swansea - Land Usage
(B) Minor alterations shall be permitted in accordance with the following provisions and
requirements.
(1) Cabanas, patios or porches shall be permitted to be attached to a manufactured home;
provided, they have at least one side open, except for screening from insects.
(2) Structures having an area not exceeding 10% of the total square foot area of the
manufactured home shall be permitted to be attached to a manufactured home, and may be entirely
enclosed, if used for storage purposes only.
(3) Carports and garages may be constructed as accessory uses to a manufactured home,
but shall not be attached.
(4) A building permit shall be required for any such alteration to a manufactured home.
(Prior Code, § 18-107) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.008 JACKS AND STABILIZERS.
Jacks or stabilizers may be placed under the frame of a manufactured home to prevent movement
on the springs while the manufactured home is parked and occupied.
(Prior Code, § 18-108)
§ 151.009 STANDS.
(A) Every manufactured home shall be placed on a stand to provide adequate support therefor.
(B) The stand shall extend the length of the support of the manufactured home and shall consist
of either:
(1) A four-inch thick concrete slab;
(2) Eight-inch thick runners a minimum of 24 inches in width; or
(3) Eighteen-inch diameter piers set a minimum of 24 inches deep or through the depth of
the fill, whichever is the greater.
(Prior Code, § 18-109) Penalty, see § 10.99
Manufactured Homes 45
§ 151.010 ANCHORS AND TIE DOWNS.
Every manufactured home shall be anchored and tied down in accordance with applicable state
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 18-110) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.011 SKIRTING.
Every manufactured home shall be skirted with fire-resistant material. Skirting shall be equipped
with an inspection door at least 24 inches wide to allow access to the underside of the home.
(Prior Code, § 18-111) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.012 COMPLIANCE WITH DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
Every manufactured home shall comply with all applicable zoning district requirements, as
contained in Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances for the district in which the manufactured home is or
shall be located.
(Prior Code, § 18-112) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.013 DISPLAY OF TITLE.
All manufactured homes shall display a certificate of title in accordance with the instructions of
the Secretary of State.
(Prior Code, § 18-113) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.014 STATE REQUIREMENTS.
Except where they conflict with the provisions of this chapter, the Mobile Home Park Act, 210
ILCS 115/1 et seq., (Public Act No. 77-1472), the Mobile Home Tie Down Act, 210 ILCS 120/1 et
seq., (Public Act No. 81-587) and the Rules and Regulations for Mobile Home Parks, as approved by
the State Department of Public Health, shall be applicable to mobile and manufactured homes within
the corporate limits of the village.
(Prior Code, § 18-114)
§ 151.015 AGE OF MANUFACTURED HOMES.
(A) Prior to the placement (or replacement) of any and all mobile homes within the village
limits, a permit must be obtained from the government center office and the site for the mobile home
must be inspected by the Code Administrator to ensure compliance with lot size regulations contained
herein.
46 Swansea - Land Usage
(B) Mobile homes presently within the village that are over ten years of age are not prohibited at
their present location.
(C) Any new mobile home brought into the village must have a shingled roof along with siding
that is not a metal type of material. Any current non-conforming mobile home shall not be moved to
another location within the village, effective as of the date of this section.
(D) Any mobile home brought into the village must be Underwriter's Laboratory and National
Electrical Code approved; must be inspected by a qualified electrician approved by the village; and
must be set up, hooked up to the village utilities and be inspected and ready for occupancy within 45
days from the time the mobile home is brought into the village. Otherwise, the mobile home must be
removed from the village. The village will provide no services until the inspection has been
completed.
(E) No mobile home shall be located in the village unless the unit has the National
Manufacturers Housing Construction and Safety Standard Metal seal affixed thereto.
(F) Existing mobile homes located within the village limits, at the date of the adoption of this
section are considered a non-conforming use at their present location. All replacements or new
mobile homes located with the village limits must meet all requirements of this section.
§ 151.016 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE IN MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS.
(A) (1) The applicant shall apply for a special use permit in accordance with § 154.213 of this
code. Incomplete applications and site plans will not be considered. The Administrator and/or
Planning Commission may require the applicant to submit any additional information or material
which is deemed necessary for an adequate review of the application.
(2) No RV park shall be established if below two acres and if the average density is less
than or equal to five spaces per acre.
(3) The minimum area of an RV space shall be 1,000 square feet; provided, tent areas shall
have no minimum space size.
(B) All RVs, together with their additions, and appurtenant structures, accessory structures, and
other structures on the site (excluding fences) shall observe the following setback requirements
(excluding any hitch or towing fixture):
(1) There shall be a minimum distance of five feet between an individual RV unit and an
adjoining interior RV park street.
(2) There shall be a minimum distance of five feet between an RV unit and the property
line.
Manufactured Homes 47
(3) There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between RV units, and between an RV
unit and unattached structures.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
§ 151.030 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this subchapter is to provide regulations for the creation, licensing and
maintenance of manufactured home parks. Although “lots” in a manufactured home park may not be
classified as “lots of record”, for the purpose of establishing bulk/area regulations, all manufactured
home parks shall be developed in a manner so that zoning lots are designated for each manufactured
home. For the purpose of enforcement, see the restrictions in § 154.078(D) of this code of
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 18-201)
§ 151.031 MANUFACTURED HOMES PARKS.
(A) A manufactured home dwelling may be used as a residence for one family in any park
expressly designed and intended for the exclusive use of manufactured homes.
(B) Any manufactured home placed or otherwise located on a lot in such park shall comply with
all applicable requirements of Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.
(C) Not more than one manufactured home dwelling shall be permitted on any lot.
(D) Plans for the development of any manufactured home park, which are submitted to the
village for review and approval, shall comply to the procedures, standards of design and required
improvements, all as contained in Ch. 153 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 18-202)
§ 151.032 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE, EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
(A) No person shall establish, maintain, conduct or operate a manufactured home park after the
adoption of this subchapter without first obtaining a license therefore from the Village Clerk.
(1) Such licensee shall expire at midnight on April 30 of each year.
(2) Such license shall be renewed from year to year upon payment of the annual license fee
herein provided.
48 Swansea - Land Usage
(3) All licenses to operate a manufactured home park shall be prominently displayed in the
office of the manufactured home park.
(4) All licenses issued under this subchapter shall be nontransferable without the written
consent of the Board of Trustees of the village.
(B) In addition to the application and permit fees provided herein, the licensee shall pay the
Village Clerk, on or before April 30 of each year, an annual license fee of $50.
(C) The Code Administrator may cause to be issued a revised license for additional
manufactured home lots when they are to be occupied by the end of the license year; provided that,
such additional lots have been inspected and approved, in writing, by the inspection officers and
further provided that when applicable, the requirements of § 151.064 of this chapter have been
complied with.
(Prior Code, § 18-203)
§ 151.033 PERMIT TO CONSTRUCT OR ALTER.
(A) No person shall construct or make alterations to a manufactured home park without first
obtaining a permit.
(B) All permits to construct, and all permits to make alterations therein, shall be prominently
displayed in the office of the manufactured home park.
(C) An application for a permit to construct a manufactured home park or to make alterations
therein shall be filed in accordance with the applicable provisions set forth in Ch. 154 of this code of
ordinances.
(D) In addition to the documents and information required by Ch. 154 of this code of
ordinances, the applicant shall submit with the application the following materials:
(1) The full name and address of the applicant or applicants, or names and addresses of
each partner if applicable or the names and addresses of the officers if the applicant is a corporation
and the present and last occupation of the applicant at the time of filing of the application;
(2) The location and legal description of the tract of land upon which it is proposed to
operate and maintain a manufactured home park;
(3) Proposed and existing facilities at the manufactured home park for sewage, garbage,
waste disposal, water supply, fire protection and for a sanitary community building, if provided; or
the proposed alterations therein and maintenance thereof;
(4) The proposed method of lighting the structures and land upon which the manufactured
home park is to be located;
Manufactured Homes 49
(5) The plot plans of the manufactured home park, building plans and specifications for
existing buildings and facilities, or the plans and specifications for new buildings and facilities for the
proposed alterations in existing facilities, all as may be required by the provisions of this chapter and
the rules and regulations of the State Department of Public Health; and
(6) (a) An affidavit of the applicant or applicants as to the truth of the matters contained in
the application shall be attached thereto. Each application shall be accompanied by an application fee
as set forth in Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.
(b) Each application fee shall be paid to the Village Clerk by a separate certified check
or United States money order in the amount of the application fee; the application fee, once paid to
the Village Clerk, shall not be refunded.
(E) The Zoning Administrator shall promptly transmit said application, together with any advice
he or she may wish to offer to the Planning and Zoning Board.
(Prior Code, § 18-204)
§ 151.034 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.
(A) The following inspections shall be performed by the village officers indicated prior to the
approval of any license or permit to construct or alter any manufactured home park in the village.
(1) The Plumbing Inspector shall inspect the sewage and water facilities for any
manufactured home park to assure compliance with §§ 151.058, 151.059 and 151.060 of this
chapter.
(2) The Code Administrator, or his or her deputy, shall inspect all electrical and structural
improvements required by §§ 151.057, 151.061, 151.062 and 151.063 of this chapter.
(3) The Village Engineer shall inspect all site locations and layouts and all street
improvements and lighting arrangements required by this subchapter.
(B) Upon completion of the required inspections, the above officers, who may be referred to
herein as “inspection officers”, shall report their findings to the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 18-205)
§ 151.035 REJECTION OF APPLICATION.
(A) If the application for a license is rejected by the inspection officers or the Planning and
Zoning Board, the reason or reasons therefor shall be stated.
50 Swansea - Land Usage
(B) If the objections contained therein can be corrected, the applicant may amend his or her
application and re-submit it for approval.
(Prior Code, § 18-206)
§ 151.036 AMENDMENT OF SITE PLAN.
(A) If a permit to construct a manufactured home park has been issued, no change in any
sanitary facilities, methods of water supply, sewer, drainage, garbage or waste disposal, or change in
the plot plan shall be made without first making written application to the Planning and Zoning Board
and receiving a written permit therefrom.
(B) Such application shall be made in accordance with the applicable provisions of Ch. 154 of
this code of ordinances.
(C) A fee amounting to $25, plus $1 per manufactured home space or lot, shall accompany each
application for a permit to alter such manufactured home park.
(D) No application fee shall be required to accompany the application for a permit to alter a
manufactured home park where such alteration involves only a reduction in the number of
manufactured home lots or spaces to a number less than that for which the manufactured home park
is currently licensed.
(E) Such change or changes shall comply with all safety and sanitary codes, building codes,
zoning codes and rules and regulations of the State Department of Public Health, as all are applicable
thereto.
(Prior Code, § 18-207)
§ 151.037 INSPECTION AND LICENSING REQUIREMENT.
(A) (1) If a permit to construct a manufactured home park has been issued, the applicant, upon
completion thereof, shall notify the Code Administrator. The inspections required by § 151.059 of
this chapter shall then be performed within the manufactured home park, to determine whether the
applicant has complied with the provisions of this chapter, Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances and
any other applicable chapters or rules and regulations.
(2) If the inspection officers find the manufactured home park constructed in accordance
with the accepted application and the codes of the village, the Village Clerk shall issue the license.
(B) (1) The inspection officers named above are hereby authorized to enter upon the premises
of any existing manufactured home park or any proposed manufactured home park for which a
permit or license has been issued at any reasonable time without further authorization, in order to
inspect the premises and perform the duties as provided for herein.
Manufactured Homes 51
(2) The inspection officers shall inspect, at least once per year, each manufactured home
park licensed under the provisions of this chapter to determine the compliance thereto and shall note
and shall act upon each violation.
(Prior Code, § 18-208)
§ 151.038 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
(A) Any license granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the inspection
officers named herein; provided, however, that, the inspectors shall first serve or cause to be served
upon the licensee, a written notice which shall specify any alleged violations of this chapter, Ch. 154
of this code of ordinances or any other applicable ordinance or code of the village, or any rules or
regulations promulgated by the Department pertaining thereto.
(B) The notice shall require the licensee to remove or abate such condition specified in the
notice, within five days or within a longer period of time as may be allowed by the inspector.
(C) If the licensee fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the notice within the
specified time, the inspector may revoke or suspend such license. Notice of revocation or suspension
shall be served upon the licensee within five days thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 18-209)
§ 151.039 RIGHT TO PUBLIC HEARING.
(A) (1) Any person refused a license or whose license is suspended or revoked shall have the
right to a hearing before the Board of Trustees.
(2) A written notice of a request for such hearing shall be served upon the Board of
Trustees within 30 days of such refusal of a permit to construct or alter, or refusal of a license, or
suspension or revocation thereof.
(B) (1) The public hearing shad be conducted by the President of the Board of Trustees.
(2) The President may compel by subpoena, or subpoena deuces tecum, the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production of books and papers, and shall administer oaths to
witnesses.
(3) The President shall give written notice of the time and place of hearing by registered
mail to the licensee or applicant, not less than 15 days, nor more than 30 days, prior to such hearing.
52 Swansea - Land Usage
(C) (1) The applicant or licensee may appear in person, by counsel or by duly-authorized agent.
(2) At said hearing, the applicant or licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to present all
relevant evidence in support of his or her application for license or renewal of license or in resistance
to the revocation thereof.
(D) (1) In the event of the inability of any party or the Board of Trustees to procure the
attendance of witnesses to give testimony or produce books and papers, such party or the Board of
Trustees may take the testimony of said witness by deposition as provided for by the State Code of
Civil Procedure.
(2) All testimony taken at the hearing shall be reduced to writing and all such testimony and
other evidence introduced at the hearing shall be a part of the official record.
(E) (1) The Board of Trustees shall make findings of fact in such a hearing and shall render its
decision within 30 days after the termination of the hearing, unless additional time is required for
proper disposition of the matter.
(2) The Board of Trustees shall give written notice of its decision by registered mail to the
licensee or applicant not more than 15 days after the Board of Trustees renders its decision.
(F) Technical errors in the proceedings before the Board of Trustees, or their failure to observe
the technical rules of evidence, shall not constitute grounds for the reversal of any administrative
decision unless it appears to the court that such error or failure materially affected the rights of any
party, and resulted in substantial injustice to the party.
(Prior Code, § 18-210)
§ 151.040 CONTINUING COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
The person to whom a permit or license for a manufactured home park is issued shall, at all
times, operate the park in compliance with this chapter and regulations issued thereunder and shall
provide supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean
and sanitary condition at all times.
(Prior Code, § 18-211)
§ 151.041 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Code Administrator, or his or her
deputy, shall administer and enforce this chapter, including the receiving of applications, the
inspection of premises and the issuing of building and other permits and certificates of occupancy.
(2) No building or other permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building
Commission, except where the provisions of this chapter have been complied with.
Manufactured Homes 53
(B) Whenever any construction, alteration or other activity is being conducted in violation of the
provision of this chapter, or in the case of any other violation of this chapter, the Code Administrator
may order the activity stopped by notice in writing served upon any person engaged in or causing
such work or activity to be performed, and any such person shall forthwith stop such activity until
authorized by the Code Administrator to proceed with the activity.
(C) (1) Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, any person may file a complaint with the
village.
(2) Such action shall not limit other remedies available with or without the issuance of a
stop order as above provided.
(3) The Code Administrator, or authorized representative, may issue or serve a summons,
citation or other process for any violation and may prosecute a violator therefor in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 18-212)
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 151.055 SITE LOCATION.
(A) Each manufactured home park licensed or to be constructed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with the requirements of this
subchapter.
(B) Every manufactured home park shall be located on a well drained site and shall be located
so that its drainage will not constitute an unreasonable hazard or nuisance to persons, property or the
water supply in the immediate vicinity of the site.
(C) Manufactured home parks shall be made free from marshes, swamps or other potential
breeding places for insects or rodents.
(D) Park sites shall not be subject to flooding, fire or safety hazards and shall not be exposed to
nuisances.
(Prior Code, § 18-301)
§ 151.056 SITE LAYOUT.
(A) The arrangement of manufactured homes within the manufactured home park shall comply
to the applicable provisions of Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances, including the area/bulk restrictions
contained therein.
54 Swansea - Land Usage
(B) (1) All driveways or accessways providing ingress and egress for the manufactured home
park, between the out-boundary property line of the manufactured home park and the improved
surface of any public road, shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions and requirements
of Ch. 153 of this code of ordinances.
(2) Driveways or accessways within a manufactured home park shall have an all-weather
surface.
(3) All driveways or accessways within the manufactured home park, established after the
effective date of this chapter, shall be not less than 24 feet in width bounded by a concrete curb and
gutter not less than six inches in thickness.
(C) All manufactured homes shall be placed an a manufactured home stand constructed of
concrete of at least five-bag mix and not less than four inches in thickness. In addition, all
manufactured home stands shall be at least ten feet wide by 40 feet in length.
(Prior Code, § 18-302)
§ 151.057 SERVICE BUILDINGS AND REQUIREMENTS.
(A) A convenience service building providing laundry facilities or office and storage
accommodations may be constructed in a manufactured home park.
(B) If such building and facilities are provided, however, the following regulations shall apply.
(1) Such buildings shall be located at least 15 feet from any manufactured home space.
(2) The owner shall comply with all building codes, electrical codes, plumbing codes,
mechanical codes and Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances, as adopted by the village.
(Prior Code, § 18-303)
§ 151.058 WATER SUPPLY.
(A) Water of safe, sanitary quality under pressure capable of furnishing a minimum of 200
gallons per day per home space shall be provided in each manufactured home park.
(B) The number of manufactured home spaces to be occupied in the manufactured home park
shall be limited by the quantity of the water available to supply each manufactured home with the
minimum requirements.
(C) Each manufactured home space shall be provided with individual tap and individual water
meter and each tap shall protrude not less than four inches above the ground and the supply main
shall not be less than four inches in diameter.
Manufactured Homes 55
(D) The plans and specifications of the water distribution system shall be approved by the State
Department of Public Health.
(E) Where an approved public supply of water is available, connection shall be made thereto and
its supply shall be used exclusively.
(Prior Code, § 18-304)
§ 151.059 SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
(A) (1) Each manufactured home shall be served by a central sewage collection system and each
manufactured home shall be provided with at least a four-inch sewer connection.
(2) The sewer connection shall be provided with suitable fittings so that a water-tight, selfdraining
connection can be made between the manufactured home and the sewer connection.
(3) Each individual manufactured home connection shall be so constructed so that they can
be closed when not linked to the manufactured home, and shall be so trapped as to prevent any
escape of odor or gas.
(B) No water or waste shall be allowed to fall to the ground from a manufactured home.
(C) The plans and specifications of the sewage collection system shall be approved by the State
Department of Public Health.
(D) When an approved public sewage system is reasonably available, connection shall be made
thereto and said public system shall be used exclusively.
(E) (1) An independent sewage system to serve the manufactured home park shall be permitted
only after express approval has been granted in writing by the Village Board of Trustees, and only if
the plans and specifications for the sewage system have been approved by the State Department of
Public Health.
(2) No septic tank system shall be approved.
(Prior Code, § 18-305)
§ 151.060 PLUMBING REGULATIONS.
All plumbing in the manufactured home park shall comply with the plumbing codes and
regulations as established by the state and shall be inspected and approved by the Village Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 18-306)
56 Swansea - Land Usage
§ 151.061 REFUSE DISPOSAL AND PEST CONTROL.
(A) (1) The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the manufactured home park shall be so
managed as to create no health hazard, rodent harborage, insect breeding area, accident hazard or air
pollution.
(2) All refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, water-tight, rodent-proof containers which shall
be provided in sufficient number and capacity to accommodate all refuse from the manufactured
home park.
(3) Satisfactory container racks or holders shall be provided at permanent locations
convenient to manufactured home spaces in areas appropriately screened.
(4) Incinerators shall not be permitted.
(5) Methods of storage, collection and disposal shall comply with the rules and regulations
set forth by the State Department of Public Health.
(B) (1) Adequate insect and rodent control measures shall be employed.
(2) All buildings and structures shall be fly- and rodent-proof.
(3) Rodent harborages shall not be permitted to exist in the park.
(Prior Code, § 18-307)
§ 151.062 LIQUID AND GAS FUEL PIPING AND STORAGE.
(A) All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinder to heating or cooking units in
manufactured homes shall be not less than standard weight, wrought iron or steel pipe, or brass or
copper pipe of iron size and shall be permanently installed and securely fastened in place.
(B) All such fuel lines shall be provided with a stop cock at the outlet of the fuel container and
another stop cock just before the fuel line enters the manufactured home.
(Prior Code, § 18-308)
§ 151.063 ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION AND SERVICE.
(A) Underground electrical lines shall be at least 24 inches below ground surface and at least
one-foot radial distance from sewer, water, gas or communications lines. If overhead power lines are
installed, they shall be at least 18 feet above streets or roads. A minimum horizontal clearance of at
least three feet shall be provided between overhead lines and any structure.
Manufactured Homes 57
(B) Electrical outlets for each individual manufactured home space shall be provided.
(1) No connected electrical extension cord shall lie on the ground or be suspended less than
seven feet from the ground above sidewalks or pathways.
(2) All electrical wiring, equipment and appurtenances shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the applicable codes and regulations of the village.
(C) All park streets shall be lighted with an average illumination of at least 150 watts every 150
feet, with additional lighting at potentially hazardous locations, such as park entrances, streets and
walkways, or steps.
(Prior Code, § 18-309)
§ 151.064 MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE; MINIMUM SIZE.
The minimum size of a manufactured home space shall be as provided in Ch. 154 of this code of
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 18-310)
§ 151.065 SPEED LIMIT.
The manufactured home park management shall install and enforce a ten mph speed limit within
the manufactured home park.
(Prior Code, § 18-311)
§ 151.066 ON-STREET PARKING.
On-street parking shall be limited to guests visiting the park.
(Prior Code, § 18-312)
§ 151.067 PUBLIC HAZARDS.
Automobiles which are not in operating condition, and junk, trash or other refuse as would
create a health or safety hazard, shall not be permitted to be maintained in any manufactured home
park and shall promptly be removed by the owner, or licensee of the park.
(Prior Code, § 18-313)
58 Swansea - Land Usage
§ 151.068 MAINTENANCE OF PARK FACILITIES.
The management of every manufactured home park shall assume full responsibility for
maintaining in good repair and condition all roadways and accessways, and all sanitary and safety
appliances in the park and shall promptly bring such action as is necessary to prosecute or eject from
the park any person or persons who willfully and maliciously damage such appliances, or any person
or persons who fail to comply with the regulations of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 18-314)
MANUFACTURED HOME RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION
§ 151.080 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The manufactured home residential subdivision is primarily intended to provide areas suitable
for the placement of manufactured homes on individual and privately-owned lots.
(Prior Code, § 18-401)
§ 151.081 INCORPORATION OF SUBDIVISION CODE.
The standards, requirements, terms and procedures contained in Ch. 153 of this code of
ordinances are hereby incorporated by reference herein. Every manufactured home residential
subdivision shall comply with all of the requirements of Ch. 153 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 18-402)
§ 151.082 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
(A) In addition to compliance with Ch. 153 of this code of ordinances, as provided in §
151.081 of this chapter, every manufactured home residential subdivision shall also comply with the
provisions of §§ 151.062 and 151.063 of this chapter.
(B) Every manufactured home located within a manufactured home residential subdivision
shall comply with the requirements of §§ 151.001 through 151.015 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 18-403)
CHAPTER 152: FLOODPLAINS
Section
152.01 Title
152.02 Purpose
152.03 Definitions
152.04 Base flood elevation
152.05 Duties of the Code Administrator
152.06 Development permit
152.07 Preventing increased flood heights and resulting damages
152.08 Protecting buildings
152.09 Subdivision and other development requirements
152.10 Variances
152.11 Disclaimer of liability
152.12 Abrogation and greater restrictions
152.99 Penalty
§ 152.01 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Swansea Floodplain Code”.
(Prior Code, § 17-101)
§ 152.02 PURPOSE.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the village by 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1,
5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-31-2, in order to accomplish the following purposes:
(A) To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage hazards to others;
(B) To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
(C) To promote and protect health, safety and general welfare of the citizens from the hazards of
flooding;
59
60 Swansea - Land Usage
(D) To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to public facilities and
utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
(E) To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the potential for creating
blight areas;
(F) To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
(G) To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in
order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect
aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and
enhance community and economic development.
(Prior Code, § 17-102)
§ 152.03 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year. The BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100-YEAR FLOOD. The base flood elevation at any
location is as defined in § 152.04 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest of
the base flood.
BUILDING. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof
including manufactured homes and prefabricated buildings, and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term
also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.
CRITICAL FACILITY. Any public or private facility, which if flooded, would create an added
dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Examples are public
buildings, emergency operations and communication centers, health care facilities and nursing
homes, schools and toxic waste treatment, handling and storage facilities.
DEVELOPMENT.
(1) Any human-made change to real estate including:
(a) Construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a building or any addition or
structural alteration to a building;
(b) Substantial improvement of an existing building;
Floodplains 61
(c) Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured
home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days per year;
(d) Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or similar projects;
(e) Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
(f) Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving or other alterations
of the ground surface;
(g) Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage tanks; and
(h) Channel modifications or any other activity that might change the direction, height
or velocity of flood or surface waters.
(2) DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing and similar practices that do not involve filling,
grading or construction of levees.
FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry
land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation or the runoff of surface waters
from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community.
FLOODPLAIN and SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Those lands within the
jurisdiction of the village that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The FLOODPLAINS of
the village are generally identified as such on the “Flood Insurance Rate Map of St. Clair County and
Incorporated Areas”, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated 11-5-2003.
The FLOODPLAINS of those parts of the unincorporated county that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the village are generally identified as such on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for the county by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and dated 11-5-2003. FLOODPLAIN also includes those areas of known flooding as
identified by the village.
FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural or non-structural additions, changes or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate, property and their
contents.
62 Swansea - Land Usage
FLOOD-PROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be
structurally dry flood-proofed to the flood protection elevation.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood plus one foot of
freeboard at any given location in the floodplain. Note: NFIP regulations require protection to or
above the base flood elevation. One foot of freeboard is recommended by IDOT/DWR. A
municipality may use higher freeboard requirements if it desires.
FLOODWAY. The portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base flood. The
FLOODWAY for the floodplains of Richland Creek, Wolf Branch Creek and Catawba Creek shall be
as delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of the county prepared by FEMA and dated
11-5-2003. The FLOODWAYS for each of the remaining floodplains of the village, the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village that may be annexed into the village, shall be according to
the best data available from federal, state or other sources.
IDOT/OWR. Illinois Department of Transportation/Office of Water Resources.
MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to required utilities.
NFIP. National Flood Insurance Program.
REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions
during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of such flood event on the average
equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SFHA (SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA). See definition of FLOODPLAIN.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the building to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred, regardless of the actual repair work performed. Costs
associated with volunteer labor and materials shall be estimated and counted toward the restoration
costs.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction, addition, structural alteration or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started. SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
Floodplains 63
(2) Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the
state’s Register of Historic Places.
TRAVEL TRAILER or RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle, which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) Four hundred square feet or less in area;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by any vehicle; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
(Prior Code, § 17-103)
§ 152.04 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
(A) This chapter’s protection standard is the base flood. The best available base flood elevation
data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the party shall finance
the detailed engineering study needed to replace the existing data with better data and submit it to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency for approval prior to any development of the site.
(B) The base flood elevation for each of the floodplains of Richland Creek, Swansea Creek,
Wolf Branch Creek and Catawba Creek within the village shall be as delineated on the 100-year
flood profiles in the “Countywide Flood Insurance Study of St. Clair County”, prepared by FEMA
and dated 11-5-2003.
(C) (1) The base flood elevation for the remaining floodplains within the village, delineated as
an “A Zone” on the flood insurance rate map of the county, shall be according to the best data
available from federal, state or other sources.
(2) Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed to determine base
flood elevations.
(3) The base flood elevation for each of the floodplains delineated as “AH Zone” or “AO
Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the flood insurance rate map of the county.
(D) The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of the unincorporated county that
are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village, or that may be annexed into the village, shall
be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles of the flood insurance study of the county prepared by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(Prior Code, § 17-104)
64 Swansea - Land Usage
§ 152.05 DUTIES OF THE CODE ADMINISTRATOR.
(A) The Code Administrator shall be responsible for the general administration of this chapter
and ensure that all development activities within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the village
meet the requirements of this chapter.
(B) Specifically, the Code Administrator shall:
(1) Process development permits in accordance with § 152.06 of this chapter;
(2) Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no delineated floodway)
meets the damage prevention requirements of § 152.07 of this chapter;
(3) Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings subject to § 152.08 of
this chapter are met and maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) or flood-proof certificate;
(4) Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of § 152.09 of this
chapter;
(5) If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of § 152.10 of this chapter are
met and maintain documentation of any variances granted;
(6) Inspect all development projects and take any and all actions outlined in § 152.99 of this
chapter as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
(7) Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other required local, state and
federal permits;
(8) Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about permit procedures and
floodplain construction techniques;
(9) Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to coordinate base
flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
(10) Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies of state and
federal permits, and documentation of compliance for development activities subject to this chapter;
(11) Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to alteration or relocation
of a watercourse;
(12) Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this code and make substantial
damage determinations for structures within the floodplain; and
Floodplains 65
(13) Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR and/or
submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a modification of the floodplain may
change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain map.
(Prior Code, § 17-105)
§ 152.06 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
(A) General. No person, firm, corporation or governmental body, not exempted by state law,
shall commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from
the Code Administrator. The Code Administrator shall not issue a development permit if the
proposed development does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
(B) Application documents. The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
(1) Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions;
(2) Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling;
(3) The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings;
(4) The elevation of the lowest floor (including basements) of all proposed buildings subject
to the requirements of § 152.07 of this chapter; and
(5) Costs of the project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer or architect. A
signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
(C) Elevation comparisons.
(1) Upon receipt of an application for development permit, the Code Administrator shall
compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that
can be shown by survey data to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the date of the
site’s first flood insurance rate map identification is not in the floodplain and therefore not subject to
the requirements of this chapter.
(2) Conversely, any land shown to be below the base flood elevation and which is
hydraulically connected to the flooding source, but not shown on the FIRM, shall be subject to the
provisions of this code. The Code Administrator shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date
of the site’s first flood insurance rate map identification.
66 Swansea - Land Usage
(3) Note: although survey data may show the development site to be entirely above the base
flood elevation, a letter of map amendment (LOMA) will still be required to remove the site from the
mapped floodplain for insurance requirements.
(Prior Code, § 17-106)
§ 152.07 PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES.
Within the floodway identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of St. Clair County that are
within the village’s floodplains, and within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been
delineated, the following standards shall apply.
(A) Except as provided in division (B) below, no development shall be allowed which, acting in
combination with existing and anticipated development, will cause any increase in flood heights or
velocities or threat to public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall be
considered as meeting this requirement and, therefore, no development permit shall be required:
(1) Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDOT/OWR Statewide Permit No. 4;
(2) Minor boat docks meeting the conditions of IDOT/OWR Statewide Permit No. 5;
(3) Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting the conditions of IDOT/OWR Statewide
Permit No. 6;
(4) Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the conditions of IDOT/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 7;
(5) Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDOT/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 8;
(6) Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDOT/OWR Statewide Permit No.
9;
(7) Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings meeting the
conditions of IDOT/OWR Statewide Permit No. 10;
(8) Minor maintenance and dredging activities meeting the conditions of IDOT/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 11;
(9) Any development determined by IDOT/OWR to be located entirely in a flood fringe
area;
(10) Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 12; and
Floodplains 67
(11) Temporary construction activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit No. 13.
(B) Other development activities not listed in division (A) above may be permitted only if:
(1) A permit has been issued for the work by IDOT/OWR (or written documentation is
provided that an IDOT/OWR permit is not required); and
(2) Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary to approve a revision of the
regulatory map and base flood elevation.
(Prior Code, § 17-107)
§ 152.08 PROTECTING BUILDINGS.
(A) Requirements. It addition to the damage prevention requirements of § 152.06 of this chapter,
all buildings located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood damage below the flood
protection elevation. This building protection requirement applies to the following situations:
(1) Construction or placement of a new building valued at more than $1,000 or 70 square
feet or larger;
(2) Substantial improvements made to an existing building, or repairs made to a
substantially damaged building;
(3) Structural alterations made to an existing building that increase the floor area by more
than 20%;
(4) Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an
existing site (the building protection requirements do not apply to returning a manufactured home to
the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage);
(5) Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days per year; and
(6) Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in § 152.03 of this chapter.
(B) Alternative methods. Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
(1) The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the
following:
(a) The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection
elevation;
68 Swansea - Land Usage
(b) The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches before compaction and
should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation before sloping below the flood protection
elevation;
(c) The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by vegetative
cover, riprap or other structural measure;
(d) The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated debris or refuse
materials; and
(e) The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or onto
neighboring properties.
(2) The building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
(a) The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles, walls or other
foundation that is permanently open to flood waters;
(b) The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing and airconditioning
equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation;
(c) If walls are used, all fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation shall
address hydrostatic pressures by having a minimum of two permanent openings no more than one
foot above grade and providing a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation;
(d) The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored, designed and certified
and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure to
hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris;
(e) All structural components below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed
of materials resistant to flood damage;
(f) Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps and other
service facilities may be located below the flood protection elevation; provided, they are waterproofed;
and
(g) The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used solely for parking or
building access and shall not be later modified or occupied as habitable space.
(C) Manufactured homes, recreational vehicles or travel trailers. Manufactured homes,
recreational vehicles or travel trailers to be installed on site for more than 180 days per year shall
meet the following conditions:
(1) Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation; and
Floodplains 69
(2) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by being tied down in
accordance with the rules and regulations for the State Mobile Home Tie-Down Act, issued pursuant
to 77 Ill. Adm. Code 870.
(D) Non-residential buildings. Non-residential buildings may be structurally flood-proofed (in
lieu of elevation) provided a registered professional engineer certifies that:
(1) Below the flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are
water-tight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood;
(2) The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy and impact from debris and ice; and
(3) Flood-proofing measures will be operable without human intervention and without an
outside source of electricity. Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing
for the purpose of this division (D)(3).
(E) Garages, sheds and the like. Garages or sheds constructed ancillary to a residential use may
be permitted; provided, the following conditions are met:
(1) The garage or shed must be non-habitable;
(2) The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and tools and cannot
be modified later into another use;
(3) The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway;
(4) The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory to an existing
principal structure on the same lot;
(5) Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of materials not
susceptible to flood damage;
(6) All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical must be elevated above
the flood protection elevation;
(7) The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each wall no more
than one foot above grade with one square inch of opening for every square foot of floor area;
(8) The garage or shed must be less than $7,500 in market value or replacement cost
whichever is greater or less than 500 square feet;
(9) The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and overturning;
70 Swansea - Land Usage
(10) All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides, fertilizers and the like)
shall be stored above the flood protection elevation; and
(11) The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner advised of the flood
insurance implications.
(F) Crawlspaces. A building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the flood
protection elevation; provided that, the following conditions are met.
(1) The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse and
lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy.
(2) Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have openings that equalize
hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters. A minimum of
one opening on each wall having a total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot
of enclosed area. The openings shall be no more than one foot above grade.
(3) The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection elevation must not be
more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.
(4) The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior grade of the crawl to
the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four feet at any point.
(5) An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove flood waters from the interior
area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of time after a flood event.
(6) Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must be constructed with
materials resistant to flood damage.
(7) Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the flood protection
elevation.
(Prior Code, § 17-108)
§ 152.09 SUBDIVISION AND OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
(A) The Village Board shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known,
in all official actions related to land management use and development.
(1) Data required. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments and additions to manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet the
Floodplains 71
damage prevention and building protection standards of §§ 152.07 and 152.08 of this chapter. Any
proposal for such development shall include the following data:
(a) The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain (where the base flood
elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant shall be responsible for calculating the
base flood elevation);
(b) The boundary of the floodway when available; and
(c) A signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the proposed plat or
plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act, 765
ILCS 205/2.
(2) Health standards. Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development.
In addition to the requirements of §§ 152.07 and 152.08 of this chapter, the following standards
apply.
(a) No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing chemicals,
explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants or other hazardous or toxic materials
below the flood protection elevation unless such materials are stored in a flood-proofed and anchored
storage tank and certified by a professional engineer or flood-proofed building constructed according
to the requirements of § 152.08 of this chapter.
(b) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(c) Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from
the systems into flood waters.
(d) New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal systems shall be
located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
Manholes or other above ground openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be
water-tight.
(e) Critical facilities shall be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. In addition, all
ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation.
(f) All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not to alter flood
flows or increase potential flood damages.
(B) All new plats recorded must show the location of any floodplains and must be signed, sealed
and certified by a state-registered land surveyor as per the requirements of Public Act No. 85-267,
765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq..
(Prior Code, § 17-109)
72 Swansea - Land Usage
§ 152.10 VARIANCES.
(A) General. Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Planning and Zoning Board for a variance. The
Planning and Zoning Board shall review the applicant’s request for a variance and shall submit its
recommendation to the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees may attach such conditions to
granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this chapter.
(B) Requirements for variance. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates
that:
(1) The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
(2) An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted;
(3) The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
(4) There will be no additional threat to public health or safety, or creation of a nuisance;
(5) There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, rescue or relief
operations, policing or repairs to roads, utilities or other public facilities;
(6) The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not establish a pattern inconsistent with
the intent of the NFIP; and
(7) All other required local, state and federal permits have been obtained. (65 ILCS 5/11-
13-4 and 5/11-13-5 establishes specific municipal zoning variance criteria.)
(C) Notification of applicant.
(1) The Code Administrator shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the
requirements of the building protection standards of § 152.08 of this chapter would lessen the degree
of protection to a building will:
(a) Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 for $100 of
insurance coverage;
(b) Increase the risks to life and property; and
(c) Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that the
applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and liability.
Floodplains 73
(2) Note: the standard flood insurance policy permits an insurance adjustor to not pay for
damage that was caused by something the owner did which increased the hazard to the property.
Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act authorizes local officials to request denial of flood
insurance for buildings in violation of local floodplain codes.
(D) More permissive criteria. Variances to the building protection requirements of § 152.07 of
this chapter requested in connection with the reconstruction, repair or alteration of a site or building
included on the National Register of Historic Places or the state’s Register of Historic Places may be
granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of divisions (B)(1) through (B)(5)
above.
(Prior Code, § 17-110)
§ 152.11 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of
study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of the village or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 17-111)
§ 152.12 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the Village Board of Trustees to
fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program. However, this chapter does not
repeal the original ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does this chapter
repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. Where this chapter
and other ordinance easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes
the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 17-113)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
(A) Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to comply with the
conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. Upon due
investigation, the Code Administrator may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of
this chapter exists. The Code Administrator shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
74 Swansea - Land Usage
(B) If such owner fails, after ten-days’ notice, to correct the violation:
(1) The village may make application to the Circuit Court for an injunction-requiring
conformance with this chapter or make such other order, as the Court deems necessary to secure
compliance with this chapter;
(2) Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less
than $50, nor more than $750; and
(3) A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(C) The Code Administrator shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a
willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance
policy to be suspended.
(D) Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action to prevent or
remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons
responsible.
(Prior Code, § 17-112)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
153.001 Title
153.002 Purpose and intent
153.003 Jurisdiction
153.004 Interpretation
153.005 Conflicting laws
153.006 Disclaimer of liability
153.007 Rules of construction
153.008 Definitions
Design and Improvement Standards
153.025 General prohibition
153.026 General suitability for subdivision
153.027 Standards for grading and clearing
153.028 Clearing and grubbing
153.029 Embankments
153.030 Subgrades
153.031 Compaction verification
153.032 Erosion control
153.033 Preservation of trees
153.034 Standards for lots
153.035 Minimum lot size
153.036 Street frontage required
153.037 Reference monuments required
153.038 Standards for streets
153.039 Pavement construction; rigid
153.040 Pavement construction; flexible
153.041 Curb and gutter construction
153.042 Relationship to existing streets
153.043 Designing blocks
75
76 Swansea - Land Usage
153.044 Designing intersections
153.045 Designing curves
153.046 Designing dead-end streets
153.047 Designing sidewalks
153.048 Dedication for public use
153.049 Standards for drainage and storm sewers
153.050 General design considerations
153.051 Specific design requirements
153.052 Standards for utilities
153.053 Specific standards for water facilities
153.054 Specific standards for sanitary sewers
153.055 Specific standards for individual sewers
153.056 Standards for easements
Administration and Enforcement
153.075 Schedule of fees
153.076 Authority
153.077 Code Administrator; appointment and term of office; compensation; duties and
responsibilities
153.078 Village Engineer; appointment and term of office; compensation; duties and
responsibilities
153.079 Complaints
153.080 Corrective action orders; contents of order; service of order
153.081 Stop-work orders
153.082 Emergency measures
153.083 Preliminary plats; requirements for filing; action by the Planning and Zoning Board;
action by the Board of Trustees
153.084 Improvement plans; requirements for filing; requirements for inspection; requirements
for “as-built” records; requirements for assurance of completion; acceptable forms
of assurance; eligible sureties; term of assurance, extension; release of bond,
escrow deposit; failure to complete improvements
153.085 Final plats; requirements for filing; required certificates; administrative review
procedures; action by the Board of Trustees; changes in approved final plats;
maintenance of improvements; duration of guarantee
153.086 Variations; review by the Planning and Zoning Board; action by the Board of Trustees
153.087 Amendments; public hearing; notice; action by the Board of Trustees
153.088 Boundary adjustments for minor plat
153.089 Lot consolidation of a minor final plat
153.999 Penalty
Subdivisions77
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Swansea Subdivision Code”.
(Prior Code, § 19-101) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 153.002 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
In accordance with Illinois Revised Statutes, this chapter regulates the subdivision and
development of land in order to assist in achieving the following specific objectives:
(A) To preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare;
(B) To implement the village community plan and official map;
(C) To provide a pleasant living environment by furthering the orderly layout and
development of land;
(D) To avoid legal and other problems by requiring that subdivided land be properly
monumented and recorded;
(E) To conserve and increase the value of land, improvements and buildings throughout
the village;
(F) To preserve the village’s natural beauty and topography to the maximum feasible
extent;
(G) To protect against injury or damage caused by pollution, storm water runoff or erosion and
sedimentation;
(H) To provide safe and convenient access to new developments and to avoid traffic congestion
and unnecessary public expenditures by requiring the proper location, design and construction of
streets and sidewalks;
(I) To ensure that the proper installation and maintenance of adequate water mains, sanitary
sewers, storm water sewers and other utilities and services; and
(J) To ensure that in conservation areas adequate parks and similar facilities can be made
available to serve the residence of new developments.
(Prior Code, § 19-102) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
78 Swansea - Land Usage
§ 153.003 JURISDICTION.
This chapter shall be applicable within the corporate limits of the village and within all
unincorporated territory located within one and one-half miles of said limits; provided, such territory
is not located within the subdivision jurisdiction of another municipality. Jurisdictional boundary
lines shall be determined in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-12-9.
(Prior Code, § 19-103) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 153.004 INTERPRETATION.
Every provision of this chapter shall be construed liberally in favor of the village, and every
regulation set forth herein shall be considered the minimum requirement for the promotion of the
public health, safety and welfare.
(Prior Code, § 19-104) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 153.005 CONFLICTING LAWS.
(A) Whenever the requirements of this chapter differ from those of any statute, other lawfully
adopted ordinance or regulation, easement, covenant or deed restriction, the more stringent
requirement shall prevail.
(B) Thus, in accordance with state, law whenever this chapter imposes higher standards than the
county’s Subdivision Ordinance, said higher standards shall supersede the county regulations in the
unincorporated territory located within the subdivision jurisdiction of the village.
(Prior Code, § 19-105) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 153.006 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
(A) Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no official board member,
agent or employee of the village shall render himself or herself personally liable for any damage that
may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
or her duties under this chapter.
(B) Any suit brought against any official, board member, agent or employee of the village as a
result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his or her duties under this chapter, shall
be defended by the Village Attorney until the final determination of the legal proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 19-106) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
Statutory reference:
Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act, see 745 ILCS 10/1-101
Subdivisions 79
§ 153.007 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
In construing the intended meaning of terminology used in this chapter, the following rules shall
be observed.
(A) Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in § 153.008 of this chapter; terms not defined in § 153.008 of this
chapter shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances; if
any term is not defined either in § 153.008 of this chapter or in Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances,
said term shall have its standard English dictionary meaning.
(B) Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter
genders.
(C) Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
(D) Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
(E) The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is discretionary.
(F) All distances shall be measured to the nearest integral foot; six inches or more shall be
deemed one foot.
(G) Captions (i.e., titles of sections, divisions and the like) are intended merely to facilitate
general reference and in no way limit the substantive application of the provisions set forth
thereunder.
(H) Reference to sections shall be deemed to include all divisions within that section; but a
reference to a particular division designates only that division.
(I) A general terms that follows or is followed by enumerations of specific terms shall not be
limited to the enumerated class unless expressly limited.
(Prior Code, § 19-201)
§ 153.008 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADMINISTRATOR. The Code Administrator appointed by the Mayor to administer this chapter
or his or her duly authorized representative.
ALLEY. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the side
or rear of premises that front on a nearby street.
80 Swansea - Land Usage
AMENDMENT. A change in the provisions of this chapter, properly effected in accordance with
state law and the procedures set forth herein.
AREA, GROSS. The entire area within the lot lines of the property proposed for
subdivision/development, including any areas to be dedicated/reserved for street and alley rights-ofway
and for public uses.
BLOCK. An area of land entirely bounded by streets, highways, barriers or ways (except alleys,
pedestrian ways or exterior boundaries of a subdivision unless said exterior boundary is a street,
highway or way) or bounded by a combination of streets, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-ofway,
waterways or corporate boundary lines.
CENTERLINE.
(1) The centerline of any right-of-way having a uniform width;
(2) The original centerline, where a right-of-way has been widened irregularly; and
(3) The new centerline, whenever a road has been relocated.
CENTERLINE OFFSET. The distance between the centerlines of two roughly parallel streets,
measured along the third street with which both said “parallel” streets intersect.
COLLECTOR STREET. A street which carries or is proposed to carry intermediate volumes of
traffic from land access streets to minor arterials.
COMMUNITY PLAN. The plan or any portion thereof adopted by the Board of Trustees to
guide and coordinate the physical and economic development of the village. The COMMUNITY
PLAN includes, but is not limited to, plans and programs regarding the location, character and extent
of streets and related facilities; public buildings and uses; utilities; schools; residential, commercial
or industrial land uses; parks, drainage facilities and the like.
CROSS-SLOPE. The degree of inclination measured across a right-of-way rather than in the
direction traffic moves on said right-of-way.
CUL-DE-SAC. A short street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and having the other
end permanently terminated by a turn-around for vehicles; the term may also be used to refer solely
to said turnaround.
CULVERT. A closed conduit, usually exposed on both ends, for the free passage of surface
drainage water under a driveway, street, highway, railroad or embankment.
CURB AND GUTTER, INTEGRAL. The rim forming the edge of a street, plus the channel for
leading off surface water, constructed of poured concrete as a single facility.
Subdivisions 81
DEDICATE. To transfer the ownership of a right-of-way, parcel of land or improvement to the
village or other public entity without compensation.
DEVELOP. To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a tract of land, or to
undertake any activity (such as grading) in preparation therefor.
DIMENSIONS. Refers to both lot depth and lot width.
DISTRICT, ZONING. A portion of the territory of the village wherein certain uniform
requirements or various combinations thereof apply to structures, lots and uses under the terms of
Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.
EASEMENT. A right to use a portion of another person’s real property for certain limited
purposes.
ESCROW DEPOSIT. A deposit in cash or other approved securities to assure the completion of
improvements within a subdivision.
FILL. Earth, gravel, small rock or rubble (not to exceed three inches in diameter) used to build
up a piece of ground.
FRONTAGE. The lineal extent of the front (street-side) of a lot.
FRONTAGE ROAD. A minor street, fronting on an arterial street or highway (usually a limited
access highway), used for access to abutting lots.
GRADE. The degree of inclination of the site or right-of-way, expressed as a percentage.
Synonym for SLOPE.
IMPROVEMENT PLANS. The engineering plans showing types of materials and construction
details for the facilities to be installed in, or in conjunction with, a subdivision.
IMPROVEMENTS. Any street, curb and gutter, sidewalk, drainage ditch, sewer, catchbasin,
newly planted tree, off-street parking area or other facility necessary for the general use of property
owners in a subdivision.
INLET. A receptacle, located where a street gutter opens into a storm water sewer, designed to
retain matter that would not readily pass through the sewer and to allow storm water runoff to enter
the sewer.
INTERSECTION. The point at which two or more public rights-of-way (generally streets) meet.
LAND ACCESS STREET. A street serving limited amounts of residential traffic, and used for
access to abutting property.
82 Swansea - Land Usage
LOT. A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether immediate or future) of
development or transfer of ownership. A LOT may or may not coincide with a “lot of record”.
LOT, CORNER. A lot having at least two adjacent sides that abut for their full length upon
streets. Both such side lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT, THROUGH. A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot lines that abut two
approximately parallel streets. Both such lot lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT AREA, GROSS. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lines of
a lot, but not including any area occupied by the waters of a duly recorded lake or river.
LOT OF RECORD. An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of subdivision recorded with
the Recorder of Deeds of the county, in accordance with state law.
MAINTENANCE BOND. A surety bond posted by the developer and approved by the village,
guaranteeing the satisfactory condition of installed improvements for the two-year period following
their dedication.
MAXIMUM DENSITY. A minimum 95% compaction as determined by ASTM Specifications
D-698 for clayey materials and a minimum relative density of 75% as determined by ASTM
Specifications D2049 for granular materials.
MINOR ARTERIAL. A street designed or utilized primarily for high vehicular speeds or for
heavy volumes of traffic on a continuous route with intersections at grade, and on which trafficcontrol
devices are usually installed to expedite the safe movement of through traffic.
OFFICIAL MAP. A graphic statement of existing facilities and the capital improvements
planned by the village, which require the acquisition of land; such as streets, drainage systems, parks
and the like.
PERFORMANCE BOND. A surety bond posted by the developer and approved by the village
guaranteeing the installation of required improvements within or in conjunction with a subdivision.
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD. The Planning and Zoning Board of the village.
PLAT, FINAL. The final engineering and architectural maps, drawings and supporting material
indicating the subdivider’s plan of the subdivision which, if approved, may be filed with the County
Recorder of Deeds.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY. Preliminary engineering and architectural maps, drawings and
supportive material indicating the proposed layout of a subdivision.
Subdivisions 83
RESERVE. To set aside a parcel of land in anticipation of its acquisition by the village (or other
governmental entity) for public purposes.
RESERVE STRIP. A narrow strip of land between a public street and adjacent lots which is
designated on a recorded subdivision plat, or property deed as land over which vehicular travel is not
permitted.
REVERSE CURVE. A curve in a street heading in approximately the opposite direction from
the curve immediately preceding it so as to form as “S” shape.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC. A strip of land which the owner/subdivider has dedicated to the
village or other unit of government for streets, alleys and other public improvements.
SETBACK FRONT. The horizontal distance between the street right-of-way line and the
building line. Minimum setback requirements are set forth in Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM, PRIVATE. A sewer system including collection and treatment facilities
established by the developer to serve a new subdivision in an outlying area.
SIDEWALK. A pedestrian way constructed in compliance with the standards of this chapter
generally abutting or near the curb line of the street.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS. The Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, prepared by the State Department of Transportation, as adopted and amended by the
Department, which are in effect at the time the subdivision is being constructed, and the related
highway standards.
STOP WORK ORDER. An order used by the Code Administrator to halt work in progress that
is in violation of this chapter.
STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries surface runoff of storm water and subsurface waters.
STREET. A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term STREET includes a
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, through way, road, pike, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive,
court and similar designations, but excludes an alley or a way for pedestrian use only.
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground, or attached to something having
a fixed location on the ground. All buildings are STRUCTURES, but not all STRUCTURES are
buildings.
STUB STREET. A street that is temporarily terminated, but that is planned for future
continuation.
SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate or other group or
combination acting as a unit to create a subdivision, as defined in this section.
84 Swansea - Land Usage
SUBDIVISION. Any division of land into two or more lots, except as set forth in the Plats Act,
765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq..
SUBDIVISION, MINOR. A division of land into two, but not more than four lots, all of which
front upon an existing street, and not involving any new streets, other rights-of-way, easements,
improvements or other provisions for public areas and facilities.
TOPOGRAPHY. The relief features or surface configuration of an area of land.
VACATE. To terminate the legal existence of right-of-way or subdivision, and to so note on the
final plat recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds.
VARIATION, SUBDIVISION. A relaxation in the strict application of the design and
improvement standards set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-201) (Ord. 1448, passed 4-3-2006; Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
§ 153.025 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
(A) No land within the subdivision jurisdiction of the village, other than land that is specifically
exempted from the requirements of the state’s Plats Act (765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.), shall be
subdivided or developed, except in compliance with the regulations of this subchapter and the
applicable provisions of state law.
(B) No lot in any subdivision shall be conveyed until:
(1) The final plat of said subdivision has been approved by the Village Board of Trustees
and recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds; and
(2) The portion of said subdivision of which the lot is located has been improved in
accordance with the requirements of this subchapter or until a performance bond or other security
has been posted to assure the completion of such improvements.
(C) No building permit shall be issued to allow construction on any lot conveyed in violation of
this section, and any so issued shall be made invalid by said violation.
(Prior Code, § 19-301) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8 and 765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.
Subdivisions 85
§ 153.026 GENERAL SUITABILITY FOR SUBDIVISION.
Land which the Board of Trustees determines to be unsuitable for development due to poor
drainage, rough topography, adverse soil conditions, flooding potential or other conditions that will
likely prove injurious to the inhabitants of the subdivision and/or surrounding areas shall not be
subdivided or developed unless adequate plans/methods are formulated to resolve or avoid the
problems caused by the adverse land conditions.
(Prior Code, § 19-302) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 153.027 STANDARDS FOR GRADING AND CLEARING.
(A) Grading and clearing necessitated for the construction of roadway and drainage facilities
shall be done in such a manner as to assure uniform subgrade support with adequate bearing capacity
to properly support the loading/structures to be superimposed.
(B) In order to help achieve this result, the subdivider shall comply with the requirements of this
section.
(Prior Code, § 19-303) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.028 CLEARING AND GRUBBING.
Prior to grading within the limits of the right-of-way, the entire area to be affected with
improvements (i.e., pavement, water, sewer, drainage and the like) shall be cleared of all tree
stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials and of all trees not intended for preservation.
(Prior Code, § 19-304) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.029 EMBANKMENTS.
Embankments to be constructed within the roadway right-of-way by the subdivider shall be done
in a manner compatible with good road construction practices and in accordance with the following
provisions.
(A) Fills shall be constructed in lifts not to exceed eight inches loose and each lift shall be
properly compacted to a density not less than 95% of maximum density, as defined.
(B) No wood, trash or other objectionable material shall be placed in fills.
(C) Large clods and excessively wet fill material shall be dished and/or in fills.
86 Swansea - Land Usage
(D) Compaction shall be achieved with a roller capable of properly compacting the given type of
embankment material; in the case of fine-grained soils, a sheeps-foot roller shall be deemed suitable.
(Prior Code, § 19-305) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.030 SUBGRADES.
(A) In areas where embankment is to be placed, the material shall be properly compacted upon
to subgrade elevation. In the case of cut section, the subgrade shall be cleared of all unsuitable
material, including, but not limited to, vegetation, tree stumps and roots, trash, debris, soft spongy
soil and the like for a minimum depth of 18 inches below subgrade elevation.
(B) All replaced material shall be compacted to a density of not less than 95% of the maximum
density, as defined.
(C) The upper 12 inches of the entire length of subgrade (cut or fill) shall be lime subsidized in
accordance with the provisions in the Standard Specifications, as defined, and shall be compacted to
at least 95% of maximum standard lab density.
(Prior Code, § 19-306) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.031 COMPACTION VERIFICATION.
(A) The subdivider shall furnish, to the Village Engineer, field compaction tests verifying that
proper compaction has been uniformly achieved throughout the embankment and subgrade material.
(B) Such tests shall be performed and certified by a qualified testing lab or engineering firm.
(Prior Code, § 19-307) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.032 EROSION CONTROL.
(A) The design of every subdivision shall be consistent with the natural limitations presented by
topography and soil so as to create the least potential for soil erosion. Soil shall be exposed during
construction for the shortest feasible period of time.
(B) In addition:
(1) The subdivider shall install temporary erosion control measures to prevent siltation of
adjacent streams, roads, private property and the like;
(2) The subdivider shall be expected to incorporate the appropriate permanent devices to
prevent long-term erosion and siltation. Such installations may include sediment basins, desilting
basins, rip rap, energy dissipaters and the like;
Subdivisions 87
(3) All development and improvements to be made within any subdivision shall comply
with any and all municipal, county or state laws, regulations or ordinances relative to soil erosion
and sediment control, in so far as they are applicable; and
(4) In the event that siltation occurs onto adjacent roads, private property and the like,
cleaning and/or removal shall be completed in accordance with the provisions as set forth in § 135.12
of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 19-308) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.033 PRESERVATION OF TREES.
Existing vegetation, specifically trees having a diameter of four inches or more when measured
at a point 12 inches above the ground, should be retained and protected to the maximum extent
consistent with the development of the site.
(Prior Code, § 19-309) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 153.034 STANDARDS FOR LOTS.
The planning and development of lots shall be done in such a manner as to assure compliance
with Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances. In order to help achieve this result, every subdivider shall
comply with the requirements of this section.
(Prior Code, § 19-310) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.035 MINIMUM LOT SIZE.
(A) All lots in any subdivision within the village shall conform to the minimum lot area and
dimension requirements of the zoning district in which said subdivision is located.
(B) All lots in any subdivision outside the village shall conform to the minimum lot area and
dimension requirements of the village’s zoning district, which is most appropriate, as determined by
the Code Administrator.
(C) Land that is under water or reserved for street improvements shall not be counted in
determining compliance with minimum lot size requirements.
(D) Every corner and through lot shall be large enough to permit compliance with the zoning
district’s front setback requirement on every side of the lot that faces a street.
(E) All lot remnants shall be added to adjacent lots to avoid the creation of unbuildable parcels,
used for utility easements or dedicated to the village for public purposes.
88 Swansea - Land Usage
(F) All side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street right-of-way lines or radial to
curved street right-of-way lines, except where the Village Engineer has determined that a deviation
from this requirement will provide a street and lot design more beneficial to the village.
(G) All side lot lines of lots which front a cul-de-sac shall be at right angles to the centerline of
said cul-de-sac until the point at which the centerline meets the center of the cul-de-sac turnaround.
Side lot lines beyond that point shall be radial to the center of the cul-de-sac turnaround except where
the Village Engineer has determined that a deviation from this requirement will provide a street and
lot design more beneficial to the village.
(H) All land to be subdivided shall be divided in such a way that each lot abuts a public street
meeting the requirements of §§ 153.038 and 153.039 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-311) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.036 STREET FRONTAGE REQUIRED.
All land to be subdivided, shall be divided in such a way that each lot abuts a public street
meeting the requirements of §§ 153.038 and 153.039 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-312) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.037 REFERENCE MONUMENTS REQUIRED.
In accordance with An Act to Revise the Law in Relation to Plats, 765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq., as
amended from time to time, reference monuments shall be erected by each subdivider as follows.
(A) In the field. Stone or reinforced concrete reference monuments, set in the ground in such a
manner that they will not be moved by frost, shall be placed in the field at opposite corners of the
subdivision.
(B) At lot corners.
(1) Every lot corner shall be marked by an iron pin or pipe, at least one-half inch in
diameter and not less than 24 inches long, driven into the ground deep enough that they do not
protrude above the surface more than one and one-half inches.
(2) No lot in any subdivision shall be sold unless the corners of said lot are marked as
specified above at the time of sale.
(Prior Code, § 19-313) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
Subdivisions 89
§ 153.038 STANDARDS FOR STREETS.
All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed street system indicated on
the village’s Official Map, shall be improved in accordance with the specifications contained in the
current State Department of Transportation’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, hereinafter referred to as IDOT Standard Specifications, and the provisions of this
subchapter, and shall meet the specifications set forth below.
(A) Minimum right-of-way width.
(1) Streets: 50 feet; and
(2) Alleys: 20 feet.
(B) Minimum pavement width.
(1) Streets: 30 feet;
(2) Alleys: 18 feet; and
(3) Both streets and alleys: 5%.
(C) Maximum grade. Both streets and alleys: 10%.
(D) Minimum crown. Both streets and alleys: three inches.
(E) Pavement width. Measurement of pavement width for streets shall be made from back-toback
of the curbs. Measurement of pavement width for alleys, where curbs are not required, shall be
from edge-to-edge.
(F) Grades. Grades shall conform as closely as possible to the natural topography without
exceeding the minimum or maximum standards specified above.
(G) Building sites. All streets shall be designed so that as many building sites, as is possible, are
at or above street grade.
(H) Alleys. Alleys may be provided in single-family residential districts at the option of the
developer, but may be required in other districts in the absence of other provisions for service
access.
(1) When provided, alleys shall not intersect with each other or change sharply in
alignment.
(2) Adequate vehicular turnaround space shall be provided at the terminus of every deadend
alley.
90 Swansea - Land Usage
(I) Comprehensive strength.
(1) Every concrete street, curb and gutter hereafter constructed in the village shall have a
compressive strength of 4,000 P.S.I. at 28 days.
(2) The subdivider or developer shall provide to the Village Engineer at no expense to the
village, concrete tests verifying compressive strength. The number of such tests shall be determined
by the Village Engineer. The Village Engineer shall also have the right to request other tests,
including air entrainment and slump tests, as he or she deems necessary.
(Prior Code, § 19-314) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.039 PAVEMENT CONSTRUCTION; RIGID.
(A) All rigid pavement shall consist of a minimum of six inches of un-reinforced portland
cement concrete over 12 inches of lime stabilized sub-grade, in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the Standard Specifications, as defined, and the illustrations provided herein. The
village may, on a case by case basis, review and approve the use of pavement cross section
alternatives including, fiber mesh steel reinforcement, compacted crushed stone and thicker portland
cement concrete if, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, traffic volume or type warrants such
requirement.
(B) Longitudinal joints shall be constructed, sawed and sealed in accordance with the Standard
Specifications, and the illustrations included herein in Ch. 154, App. A, of this code of ordinances.
(C) Transverse joint spacing shall not exceed 15 feet and shall be constructed, sawed and sealed
in accordance with the Standard Specifications, and the illustrations included herein in Ch. 154, App.
A, of this code of ordinances.
(D) Construction joints shall be constructed at the end of each day’s run or at locations where a
“cold” joint will occur due to a delay or interruption in placement operations. All transverse
construction joints shall be “tied” with #4 deformed bars, 36 inches long, spaced at 12-inch centers.
Construction joints must be at least five feet from a contraction joint.
(E) Traffic shall be restricted on newly poured concrete streets by barricades and appropriate
signs for the time period specified below; provided that, the Village Engineer may increase the time
period depending upon site location and conditions such as weather:
(1) No traffic shall be permitted for seven days;
(2) Only automobiles and trucks up to one-half ton shall be allowed after seven days; or
(3) All other vehicles shall be allowed after ten days.
(Prior Code, § 19-315) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
Subdivisions 91
§ 153.040 PAVEMENT CONSTRUCTION; FLEXIBLE.
(A) All flexible pavement shall be constructed of two inches of Class I surface over four inches
of Class I binder course over 12 inches of lime stabilized sub-grade in accordance with the Standard
Specifications and the illustrations provided in Ch. 154, App. A, of this code of ordinances.
(B) Should the Village Engineer or Code Administrator, or the developer’s engineer, determine
that the village’s minimum pavement standards are not adequate for a given condition, including,
traffic volume, size of loads, sub-grade support and drainage, the required pavement design shall be
determined by the developer’s engineer on the basis of current pavement design procedure subject to
the approval of the Village Engineer or Code Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 19-316) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.041 CURB AND GUTTER CONSTRUCTION.
(A) All streets, except alleys, constructed after the effective date of this chapter, shall include
mountable curb and gutter and/or vertical curb and guttering of portland cement concrete, in
accordance with the dimensions depicted herein, IDOT Standard Specifications and the dimensions as
given in Ch. 154, App. A, of this code of ordinances.
(B) Curb and/or gutter may be constructed either integrally or separately in conjunction with
portland cement concrete pavement. If constructed separately, the gutter flag shall be “tied” to
portland cement concrete pavement with #4 reinforcing bars at least 30 inches long and spaced at 30-
inch centers.
(C) Contraction joints and expansion joints shall be installed in the curb, or curb and gutter, in
prolongation with joints in adjacent portland cement concrete pavement or base course, except that
dowel bars shall not be required in contraction joints. Contraction joints, when sawed or template
formed, shall be sealed in accordance with IDOT Standard Specifications.
(D) When curb and gutter is constructed adjacent to flexible pavement, a one-inch expansion
joint shall be installed at points of curvature for short-radius curves and at construction joints.
Contraction joints shall be placed between expansion joints at distances not to exceed 25 feet.
(E) All expansion joints shall be constructed with a minimum one-inch thick performed
expansion joint filler conforming to the cross section of the curb and gutter, and shall be provided
with a one and one-fourth inch diameter by 18-inch long, coated smooth dowel bar conforming to
standard specifications. The dowel bar shall be fitted with a cap having a inched stop that will
provide a minimum one-inch of expansion.
(F) Construction joints constructed in curb and gutter adjacent to portland cement concrete
pavement and portland cement concrete base course, shall be provided with #4 deformed steel tie
bars
at least 30 inches long, and placed on nine-inch or more centers with a minimum of two bars per
joint.
(Prior Code, § 19-317) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
92 Swansea - Land Usage
§ 153.042 RELATIONSHIP TO EXISTING STREETS.
(A) Whenever any subdivision abuts an existing street that is narrower than the standards
indicated in this subchapter, the developer shall dedicate sufficient right-of-way on the side abutting
the subdivision to permit compliance with those standards at some future date.
(B) Every developer shall, at his or her own expense, improve existing streets within his or her
subdivision to the standards imposed herein.
(C) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed minor arterial street, the
Board of Trustees may require that access to said street be limited by one of the following means:
(1) Lots be subdivided so that they back onto the minor arterial street and front onto a
parallel land access street, thereby creating double frontage lots, and that the developer install
screening in a reserve strip along the rear lot lines of such lots;
(2) The developer create a series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets or short loops entered
from and generally at right angles to the minor arterial street, with the rear lot lines of the lots at the
termini of such streets backing onto the minor arterial; or
(3) The developer create a frontage road, separated from the minor arterial street by a
planting strip, but having access thereto at suitable points.
(D) New residential streets shall be planned and laid out to discourage traffic through the
subdivision, by avoiding a rigid rectangular street pattern, and by instead utilizing curvilinear streets,
cul-de-sacs or U-shaped streets to effect a more desirable street layout and minimize traffic between
streets outside the subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 19-318) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.043 DESIGNING BLOCKS.
(A) Block width. Wherever practicable, blocks shall be sufficiently wide to accommodate two
tiers of lots having the minimum depth required by the applicable zoning district regulations.
(B) Block length. No block shall be longer than 1,400 feet, nor shorter than 500 feet; provided,
however, that, wherever practicable, blocks along collector streets shall not be less than 1,000 feet in
length.
(Prior Code, § 19-319) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
Subdivisions 93
§ 153.044 DESIGNING INTERSECTIONS.
(A) No more than two streets shall intersect at any one point.
(B) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles.
(1) In no case shall two streets intersect at an angle of less than 75 degrees.
(2) An oblique street shall be approximately at right angles with said intersection for at
least 100 feet therefrom.
(C) Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever practicable,
align with any existing intersection on the opposite side of such street.
(1) Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be permitted, except
where the intersected street has divided lanes without median breaks at either intersection.
(2) Intersections involving collector or minor arterial streets shall be at least 1,000 feet
apart.
(D) Returns at intersections shall be made concentric and shall be rounded by a radius of not less
than 20 feet at the right-of-way line, and not less than 30 feet at the back of curb line.
(E) All street intersections shall be built in such a way that whenever practical, the cross-slopes
thereon do not exceed 3%.
(F) Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation in a triangular
area depicted in Ch. 154, App. A, of this code of ordinances, the developer shall cut such ground
and/or vegetation, including trees, in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way.
(G) Street name signs shall be erected by the developer at all intersections within or abutting any
subdivision.
(1) Said signs shall be of embossed steel, U.S. standard street name signs, or the equivalent
thereof, and measure six inches by 24 inches with lettering at least four inches high.
(2) All street name signs shall be mounted on two-inch diameter galvanized pipe set in
concrete to a depth of at least three feet and extending above the surface to a height of at least seven
feet.
(3) The names of new streets shall be significantly different in sound and spelling from the
names of existing streets in the village so as to avoid confusion.
(4) A street, which is a continuation of an existing street, shall bear the same name as the
existing street.
94 Swansea - Land Usage
(H) The developer, at his or her own expense, shall provide street lights at all intersections and
at intermittent locations in accordance with the design standards of the local electrical utility company
and as approved by the Board of Trustees. Street lights shall be a minimum of 150-watt sodium
vapor carriage lights on 18-foot fiberglass poles.
(Prior Code, § 19-320) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.045 DESIGNING CURVES.
(A) Where curvilinear horizontal alignment is utilized for subdivision streets, the minimum
centerline radius shall be as indicated below, unless otherwise dictated by site constraints and
approved by the Village Engineer:
(1) Collector street: 150 feet; and
(2) Alley: 75 feet.
(B) If reverse curves are to be utilized on any collector street or arterial street, the radii of
which are less than 300 feet, a tangent at least 100 feet in length shall be introduced between the
curves, as depicted in Ch. 154, App. A, of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 19-321) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.046 DESIGNING DEAD-END STREETS.
(A) Temporary stub streets.
(1) Streets shall be so arranged to provide for the continuation of collector streets between
adjacent properties when such continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective
fire and police protection, efficient provision of utilities and where such continuation is in accord
with the village’s official map.
(2) If the adjacent property is undeveloped and any street must dead-end temporarily, the
right-of-way shall be extended to the property line, a temporary turnabout shall be provided at the
terminus and no strip that would prevent connections with future streets shall be reserved.
(B) Permanent dead-end streets.
(1) For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire protection,
permanent dead-end streets shall be limited to 1,000 feet in length.
(2) The terminus of a permanent dead-end street shall not be closer than 50 feet to the
boundary of an adjacent tract.
Subdivisions 95
(3) A cul-de-sac turnaround, having a minimum right-of-way radius of 50 feet and a
minimum pavement radius of 45 feet, shall be provided at the end of every permanent dead-end
street, as depicted in Ch. 154, App. A, of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 19-322) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.047 DESIGNING SIDEWALKS.
(A) (1) In an effort to ensure the safety of the walking public, sidewalks shall be required along
both sides of streets in all zoning districts. This regulation shall apply to all streets located within and
adjacent to a subdivision. Exception: in residential subdivisions with densities of one housing unit, or
less, per acre of gross area, sidewalks shall be required on one side of the street only.
(2) No variation from the above requirements shall be granted unless the Village Board,
having considered the Planning and Zoning Board’s advisory report, determines that, in the area in
question, sidewalks are not needed to ensure public safety, or that topographical conditions make the
installation of sidewalks impractical.
(B) In commercial areas, the sidewalk shall be located as far as practical from the traffic lanes
(usually close to the right-of-way line). In residential areas, the sidewalk shall be located 30 inches
from the back of the curb along streets, and 12 inches from the back of the curb around the radii of
cul-de-sacs and half cul-de-sacs. The minimum unobstructed width shall be as follows:
(1) Residential districts: four feet wide;
(2) Non-residential districts: five feet wide; and
(3) Sidewalks abutting curbs: six feet wide.
(C) Every sidewalk shall be constructed of concrete at least four inches thick that has a
minimum compressive strength of 3,500 P.S.I. after 28 days. The finished surface of all sidewalks
shall have a lightly brushed texture. Control joints shall be trowelled in at minimum six-foot
intervals. Expansion joints shall be placed at driveway crossings, at both ends of the sidewalk and, in
the event of excessively long runs, as determined by the Village Engineer.
(D) No sidewalk shall be constructed at a grade steeper than 8% unless steps and/or ramps,
approved by the Village Engineer, are provided. The cross-slope shall not exceed 1:50.
(E) Curbs shall be cut and sidewalks ramped at all intersections and driveways so as to enhance
the mobility of handicapped individuals. All ramps at intersections and other hazardous vehicular
ways shall have a detectable warning texture.
96 Swansea - Land Usage
(F) When a sidewalk passes over a storm sewer inlet, the inlet cover depth shall be increased to
five feet.
(Prior Code, § 19-323) (Ord. 1576, passed 5-17-2010; Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.048 DEDICATION FOR PUBLIC USE.
Upon the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful to create any private street within the
subdivision jurisdiction of the village, except as stipulated below.
(A) Every subdivider shall dedicate for public use, at least the minimum right-of-way indicated
in the street design specifications contained herein. Exception: in lieu of dedicating the minimum
right-of-way for public use, private streets may be provided under the following circumstances.
(1) Only one means of ingress and egress shall be constructed into the development.
(2) If more than one ingress/egress points are constructed, gates shall be installed to
prohibit public thoroughfare.
(3) The method of operation of the gates shall be approved by the Village Board of Trustees
upon the recommendation of the Police and Fire Chiefs.
(4) Adequate maneuverability must be provided throughout the development for all
emergency vehicles.
(5) All streets must be kept in good repair at all times.
(B) The Village Engineer may require a subdivider to dedicate right-of-way in excess of the
stated minimum if, in his or her professional opinion, he or she feels that:
(1) Due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate site lines; or
(2) Due to the location of streams and railroads tracks, additional width is needed to
construct bridges, underpasses and/or safe approaches thereto.
(C) Whenever a subdivision abuts an existing street that does not meet the street design
specifications contained herein, the subdivider shall reserve sufficient right-of-way along the street
abutting the subdivision so that, when additional right-of-way is acquired on the other site,
compliance with said standards will be possible.
Subdivisions 97
(D) Any land that is dedicated or reserved for public rights-of-way shall not be counted in
determining compliance with the lot size and setback requirements set forth in Ch. 154 of this code
of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 19-324) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.049 STANDARDS FOR DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS.
Every residential, commercial and industrial development, having a gross aggregate area of onehalf
acre or more, shall be provided with drainage facilities which will effectively and satisfactorily
manage storm water surface runoff, and provide for storm water detention.
(A) In order to ensure each development or redevelopment is in compliance, every developer
shall provide the following:
(1) Existing and proposed drainage plans delineating the existing topography and proposed
grading topography of the site and at a distance of 50 feet surrounding the site at a maximum of twofoot
contour intervals showing the following:
(a) A vicinity map showing the relationship of the site to its general surroundings at a
scale of not less than 2,000 feet to one inch;
(b) Title, scale, north arrow, legend, seal of a state-licensed professional engineer, date
and name of person preparing plans;
(c) Property boundary, dimensions and approximate acreage;
(d) Building setback lines;
(e) All existing or proposed easements;
(f) All existing and proposed structures and sizes;
(g) Location, size and slope of storm water conduits and drainage swales;
(h) Shoreline of lakes, ponds and detention basins with normal pool water level
elevation;
(i) The banks and centerline of streams and channels;
(j) Roads, streets and associated storm water inlets including finished grades;
(k) Base flood elevation, flood fringe and regulatory floodway;
(l) FEMA Map Panel, as appropriate;
98 Swansea - Land Usage
(m) Existing and proposed watershed area divisions, and designated overland flow
paths;
(n) Cross-section data for open channel flow paths;
(o) Area in square feet, or acres of existing and proposed impervious surface within
each watershed;
(p) All known existing, abandoned or proposed water or monitoring well head
locations;
(q) All known sanitary or combined sewer lines;
(r) All known septic systems, aeration systems and private disposal systems;
(s) Known farm drains and tiles;
(t) Detention facilities;
(u) The limits of designated regulatory and non-regulatory wetland areas;
(v) Depressional storage areas;
(w) The location and limits of known sinkholes (Karst areas);
(x) Any known designated natural areas, prime farmland; and
(y) Any known proposed environmental mitigation features.
(2) (a) A hydrologic/hydraulic drainage report prepared by a professional engineer
licensed in the state shall be provided with design calculations to substantiate the design for all
proposed storm sewers; pipe culverts, cross-road culverts; and swales and ditches. Hydraulic
encroachment computations shall also be provided to ensure storm water does not unduly encroach
onto pavement areas. Proposed drainage areas, land uses, runoff coefficients, flow rates, capacities,
velocities and hydraulic grade lines are to be calculated and included in the report. The design of
erosion control devices shall also be included in the report. A clearly legible drainage area map shall
be provided with the hydraulic calculations indicating existing and proposed watershed and subwatershed
areas.
(b) The drainage report shall also include hydrologic/hydraulic storm water detention
calculations detailing existing and proposed watershed drainage areas; design summary of land
usages and runoff coefficients; time of concentration computations; computation of peak discharge
runoff rates for each design storm and identifying the critical storm event; computation of detention
volumes delineating the stage vs. storage for the detention facility in a tabular chart; and a flow
rating table of the outflow structure delineating stage vs. flow capacity in a tabular chart.
Subdivisions 99
(3) The location of proposed detention basins detailing the limits of ponding for each design
storm and the total available volume, details of outlet structure(s) and details of erosion control
device(s) shall be provided.
(4) A statement of certification of all drainage plans, exhibits, calculations and supporting
data by a state-licensed professional engineer.
(B) The Village Engineer, on a case by case basis, shall have the authority to require, additional
information for a proper review and to grant variations from those requirements in this section which
may not apply.
(C) Any storm water design calculations reviewed and approved by the state’s Department of
Transportation or Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources, shall serve as
fulfilling the requirements in this section; provided that, the developer submits documentation of such
approval.
(D) The minimal design requirements of this chapter shall not be construed to relieve the
subdivider of any legal responsibilities for downstream/upstream storm water damages inflicted by
runoff or backup from the development.
(Prior Code, § 19-325) (Ord. 1448, passed 4-3-2006; Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.050 GENERAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS.
(A) The design, plans and specifications of every storm sewer system, cross-road culvert, storm
water detention facility, ditch, swale and channel shall include provisions to show compliance with
the drainage laws of the state and any subdivision thereof in effect at that time. By requiring that the
subdivider or developer evidence planned compliance with drainage laws, the village assumes no
responsibility to landowners or others for damage caused by noncompliance with such laws.
(B) In general, all drainage system design and construction shall conform to the State
Department of Transportation’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (latest
edition) unless otherwise modified herein.
(C) Sump pumps may be connected to the storm sewer system, but shall only enter the system
above the hydraulic grade line for the 25-year design storm event. By connection of the sump pump
to the village’s storm sewer system, the village takes no responsibility for the operation, maintenance
or ownership of the sump pump system.
(D) All sump pumps shall be fitted with an appropriate check valve to prevent backflow of storm
water. The village shall not be liable for any damage due to backup of storm water due to failure of
the sump pump check valve and appurtenances.
100 Swansea - Land Usage
(E) Place aggregate in maximum eight-inch layers and compact to 95%, maximum dry density
ASTM D698, Standard Proctor, except for the top four feet of trench, which shall be compacted to
97% maximum dry density, ASTM D698, Standard Proctor. Lift size may be increased when it is
demonstrated that compaction requirements can be met using other methods.
(Prior Code, § 19-326) (Ord. 1448, passed 4-3-2006; Ord. 1622, passed 8-1-2011; Ord. 1700,
passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.051 SPECIFIC DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Storm sewers and inlets.
(1) Design methodology.
(a) All storm sewer piping systems, roadway ditches, and appurtenant pipe culverts
shall be sized utilizing the “Rational Method” of design as described in Chapter 4, Hydrology, of the
State Department of Transportation’s Drainage Manual for drainage areas less than 200 acres.
(b) Storm sewer pipes, pipe culverts and inlet devices shall be provided to satisfactorily
accommodate the surface runoff incident to the 25-year design storm event.
(c) The hydraulic grade line of the system at any inlet or storm manhole shall not be
higher than two feet below the inlet sill or the top of a manhole or junction box.
(d) An overland flow path shall be provided to safely pass flows which cannot be
accommodated by the design storm event.
(2) Rainfall intensities. All design rainfall events for storm sewer design shall be based or
the State Water Survey’s Bulletin 70 (refer to Table 13, Sectional Frequency Distributions for Storm
Periods of 5 Minutes to 10 Days and Recurrence Intervals of 2 Months to 100 Years). The total
rainfall value for the design storm shall be adjusted for the “St. Louis Urban Effect” as given in
Table 4, State Water Survey’s Circular 172.
(3) Runoff coefficients. The proposed impervious surface (paved and building areas) runoff
coefficient shall be 0.95 and the runoff coefficient for lawns shall be 0.20. Wooded and forested area
runoff coefficients shall be 0.12. For a typical subdivision, the runoff coefficient shall be determined
by calculating a composite street and lot coefficient for the area that flows toward the street. A
separate composite lot coefficient may be computed for yard inlets. If the engineer wishes to use only
one coefficient for the storm sewer design, the most conservative composite runoff coefficient shall
be used.
Subdivisions 101
(4) Storm sewer materials.
(a) Storm sewer pipes located under paved surfaces and within right-of-way shall be
reinforced concrete pipe with rubber gasket joints and with sufficient wall thickness and
reinforcement to carry the design loading, and with materials conforming to the requirements of
ASTM C-76 reinforced concrete culvert, storm drain and sewer pipe with joints conforming to
ASTM C-443 joints for circular concrete and culvert pipe utilizing rubber gaskets.
(b) The type of storm sewer pipe materials used when replacing or repairing existing
storm sewer pipes shall be at the discretion of the Village Engineer.
(c) Storm sewer pipes and pipe culverts located outside of paved surfaces and right-ofway
may be of any of the following materials:
1. Reinforced concrete pipe with sufficient wall thickness and reinforcement to
carry the intended loading and meeting the requirements of ASTM C-76 reinforced concrete culvert,
storm drain and sewer pipe;
2. Pre-coated, galvanized steel pipe meeting the requirements of AASHTO M245-
78 and M246; provided, the plate thicknesses conform to IDQT standard specifications;
3. Aluminized steel Type 2 corrugated culvert pipe meeting the requirements of
AASHTO M274 and M36 and conforming to IDQT standard specifications; and
4. Polyethylene pipe conforming to AASHTO M294-94. This pipe shall have an
integrally formed smooth wail interior. Joints shall be elastomeric gasketed in conformance with
ASTM F477-93. Pipe shall not be exposed to direct sunlight for more than six months. Pipe shall
have metal end sections.
(5) Storm sewer construction.
(a) Properly sized storm sewer(s) shall be provided to carry surface runoff from streets
and curb and/or gutters and shall be of sufficient length that they transport the runoff at least 60 feet
from the street pavement back of curb.
(b) The minimum diameter of storm sewers shall be 12 inches and the minimum
diameter of pipe culverts shall be 15 inches.
(c) The minimum and maximum gradients of pipes/storm sewers shall conform to the
following criteria.
1. Minimum grade shall be 0.3%.
102 Swansea - Land Usage
2. There is no maximum grade; provided that, erosion control devices shall be
utilized for all outfalls of storm sewers or pipe culverts in accordance with the design requirements
of HEC-11.
(d) All site drainage design, including outfalls of storm sewers and storm water
detention facilities, shall take into account the effects of downstream tailwater conditions.
(e) All trenches for storm sewer pipes and pipe culverts that are located under paved
surfaces shall be properly backfilled and properly compacted to a density not less than 95% of
maximum density, as defined in ASTM D2321. Manholes shall be constructed as depicted in Ch.
154, App. A, of this code of ordinances.
(6) Inlet/catch basins construction.
(a) Inlets/catch basins shall be constructed in accordance with the standards depicted in
Ch. 154, App. A, of this code of ordinances.
(b) The spacing for inlets/catch basins shall be calculated so that the runoff from the
design storm shall not encroach upon the pavement by more than five feet from the back of curb;
provided, however, that, under no circumstances shall such inlet/catch basin spacing exceed 300 feet.
Calculations should include curb and gutter and inlet capacity and consideration of bypass flows
(c) The intersection of inlet tops with sidewalks should be detailed for each location to
ensure continuity in the sidewalk jointing, expansion joint placement and final surface elevation.
(B) Cross-road culverts, bridges and channels.
(1) Design methodology.
(a) In general, all cross-road culverts, bridges and channels shall be sized utilizing the
USGS Regression Equation. The rural USGS Regression Equation shall be utilized for watersheds
from 0.02 square miles to 10,000 square miles. In urbanized areas, the urban USGS Regression
Equation methodology shall be utilized for watersheds from 0.7 to 630 square miles. Since the USGS
Regression Equation may produce conservative results in watersheds less than 320 acres, it may be
necessary to compare the results computed to other methodologies such as the Rational Method. SCS
TR-55 or HEC-1 computer analysis. In complex watersheds, SCS TR-55 or HEC-1 Flood
Hydrograph Computer modeling shall be utilized to compute peak storm water flows. A HEC-RAS
analysis shall be developed to size the structures or channel and establish water surface profiles
created by the proposed drainage system based on the aforementioned hydrologic models.
(b) Watersheds over one square mile are subject to review by the state’s Department of
Natural Resources (IDNR), Office of Water Resources (OWR), and should be designed under the
specific requirements of the INDR\OWR.
Subdivisions 103
(c) All cross-road culverts, bridges and channels shall be provided to satisfactorily
accommodate the runoff incident to the 100-year design storm event. A minimum of two feet of
freeboard shall be provided below roadway shoulders to the 100-year flood elevation, taking into
account the headwater and tailwater effects of the culvert.
(d) For a new culvert crossings, the water surface profile increase shall not exceed
one-half foot at the structure, nor 0.1 foot at a point 1,000 feet upstream of the structure as
determined by the horizontal projection of the maximum created head and the slope of the hydraulic
grade line.
(2) Rainfall intensities.
(a) For HEC-1 and SCS TR-55 modeling of cross-road culverts, channels and bridges,
the design rainfall intensities shall be based on State Water Survey Bulletin 70 (refer to Table 13,
Sectional Frequency Distributions for Storm Periods of 5 Minutes to 10 Days and Recurrence
Intervals of 2 Months to 100 Years). The total rainfall value for the design storm shall be adjusted
for the “St. Louis Urban Effect” as given in Table 4, State Water Survey Circular 172.
(b) Rainfall shall be distributed utilizing the Huff distributions in State Water Survey
Circular 173 (Table 3, Median Time Distributions of Heavy Storm Rainfall at a Point). The first
quartile point rainfall distribution shall be used for durations less than or equal to six hours. The
second quartile distribution shall be used for storms greater than six hours and less than or equal to
12 hours. The third quartile point rainfall distribution shall be used for durations greater than 12 and
less than or equal to 24 hours. The fourth quartile distribution shall be used for durations greater than
24 hours. All quartiles should be run for each required frequency to determine the controlling peak
storm duration for each frequency.
(3) Cross-road culvert materials.
(a) Cross-road culverts shall be reinforced concrete, pipe with rubber gasket joints and
with sufficient wall thickness and reinforcement to carry the design loading, and with materials
conforming to the requirements of ASTM C-76 reinforced concrete culvert, storm drain and sewer
pipe with joints conforming to ASTM C-443 joints for circular concrete and culvert pipe utilizing
rubber gaskets, or reinforced concrete box culverts conforming to ASTM C-789 pre-cast reinforced
concrete box sections for culverts, storm drains and sewers, or ASTM C850 pre-cast reinforced
concrete box culverts, storm drains and sewers with less than two feet of cover subjected to highway
loadings.
(b) All cross-road culverts shall be constructed with appropriate end sections
conforming to the roadway embankment slope or be constructed with headwalls.
(c) The type of culvert pipe material used when replacing or repairing existing crossroad
culverts shall be at the discretion of the Village Engineer.
104 Swansea - Land Usage
(4) Drainage swales.
(a) Natural drainage swales may be utilized to accommodate surface runoff providing
they are located near lot lines and the flows induced therein do not pose health or safety hazards for
residents.
(b) In general, all drainage swales having less than 1% slope shall be paved with
portland cement concrete or shall utilize storm sewers to transport storm water flows.
(c) The minimum and maximum gradients of earth drainage ways and/or swales shall
conform to the following criteria.
1. Minimum grade shall be 1%, which may be reduced to 0.35% if paved with
concrete, or as approved by the Village Engineer.
2. Maximum grade shall be 3% with no protection other than sod, or 12% with
paving, rip rap and/or energy dissipaters.
(d) All new or improved storm water drainage swales created in new developments
shall not allow overland drainage to exceed 250 feet without being captured by a storm sewer
system. The velocity of flow in these drainage swales shall not exceed five fps unless measures are
taken to avoid erosion.
(e) Area inlets shall be required to intercept flows greater than four cfs in paved or unpaved
swale areas.
(C) Storm water detention facilities. In order to protect downstream property from potential
damages by increased flow rates or greater velocities, the village may require the installation of
drainage detention facilities, where such facilities are deemed necessary in the interest of public
safety and welfare. All detention facilities shall be located in outlots.
(1) Design methodology.
(a) Storm water detention systems for new developments or re-developments as a
minimum shall be designed to control the peak rate of discharge from the property for the two-year,
24-hour and 100-year, 24-hour storm events to discharge rates at or below those which existed prior
to development utilizing approved runoff hydrograph methods as outlined herein. In addition, the
storm water detention system shall be designed to control the peak rate of discharge from the
property for the one-hour, two-hour, three-hour, six-hour, 12-hour and 24-hour storm event,
whichever is determined to be the most critical. Additionally, the discharge from a storm water
detention facility shall not cause an increase in flooding or channel instability downstream, when
considered in aggregate with other developed properties and downstream drainage capacities.
Subdivisions 105
(b) All hydrologic/hydraulic drainage calculations shall be accompanied by the
“Engineer’s Hydraulic/Hydrologic Drainage Summary and Certification”, as listed in Ch. 154, App.
A, of this code of ordinances.
(c) For detention basins with drainage areas less than 200 acres the modified rational
method as described in the IDOT Drainage Manual in Chapter 4, Hydrology, and Chapter 12,
Detention. In addition, the existing and proposed impervious surface (paved and building areas)
runoff coefficient shall be 0.95, and existing and proposed agricultural, pastures, wooded areas and
lawns shall be 0.20. Wooded and forested area runoff coefficients shall be 0.12.
(d) Detention basins with more complex watersheds or watersheds exceeding 200 acres
shall be analyzed utilizing a hydrograph routing method that is generally acceptable to the State
Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources, such as the Soil Conservation Service
TR-20 and TR-55 Methodology, or the Corps of Engineers HEC-1 computer model to develop
inflow and outflow hydrographs for the existing and proposed condition runoff and for routing
through the detention basin.
(2) Rainfall intensities.
(a) Design rainfall events for storm water detention design utilizing the “Rational
Method” of analysis shall be based on the State Water Survey’s Bulletin 70 (refer to Table 13,
Sectional Frequency Distributions for Storm Periods of 5 Minutes to 10 Days and Recurrence
Intervals of 2 Months to 100 Years). The total rainfall value for the design storm shall be adjusted
for the “St. Louis Urban Effect” as given in Table 4, State Water Survey Circular 172.
(b) For SCS-TR-55 and TR-20 methodology and HEC-1 methodology, rainfall shall be
distributed utilizing the Huff distributions in State Water Survey Circular 173 (Table 3, Median Time
Distributions of Heavy Storm Rainfall at a Point). The first quartile point rainfall distribution shall be
used for durations less than or equal to six hours. The second quartile distribution shall be used for
storms greater than six hours and less than or equal to 12 hours. The third quartile point rainfall
distribution shall be used for durations greater than 12 and less than or equal to 24 hours. The fourth
quartile distribution shall be used for durations greater than 24 hours. All quartiles should be run for
each required frequency to determine the controlling peak storm duration for each frequency.
(3) Storm water detention basin construction.
(a) Where detention or retention basins are to be used as part of the drainage system
for a property, they shall be constructed as the first element of the initial earthwork program. Any
eroded sediment captured in these facilities shall be removed by the applicant on a regular basis and
before project completion in order to maintain the design volume of the facilities.
(b) When practical, flows from off-site upstream areas should be bypassed around
detention basins, whenever possible. The piping should be designed to pass the 100-year storm event
based on maximum land use that is consistent with the current zoning or adjacent land use trends. If
off-site flows are directed into the detention basin, allowable release rates for the pertinent
watersheds and sub-watersheds shall not be modified above existing condition runoff rates.
106 Swansea - Land Usage
(c) The placement of a detention basin in the flood fringe area shall require
compensatory storage for one and one-half times the volume below the base flood elevation occupied
by the detention basin including any berms. The release from the detention storage provided shall
still be controlled consistent with the requirements of this section. The applicant shall demonstrate its
operation for all stream-flow and floodplain backwater conditions. Excavations for compensatory
storage along watercourses shall be opposite or adjacent to the area occupied by detention. All
floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year elevation shall be replaced below the existing tenyear
elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year elevation shall be replaced
above the existing ten-year flood elevation. All compensatory storage excavations shall be
constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
(d) Detention basins should have an emergency spillway for conditions that exceed the
storage volume. The maximum ponding elevation shall be calculated based on a routing of the 100-
year design storm assuming the low-flow outlet is blocked with water ponded to the overflow
structure’s sill. A minimum of one foot of freeboard shall be provided from the maximum ponding
elevation to the top of the basin.
(e) Where a single pipe outlet or orifice plate is to be used to control discharge, it shall
have a minimum diameter of four inches. Smaller basins may install a smaller rectangular or v-notch
weir to control discharge. If this minimum orifice size permits release rates greater than those
specified in this section, and regional detention is not a practical alternative, outlets, structures such
as perforated risers, or flow control orifices shall be used.
(f) All ends of pipes discharging into a dry basin shall be connected with the low-flow
pipe (outflow structure) by means of a paved swale. The paved swale shall be non-reinforced
concrete, four inches thick, with a minimum 2% slope to the center and a minimum 0.35%
longitudinal slope. Paved swales shall be a minimum of four inches deep and three feet wide or 1.3
times the diameter of the pipe entering the basin, whichever is greater, and be keyed to the structure.
The bottom of the basin shall be sloped a minimum of 2% towards the concrete swale.
(g) The maximum planned depth of storm water stored shall not normally exceed four
feet.
(h) The maximum side slopes for grassed dry basins shall not exceed one foot vertical
for three feet horizontal (3H:1V slope). The maximum side slopes for grassed wet basins shall not
exceed one foot vertical for five horizontal (5H:1V slope). All wet basins shall have a level safety
ledge at least four feet in width two and one-half to three feet below the normal water depth.
(i) In no case shall the limits of maximum ponding be closer than 30 feet horizontally
from any building, and less than two feet vertically below the lowest sill elevation.
Subdivisions 107
(j) In no case shall the limits of maximum ponding be closer than ten feet, plus one
and one-half times the depth of the basin from the right-of-way. If there is an easement behind the
right-of-way, then this distance shall be measured from the edge of the easement.
(k) The maximum storm water ponding depth in any parking area shall not exceed six
inches for more than one hour.
(Prior Code, § 19-327) (Ord. 1448, passed 4-3-2006; Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 153.052 STANDARDS FOR UTILITIES.
(A) All utility lines, including gas, electric power, telephone and CATV lines, shall be located
underground throughout every subdivision.
(B) Underground service connections to the property line of each platted lot shall be installed at
the developer’s expense; provided, however, that, the Village Board may waive the requirement for
service connections to each lot if adjoining lots are to be retained in single ownership.
(Prior Code, § 19-328) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 153.053 SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR WATER FACILITIES.
(A) Whenever the public water system is reasonably accessible, that is, within 200 feet of the
subdivision, every lot shall be provided with a connection thereto at the lot line.
(B) If the public water system is not reasonably accessible, individual wells may be used or a
private central water system may be developed; provided, such facilities are approved by the Village
Engineer.
(C) All water distribution lines shall be at least six inches in diameter.
(D) (1) The use or attempt to use as a potable water supply ground water from all depths in the
following locations, specifically denoted in the "Ground Water Ordinance Area" attached to the
applicable ordinance, by the installation or drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby
prohibited, except for such uses or methods in existence before the effective date of the applicable
ordinance:
(a) 1718 North Illinois Street, Swansea, Illinois 62226, as described in Ordinance No.
1450, effective April 30, 2006;
(b) 1341 North Illinois Street, Swansea, Illinois 62226, as described in Ordinance No.
1646, effective May 17, 2012; and
108 Swansea - Land Usage
(c) 2040 Llewellyn Road, Swansea, Illinois 62226, also known as Permanent Parcel
Nos. 08060210006 and 08050100006 and 08060400034, and as shown on Figure 2, attached hereto
and incorporated by reference herein;
(d) 2030 Llewellyn Road, Swansea, Illinois 62226, also known as Permanent Parcel
Nos. 08050300001 and 08050100007, and as shown on Figure 2, attached hereto and incorporated
by reference herein;
(e) 2043 Llewellyn Road, Swansea, Illinois 62226, also known as Permanent Parcel
No. 08050100005, and as shown on Figure 2, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein;
(f) 2119 Llewellyn Road, Swansea, Illinois 62226, also known as Permanent Parcel
No. 08060211012, and as shown on Figure 2, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein.
(2) This limitation shall apply to the village or any other person's construction or use or
attempt to construct or use a well.
(3) (a) PERSONS shall mean any individual, partnership, co-partnership firm, company,
limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political
subdivision or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns.
(b) POTABLE WATER shall mean any water used for human or domestic
consumption, including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming, washing
dishes or preparing foods.
[Figures 1 and 2 follow on next two pages]
Subdivisions 109
FIGURE 1
110 Swansea - Land Usage
FIGURE 2
(Prior Code, § 19-329) (Ord. 1646, passed 5-7-2012; Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014; Ord. 1769,
passed 12-19-2016) Penalty, see § 153.999
Subdivisions 111
§ 153.054 SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR SANITARY SEWERS.
(A) All sanitary sewer facilities shall be installed in compliance with the regulations of the State
Department of Public Health and the State Environmental Protection Agency, and must be approved
by the Village Engineer.
(B) Whenever the public sanitary sewerage system is reasonably accessible, that is, when the
distance from the property to be subdivided to the nearest public sewer with available capacity does
not exceed 200 feet, the developer shall extend said system throughout the subdivision and shall
provide each lot with a connection thereto.
(C) In areas where the public sanitary sewerage system is not reasonably accessible, but where
plans for the installation of said system have been approved by the State Environmental Protection
Agency, the developer shall provide sanitary sewers in accordance with such plans and temporarily
cap them.
(D) Except as provided in divisions (A) or (B) above, whenever connection to the public
sewerage system is not reasonably accessible and plans for such a system have not been approved by
the IEPA, the developer shall install a private central sewerage system approved by the Village
Engineer.
(E) Whenever the provisions of divisions (A), (B) or (C) above are applicable, the developer
shall comply with the following regulations.
(1) The developer shall attempt to locate every sanitary sewer main within the area between
the pavement edge and the right-of-way line of the street.
(2) Where a sewer main crosses a proposed street, the developer shall back fill with
compacted limestone screenings, sand or other approved granular material.
(3) The developer shall provide a six-inch service connection for each residential lot, the
lateral of which, shall be extended at least ten feet into the lot, as measured from the lot line, and
extended vertically to a minimum of three feet above the finished grade level. The exposed end shall
be sealed with a six-inch cap glued in place. The transition from the horizontal to the vertical shall be
made by the use of a six-inch 90-degree “long sweep” or a series of two 45-degree elbows.
(4) Where a lateral crosses a proposed street, the trench shall be backfilled with limestone
screenings, sand or other approved granular material.
(5) All sections of all sanitary sewer mains, laterals and the like shall be air-tested. All
mains shall also be mandrel tested, lamped and televised. All testing shall be done by an independent
testing agency approved by the village.
(a) When air testing, all sections of sanitary sewer mains, laterals and the like, eight
inches or less in diameter, shall be pressurized to at least four P.S.I. above the surrounding ground
water pressure, and must not drop more than one P.S.I. after a minimum duration of five minutes.
Sewer mains
112 Swansea - Land Usage
over eight inches in diameter shall be tested as required by the Village Engineer. A copy of the
testing results, showing a minimum of the initial test pressure, the final test pressure and the duration
of the test shall be submitted to the village prior to final acceptance of the development. The test
results shall be certified by the testing agency.
(b) An approved testing company shall televise all sanitary sewer mains. A digital
format denoting the manhole number, distance between laterals and manholes shall be depicted on
the digital format. The manhole number on the digital format shall be the manhole number shown on
the plans for the development and the corresponding village designated manhole number. A report in
eight and one-half by 11-inch format shall be submitted detailing the results. The digital format and
the report shall identify all observed construction deficiencies, pipe material flaws and the like. The
report and a copy of the digital format shall be submitted to the village.
(c) All sanitary sewers mains shall be lamped by an approved, independent agency to
ensure consistent slope and alignment prior to acceptance. A report shall be submitted to the village.
(d) All manholes shall be vacuum tested.
1. The vacuum should reach ten inches water column and hold the pressure for
the time specified in the following chart.
Time (in Sec.)
Manhole Depth (feet) 48-Inch Diameter 60-Inch Diameter 72-Inch Diameter
8 20 26 33
10 25 33 41
12 30 39 49
14 35 46 57
16 40 52 65
13 45 59 73
20 50 65 81
22 55 72 89
24 59 78 97
26 64 85 105
28 69 91 113
30 74 98 121
Subdivisions 113
2. If the vacuum drops more than one inch within the test time, the manhole is
considered unacceptable. A copy of the testing results, showing a minimum of the initial test
pressure, the final test pressure and the duration of the test shall be submitted to the village prior to
final acceptance of the development. The test results shall be certified by the testing agency.
(e) The developer shall provide a sanitary sewer as-built to the village. The as-built
shall show the location, flowline and depth of all manholes and the location of all laterals. All
elevations shall be based upon the existing sewer system datum of the village. The developer shall
submit all as-built data both on hard copy and in an Autocad format as approved by the village.
(Prior Code, § 19-330) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.055 SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR INDIVIDUAL SEWERS.
(A) Individual sewage disposal facilities shall not be installed in any subdivision containing more
than ten lots as shown on the final plat or as subsequently developed.
(B) Where individual disposal facilities are permitted, the Village Board may require that the
minimum lot size be increased above the usual zoning district requirements to provide adequate area
for drain fields.
(Prior Code, § 19-331) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.056 STANDARDS FOR EASEMENTS.
(A) Unless utilities are to be installed in the public rights-of-way, easements not less than ten
feet wide shall be provided on each side of all rear lot lines, and alongside side lot lines where
necessary for storm and sanitary sewers; gas, water and other mains; and for underground electric
and telephone lines.
(B) Easements of greater width may be required along or across lots when necessary for the
extension of main sewers or other utilities or where both water and sewer lines are located in the
same easement.
(C) Adequate easements for storm water drainage shall be established along any natural drainage
channel and in such other locations as may be necessary to provide satisfactory disposal of storm
water from streets, alleys and all other portions of the subdivision. The location and minimum widths
of such easements shall be determined by the Village Engineer.
(D) It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to such easements to authorized officials
upon display of proper identification.
114 Swansea - Land Usage
(E) No person shall erect any structure or plant any tree or shrub in any easement or within any
street or alley right-of-way, except at the owner’s risk with respect to all costs for demolition,
removal or reconstruction thereof.
(Prior Code, § 19-332) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 153.999
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.075 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
(A) The following schedule establishes fees for the various procedures listed in this chapter,
which are intended to defray the administrative costs connected with such procedures, and as such do
not constitute a tax or other revenue-raising device.
Procedure Fee
Amendment to the Subdivision Code text $225
Filing an amended plat after approval has been granted $500, plus $10 per lot or building site with minimum of
$600
Filing of final plat for minor subdivision $50
Filing of final plat of same subdivision Included in fees
Filing of improvements plans for same subdivision Fees for the Village Engineer’s review of the
improvement plans and any inspections of improvements
must be paid by the developer
Filing of preliminary plat $500, plus $10 per lot or building site with a minimum of
$600
Inspection of improvements of same subdivision See “Filing for improvements plans for same
subdivision”
Variation $225
(B) Until such fees have been paid, no request for any of the above shall be deemed to have
been filed and no procedure shall be initiated.
(Prior Code, § 19-402) (Ord. 1551, passed 5-18-2009; Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 153.076 AUTHORITY.
(A) The primary authority for administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
shall be vested in the following:
(1) Code Administrator;
Subdivisions 115
(2) Village Engineer;
(3) Planning and Zoning Board; and
(4) Board of Trustees.
(B) In addition to the above, other officials, appointees or employees of the village may be
required and authorized to perform functions authorized in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-403) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 153.077 CODE ADMINISTRATOR; APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE;
COMPENSATION; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
(A) Authorization. The Code Administrator, established in § 32.07(A) of this code of
ordinances, is hereby authorized and empowered to administer and enforce provisions of this chapter
as listed in division (D) below.
(Prior Code, § 19-404)
(B) Appointment and term of office. Procedures for the appointment of the Code Administrator
and his or her respective term of office shall be governed by the provisions of § 32.07(A) of this
code of ordinances, and not altered by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-405)
(C) Compensation. Any compensation paid to The Code Administrator shall be governed by the
provisions of § 32.07(C) of this code of ordinances and not altered by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-406)
(D) Duties and responsibilities. The Code Administrator, in administering and enforcing the
provisions of this chapter, shall be responsible for, but not limited to, the following specific duties:
(1) To review and forward preliminary and final plats to the Planning and Zoning Board;
(2) To transmit improvement plans to the Village Engineer for his or her review;
(3) To issue stop orders as necessary when the Village Engineer determines that approved
improvements are being constructed in violation of this chapter;
(4) To pursue actions authorized in § 153.084(J) of this chapter when a developer fails to
complete required improvements;
(5) To evaluate and make decisions concerning proposed minor changes in approved final
plats;
(6) To review and forward applications for variations to the Planning and Zoning Board;
116 Swansea - Land Usage
(7) To periodically review the provisions of this chapter to determine whether revisions are
needed, and to make recommendations on such matters to the Planning and Zoning Board as
necessary;
(8) To maintain up-to-date records of matters pertaining to this chapter including, but not
limited to, preliminary plats, “as-built” records of completed improvements, final plats, variations
and amendments; and
(9) To provide information to subdividers and developers and to the general public on
matters related to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-407)
(Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 153.078 VILLAGE ENGINEER; APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE;
COMPENSATION; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
(A) Authorization. The Village Engineer, appointed under § 32.04(A) of this code of
ordinances, is hereby authorized and empowered to administer and enforce all applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-408)
(B) Appointment and term of office. Procedures for the appointment of the Village Engineer and
his or her respective term of office shall be governed by the provisions of § 32.04(A) of this code of
ordinances and not altered by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-409)
(C) Compensation. Any compensation paid to the Village Engineer shall be governed by the
provisions of § 32.04(A) of this code of ordinances and not altered by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-410)
(D) Duties and responsibilities. The Village Engineer, in administering and enforcing the
provisions of this chapter, shall be responsible for, but not limited to, the duties specified in the
various sections of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-411)
(Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 153.079 COMPLAINTS.
(A) Whenever any person alleges that a violation of the provisions of this chapter has occurred,
that person shall file a written complaint on forms provided by the Code Administrator.
(B) The Code Administrator shall record such complaints, promptly investigate and, if
necessary, institute appropriate corrective action.
(Prior Code, § 19-416) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
Subdivisions 117
§ 153.080 CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDERS; CONTENTS OF ORDER; SERVICE OF
ORDER.
(A) General. Whenever the Code Administrator finds, by complaint, inspection or otherwise,
any development in violation of this chapter, he or she shall so notify the responsible party, and shall
order appropriate corrective action.
(Prior Code, § 19-417)
(B) Contents of order. Every order to take corrective action shall be issued in writing and shall
at least include:
(1) A description of the premises sufficient for identification;
(2) A statement indicating the nature of the violation;
(3) A statement of the corrective action necessary to effect compliance;
(4) The date by which the violation must be corrected;
(5) A statement that the alleged violator is entitled to a conference with the Code
Administrator and/or the Village Engineer if he or she so desires;
(6) The date by which an appeal of the corrective action order must be filed, and a
statement of the procedure for so filing; and
(7) A statement that failure to obey a corrective action order may result in the imposition of
fines.
(Prior Code, § 19-418)
(C) Service of order. A corrective action order shall be deemed properly served upon the owner,
subdivider or developer, if it is:
(1) Served upon him or her personally;
(2) Sent by certified mail to his or her last known address; or
(3) Posted in a conspicuous place on or about the affected premises.
(Prior Code, § 19-419)
(Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
118 Swansea - Land Usage
§ 153.081 STOP WORK ORDERS.
Whenever any work is being done in violation of any provision of this chapter, the Code
Administrator’s corrective action order may state that the violation must cease immediately, in which
case, the corrective action order is equivalent to a stop work order.
(Prior Code, § 19-420) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 153.082 EMERGENCY MEASURES.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever the Code Administrator
determines that any violation of this chapter poses an imminent peril to life or property, he or she
may institute, without notice or hearing, any necessary proceedings to alleviate the perilous
condition.
(Prior Code, § 19-421) (Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 153.083 PRELIMINARY PLATS; REQUIREMENTS FOR FILING; ACTION BY THE
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD; ACTION BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
(A) General.
(1) Except as specifically provided otherwise below, every person who proposes to
subdivide any land located within the subdivision jurisdiction of the village shall file four copies of
the preliminary plat of said subdivision with the Code Administrator.
(2) The subdivider shall also file one copy of the preliminary plat and all supporting data
with the appropriate Soil and Water Conservation District. Said district shall have not more than 30
days to submit any comments to make to the Planning and Zoning Board.
(3) Whenever a subdivider proposes to develop a large tract of land in stages and only a
portion of that tract is to be submitted for preliminary or final plat approval, the developer shall also
submit a “site design” of the entire tract proposed for eventual development. Said site design shall
indicate the general location of proposed streets and utilities, proposed densities, location of wooded
areas (aerial photos are acceptable) and the topography of the tract (USGS data is acceptable).
(4) All preliminary plats shall be reviewed and acted upon in accordance with 65 ILCS
5/11-12-8 and the provisions of divisions (A)(4)(a) and (A)(4)(b) below; provided, however, that, the
provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(a) Minor subdivisions, as defined in § 153.008 of this chapter; or
(b) Land that is specifically exempted from the State Plats Act (765 ILCS 205/1(b)).
(Prior Code, § 19-422)
Subdivisions 119
(B) Requirements for filing.
(1) Every preliminary plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor registered in the state at
any scale necessary for clarity; provided, the resultant drawing does not exceed 32 inches by 42
inches. Said preliminary plats, together with supporting data, shall provide all of the following
information:
(a) The names and addresses of the owner, subdivider (if not the owner) and registered
land surveyor;
(b) Location, boundaries and name of the proposed subdivision;
(c) Zoning district classification of the tract to be subdivided;
(d) North arrow, graphic scale and date of map;
(e) Dimensions of the tract and its gross area;
(f) Topography of the tract to be subdivided as indicated by two-foot contour data;
(g) Locations of such features as bodies of water, ponding areas, natural drainage
ways, railroads, cemeteries, bridges, parks and schools, within or adjacent to the tract to be
developed;
(h) Locations and right-of-way widths of all existing and proposed streets and alleys;
(i) Locations, widths and purposes of all existing and proposed easements;
(j) Location and size of existing and proposed sanitary and storm sewers;
(k) In conservation areas, locations, dimensions and areas of all parcels to be reserved
for parks/playgrounds or other public purposes; and
(l) Locations, dimensions and areas of all proposed or existing lots within the
subdivision.
(2) The developer or subdivider shall submit the preliminary plat to the Code Administrator
at least 14 days before the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning and Zoning Board.
(3) The Code Administrator shall promptly notify the Chairperson and members of the
Planning and Zoning Board of the submission and make copies of the preliminary plat available for
its review prior to the scheduled meeting.
(Prior Code, § 19-423)
120 Swansea - Land Usage
(C) Action by the Planning and Zoning Board.
(1) At its next regularly scheduled meeting, the Planning and Zoning Board shall review
preliminary plat for compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Within 90 days from the date of submission of the preliminary plat or the filing of the
last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later, the Planning and Zoning Board shall
either approve or disapprove the application for preliminary plat approval, unless the Planning and
Zoning Board and the subdivider mutually agree to extend this time limit.
(3) If the Planning and Zoning Board disapproves the preliminary plat, it shall furnish to
the applicant, within the 90-day period, a written statement specifying the aspects in which the
proposed plat fails to conform to this chapter and/or the official map.
(4) If the Planning and Zoning Board approves the preliminary plat, it shall promptly so
inform the Board of Trustees. If the Planning and Zoning Board fails to act on a preliminary plat
within the prescribed time limits, said failure to act shall be considered a positive recommendation.
No plat which provides access to a state highway shall be approved by the Planning and Zoning
Board until the same has been reviewed by and comments received from the State Department of
Transportation.
(Prior Code, § 19-424)
(D) Action by the Board of Trustees.
(1) If the Planning and Zoning Board has approved a preliminary plat, the Board of
Trustees, by resolution, shall either accept or reject said plat within 30 days after its next regularly
scheduled meeting following the Planning and Zoning Board’s action. If the Board of Trustees rejects
the preliminary plat, its resolution shall specify the aspects in which the plat fails to comply with this
chapter and/or the official map.
(2) The Village Clerk shall attach a certified copy of the Board’s resolution of approval or
disapproval to the preliminary plat. One copy of the resolution and plat shall be retained by the
Clerk, one shall be filed with the Code Administrator and one copy shall be given to the subdivider.
Board approval shall not qualify a preliminary plat for recording.
(Prior Code, § 19-425)
(Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 70 ILCS 405/22
Subdivisions 121
§ 153.084 IMPROVEMENT PLANS; REQUIREMENTS FOR FILING; REQUIREMENTS
FOR INSPECTION; REQUIREMENTS FOR “AS-BUILT” RECORDS; REQUIREMENTS
FOR ASSURANCE OF COMPLETION; ACCEPTABLE FORMS OF ASSURANCE;
ELIGIBLE SURETIES; TERM OF ASSURANCE, EXTENSION; RELEASE OF BOND,
ESCROW DEPOSIT; FAILURE TO COMPLETE IMPROVEMENTS.
(A) General.
(1) Following approval of any preliminary plat by the Board of Trustees, but prior to
submission of the final plat, the subdivider shall submit four copies of the plans and specifications for
all improvements to be installed within or in conjunction with the proposed subdivision to the Code
Administrator for review by the Village Engineer.
(2) Such plans and specifications shall be signed and sealed by the registered professional
engineer responsible for their preparation.
(3) Until the Village Engineer certifies in writing that the proposed improvements conform
to generally accepted engineering practices and to the standards imposed in this chapter:
(a) The Code Administrator shall not issue any permit to allow construction of said
improvements; and
(b) The Board of Trustees shall not act upon the application for final plat approval.
(Prior Code, § 19-426)
(B) Requirements for filing. Plans and specifications for improvements shall consist of black or
blue line prints not larger than 32 inches by 42 inches. Said plans, together with related
specifications, shall provide all of the following information:
(1) Any flood-prone areas, detailed on a topographical map, at the same scale as required
in the preliminary plat, illustrating that all lots and improvements will be above the regulatory flood
evaluation;
(2) Existing and proposed elevations along the centerlines of all streets;
(3) Radii of all curves and lengths of tangents on all streets;
(4) Locations and typical cross-section of street pavements including curbs/gutters and
catch basins;
(5) Locations and typical cross-section of sidewalks;
(6) Locations, sizes and invert elevations of all existing and proposed sanitary sewers and
storm sewers, showing connections to any existing or proposed sewer systems;
122 Swansea - Land Usage
(7) Locations of all water, gas, electric and other utilities;
(8) Locations of street signs;
(9) Locations of all wooded areas (aerial photos are acceptable);
(10) All proposed measures to control erosion and sedimentation;
(11) High water elevations of all lakes and streams adjoining or within the tract; and
(12) Such other information as the Village Engineer may reasonably require to perform his
or her duties under this section.
(Prior Code, § 19-427)
(C) Requirements for inspection. The subdivider/developer shall notify the Code Administrator
and the Village Engineer of the beginning and completion of the construction of all improvements.
(1) The Village Engineer shall inspect said improvements while they are under construction
and, if he or she determines that they are being built in violation of this chapter or the approved
plans, he or she shall promptly notify the Code Administrator who, in turn, shall issue a stop work
order.
(2) The Village Engineer shall also inspect improvements upon their completion. The
village shall not accept any completed improvements until the Village Engineer has certified that they
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-428)
(D) Requirements for “as-built” records. Upon the completion of all improvements, the
subdivider/ developer shall file with the Code Administrator, a set of reproducible cloth- or
polyester-base film positives showing as-built details of all improvements and any deviations from
approved plans. The sanitary sewer “as-built” drawings shall illustrate the location and approximate
depth of all service laterals; the size, location and flowline elevations of all sewer mains; the top and
flowline elevations of all manholes; and any other pertinent information.
(Prior Code, § 19-429)
(E) Requirements for assurance of completion. The Board of Trustees shall not approve any
final plat of subdivision and, therefore, said final plat shall not be entitled to recording, until:
(1) All improvements required in the approved improvements plan have been completed by
the subdivider/developer at his or her expense, inspected by the Village Engineer and dedicated to
the village or other appropriate entity; or
Subdivisions 123
(2) At the discretion of the Board of Trustees, and in accordance with the provisions below,
the subdivider/developer has provided the village with legal assurance to guarantee the satisfactory
completion and dedication of all required improvements.
(Prior Code, § 19-430)
(F) Acceptable forms of assurance. At the option of the Board of Trustees, the required legal
assurance may be either a performance bond or an escrow deposit.
(1) Every performance bond shall be reviewed by the Village Attorney and posted with the
Village Clerk.
(2) Any funds to be held in escrow shall be deposited with the Village Treasurer.
(3) The amount of the performance bond or escrow deposit shall be equal to the Village
Engineer’s estimate of the costs of constructing the unfinished portion of the required improvements,
plus all required inspection fees.
(4) Every escrow deposit shall be in the form of:
(a) Cash;
(b) An irrevocable letter of credit or commitment from a lending institution
guaranteeing to the village the availability of the escrow funds from time to time upon demand; or
(c) Certificate of deposit, treasury bills or other readily negotiable instruments
approved by the Village Treasurer and made payable to the village.
(Prior Code, § 19-431)
(G) Eligible sureties.
(1) No person shall be eligible to act as surety unless he or she has been approved by the
Village Treasurer.
(2) The Treasurer shall conduct or cause to be conducted spot audits of all sureties.
(3) Any surety who fails to perform shall be ineligible for two years thereafter to act as
surety for any subdivision improvement within the village’s jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 19-432)
(H) Term of assurance, extension.
(1) The initial term of any performance bond or escrow agreement shall not exceed two
years.
124 Swansea - Land Usage
(2) If all the required improvements have not been completed by the end of the two-year
period, the Code Administrator, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, may either
extend said bond/escrow agreement for one year only, or may proceed as per division (J) below.
(Prior Code, § 19-433)
(I) Release of bond, escrow deposit.
(1) The Village Clerk/Treasurer may release up to 90% of the amount of the performance
bond/escrow deposit upon receipt of written authorization from the Village Engineer. The amount
which the Village Engineer authorizes to be released shall be equal to the value of improvements
actually completed in accordance with approved plans.
(2) The balance of the amount of the performance bond/escrow deposit shall not be released
until:
(a) The Village Engineer has certified to the Code Enforcement Officer, in writing,
that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed; and
(b) Said improvements have been dedicated to and accepted by the village or other
appropriate entity.
(Prior Code, § 19-434)
(J) Failure to complete improvements. If all required improvements have not been completed by
the end of the two-year period (or three-year period in the case of an extension), the Code
Administrator, with the assistance of the Village Attorney, may:
(1) Require the surety to perform on the bond, and to pay to the village an amount equal to
the cost of completing the required improvements, as estimated by the Village Engineer, or the
amount of the bond not theretofore released, whichever is less;
(2) Order the Village Treasurer to retain all escrowed funds needed to complete the
required improvements and to return the balance, if any, of such funds to the subdivider/developer;
or
(3) Require the subdivider/developer to submit a new performance bond/escrow deposit in
an amount sufficient to cover any increase in the cost of constructing the required improvements.
(Prior Code, § 19-435)
(Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
Subdivisions 125
§ 153.085 FINAL PLATS; REQUIREMENTS FOR FILING; REQUIRED CERTIFICATES;
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW PROCEDURES; ACTION BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES;
CHANGES IN APPROVED FINAL PLATS; MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS;
DURATION OF GUARANTEE.
(A) General.
(1) The County Recorder of Deeds shall not record any final plat of a subdivision located
within the subdivision jurisdiction of the village until said final plat has been approved by the Board
of Trustees.
(2) (a) The Board of Trustees shall not approve any final plat unless they determine that
said plat is in compliance with all pertinent requirements of this chapter including those set forth
below.
(b) The subdivider of every subdivision, whether major or minor, but excluding land
specifically exempted from the State Plat Act, as now or hereafter amended, (765 ILCS 205/1(b)),
who desires final plat approval, shall file four copies of the final plat and supporting data with the
Code Administrator not later than one year after preliminary plat approval has been granted;
provided, however, that, with the consent of the Board of Trustees, the subdivider may delay
application for final approval of part(s) of the tract shown on the preliminary plat, for successive
one-year periods.
(Prior Code, § 19-436)
(B) Requirements for filing.
(1) Every final plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor on new linen tracing
cloth- or polyester-base film with waterproof black ink at a scale not greater than 100 feet equals one
inch; provided that, the resultant drawing shall not exceed 32 inches by 42 inches.
(2) The final plat and supporting data shall provide all of the following information:
(a) North arrow, graphic scale and data;
(b) Name of subdivider;
(c) Accurate metes and bounds or other adequate legal description of the tract;
(d) Accurate boundary tines, with dimensions and bearing or angles which provide a
survey of the tract, closing with an error of closure of not more than one foot in 10,000 feet;
(e) Reference to recorded plats of adjoining platted land by record name, plat book and
page number;
(f) Accurate locations of all existing streets intersecting the boundaries of the
subdivision;
126 Swansea - Land Usage
(g) Right-of-way lines of all streets, other rights-of-way, easements and lot line with
accurate dimensions, angles or bearings and curve data, including, radii, arcs or chords, points of
tangency and central angles;
(h) Name and right-of-way width of every proposed street;
(i) Location and purpose of any existing or proposed easements;
(j) Number of each lot, lot dimensions and, in a separate list, lot areas;
(k) Purpose(s) for which sites, other than private lots, are reserved;
(l) Building or setback lines with accurate dimensions;
(m) In a supporting document, restrictions of all types which will run with the land and
become covenants in the deeds of lots; and
(n) Locations of all existing and proposed utilities.
(Prior Code, § 19-437)
(C) Required certificates. As required by state law (765 ILCS 205/2), the following certificates
shall be executed on the final plat.
(1) Owner’s certificate.
We, , the owners of (description) have caused the said tract
to be surveyed and subdivided in the manner shown, and said subdivision is to be hereinafter known as
.
All rights-of-way and easements shown herein are hereby dedicated to the use of the public forever.
Dated this day of , 20 .
(SEAL)
(SEAL)
Subdivisions 127
(2) Notary public certificate.
State of Illinois )
County of St. Clair )
I, , a Notary Public in and for the County aforesaid,
do hereby certify that (owners) are personally known to me to be the same persons whose
names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and that they appeared before me this day in person and
acknowledged that they signed and sealed the same as their free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes
therein set forth.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this day of , 20 .
NOTARY
COMMISSION
(3) Surveyor’s certificate.
I, , a registered Illinois Land Surveyor, do hereby certify that this plat is a
correct representation of a survey made under my direct supervision at the request of for
the purpose of subdividing the tract into lots as shown.
Illinois Land Surveyor
Registration Number
Date
(4) County Clerk’s certificate.
I, , County Clerk of St. Clair County, Illinois, do hereby certify that I
find no unpaid or forfeited taxes against any of the real estate included within this plat.
County Clerk
Date
128 Swansea - Land Usage
(5) Certificate of Board of Trustees.
I, , President of the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Swansea, do hereby certify that the plat shown herein was duly presented to the Board of Trustees, and approved
at a meeting of same held on (date) .
President of the Board
Village Clerk
(6) Flood hazard certificate.
We, the undersigned, do hereby certify that no part of this plat to be recorded, is situated within a special flood
hazard area as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
By:
Owner(s)
By:
Illinois Land Surveyor
Registration Number
Date
(7) State highway certification.
(a) For those subdivisions which provide access to a state highway, the following
certification shall also be required and executed on the final plat:
Illinois Department of Transportation Certification
This plat has been approved by the Illinois Department of Transportation with respect to roadway access pursuant
to ILL STAT 1987, CH. 109, PAR. 2. However, a highway permit for access is required by the owner of the
property. A plan that meets the requirements contained in the Department’s “Policy On Permits For Access
Driveways To State Highways” will be required by the Department.
District Engineer
Date
Subdivisions 129
(b) For those subdivisions which provide access to a state highway, the following
certification shall also be required and executed on the final plat:
St. Clair County Highway Department Certification
This plat has been approved by the St. Clair County Highway Department with respect to roadway access
pursuant to County Regulations. However, a highway permit for access is required by the owner of the property.
County Engineer
Date
(Prior Code, § 19-438)
(D) Administrative review procedures.
(1) Within 30 days from the date of application, the Code Administrator shall review said
final plat, and supporting data, and shall jointly advise the Board of Trustees in writing whether it
substantially conforms to the approved preliminary plat.
(2) A copy of their advisory report shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Board,
who may prepare an addendum to said report if they so desire, and forward same to the Board of
Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 19-439)
(E) Action by the Board of Trustees.
(1) Within 60 days from the date of submission of an application for final plat approval, or
the filing of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later, the Board of Trustees
shall either approve or disapprove the application for final plat approval by resolution unless the
Board and the subdivider mutually agree to extend this time limit. Failure to act within the prescribed
time limits shall be deemed approval. The Board of Trustees shall not approve any final plat unless:
(a) The final plat substantially conforms to the approved preliminary plat;
(b) The final plat manifests substantial compliance with the official map and with the
design and improvements standards of this chapter;
(c) To the Board’s knowledge and belief, the final plat complies with all pertinent
requirements of state law; and
130 Swansea - Land Usage
(d) Either of the following has been met:
1. All required improvements have been completed, inspected, accepted and
dedicated; or
2. The subdivider/developer has posted a performance bond or deposited funds in
escrow to guarantee the satisfactory completion and dedication of all required improvements.
(2) If the Board of Trustees disapproves the final plat, its resolution shall specify the
aspects in which the plat fails to meet the above conditions for approval.
(3) The Village Clerk shall attach a certified copy of the Board’s resolution of approval or
disapproval to the final plat. One copy of the resolution and plat shall be retained by the Clerk, one
copy shall be filed with the Administrator and one copy shall be given to the subdivider.
(Prior Code, § 19-440)
(F) Changes in approved final plats. Once a final plat is approved by the Board of Trustees, it
shall not thereafter be modified; provided, however, that, minor changes may be made upon written
application to the Code Administrator. Major changes shall require the filing of a new final plat and
complete review as provided for herein.
(Prior Code, § 19-441)
(G) Maintenance of improvements. Subsequent to completion of the improvements within the
development by the subdivider, the Village Engineer and Code Administrator shall make an
inspection of said improvements to ascertain the acceptability of the structural condition, earth slopes
and drainage structures, and that all other requirements of this chapter have been met.
(1) If said inspection indicates no deficient items and all “as-built” drawings have been filed
with the Code Administrator, and the subdivider/developer has posted an appropriate maintenance
bond as hereinafter set forth, the Board of Trustees shall take formal action to dedicate the completed
improvements for maintenance.
(2) Should any improvement require correction or repair, the subdivider shall be notified,
in writing, of each deficiency. No street(s) will be accepted in a subdivision until all streets comply
with the requirements of this chapter to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer and Superintendent of
Public Works.
(3) Should the subdivider fail to properly correct any of the noted deficiencies, he or she
shall be responsible for all maintenance, other than snow and ice control, until such time as the
streets are completely acceptable to the village.
(a) Under this situation, the subdivided maintenance responsibility shall be construed to
include, but not be limited to, regular mowing of the parkways; periodic cleaning of debris from the
pavement and gutters; and periodic cleaning of storm sewers and catch basins.
Subdivisions 131
(b) Should the subdivider fail to discharge any of these responsibilities, he or she will
be notified to rectify the situation by the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 19-442)
(H) Duration of guarantee.
(1) All improvements within a development shall be guaranteed by the developer or be in
satisfactory condition and in compliance with this chapter for a period of two years from the date of
dedication.
(2) Prior to dedication, the subdivider/developer shall post a maintenance bond with the
Village Clerk in a form approved by the Village Attorney.
(a) Said bond shall be in an amount determined by the Village Engineer (generally
25% of the estimated construction costs) to be sufficient to guarantee the satisfactory condition of the
required improvements for a period of at least two years.
(b) It shall be the subdivided responsibility to request from the village in writing, a
final inspection of the improvements not later than 60 days after receiving notice from the
subdivider.
(c) In any event if the subdivider fails to request a final inspection in writing 30 days
before the end of the guarantee period, the guarantee period shall be extended until 30 days after
such time as the notice is received and the improvements are deemed satisfactory by the village.
(3) If, at any time during the guarantee period, the improvements are found to be defective,
they shall be repaired or replaced at the subdivider’s expense.
(a) If the subdivider fails or refuses to pay such costs within 90 days after demand is
made upon him or her by the Code Administrator, the village shall use the maintenance bond to
make the necessary repairs/replacement.
(b) If the cost of repairs/replacement exceeds the bond amount, the
subdivider/developer shall be liable for the excess.
(4) Upon final inspection of any completion of the repairs deemed necessary by the village,
the village shall release the subdivider’s maintenance bond. The village shall issue a written
inspection releasing the developer from further responsibility to the village for said improvements.
(Prior Code, § 19-443)
(I) Special service area.
(1) No final plat of any subdivision shall be approved unless a special service area has been
established by the developer and the ordinance establishing the special service area has been recorded
for the entire subdivision.
132 Swansea - Land Usage
(2) The village, in the village's sole discretion, shall determine which specific public
improvements or services it will provide to each such special service area, and when it will
commence doing so.
(3) Such services may include: the maintenance and construction of detention ponds,
retention basins, storm sewers, outlots, streets, curbs, parking areas, sidewalks and trails,
landscaping and fencing, waterlines, sewer lines, street lights, monuments, entrances, recreation
areas, green space, and other specific services relating to subdivision maintenance and
improvements, collectively referred to hereinafter as the "SSA services and improvements"; and
(4) The village shall levy a direct annual tax on all of the taxable property within each such
special service area to pay the annua! cost of providing the SSA services and improvements.
(5) Property, infrastructure or improvements within the special service area for which the
village has agreed to take ownership shall be transferred to the village only to the extent specified in
a motion, resolution or ordinance duly passed or enacted by the village corporate authorities as
provided by law.
(Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014; Ord. 1767, passed 12-5-2016)
§ 153.086 VARIATIONS; REVIEW BY THE PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD; ACTION
BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
(A) General. Any subdivider/developer desiring a variation from the requirements of this
chapter shall file a written application therefor with the Code Enforcement Officer at the same time
that he or she files his or her preliminary plat.
(1) The application shall fully explain the grounds for the variance request and specify the
section(s) of this chapter which, if strictly applied, would cause great practical difficulties or
hardship.
(2) The Code Administrator shall prepare an advisory report on every application for
variation and submit it, together with the completed application, to the Planning and Zoning Board.
(3) Any variation proposed herein by the developer, which is in effect a variation of the
provisions of Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances, shall only be allowed and granted in compliance
with the provisions of Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances after a public hearing before the Planning
and Zoning Board of Appeals. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as to allow a variation of
lot size, setbacks or any other regulation of Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances, which is not in
compliance with the provisions of § 154.212(B) of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 19-444)
Subdivisions 133
(B) Review by the Planning and Zoning Board.
(1) The Planning and Zoning Board shall review the application for variation and the Code
Administrator’s comments, and submit its advisory report to the Board of Trustees, together with its
recommendation on preliminary plat approval.
(2) The Planning and Zoning Board’s advisory report shall be responsive to all the variance
standards set forth in division (C) below.
(Prior Code, § 19-445)
(C) Action by the Board of Trustees.
(1) At the same meeting at which they take action on the application for preliminary plat
approval, the Board of Trustees shall decide, by resolution, whether to grant or deny the requested
subdivision variation.
(2) A copy of its decision, clearly stating its reasons therefor and the exact terms of any
variation granted, shall be attached to both the preliminary and final plats.
(3) The Board of Trustees shall not grant any subdivision variation unless, based upon the
information presented to them, it determines that:
(a) The proposed variation is consistent with the general purposes of this chapter;
(b) Strict application of the subdivision design and improvement requirements would
result in great practical difficulties or hardship to the applicant, not a mere inconvenience;
(c) The proposed variance is the minimum deviation from the subdivision requirements
that will alleviate the difficulties/hardship;
(d) The plight of the applicant is due to peculiar circumstances not of his or her own
making;
(e) The peculiar circumstances engendering the variation request are not applicable to
other tracts and, therefore, that a variation would be a more appropriate remedy than an amendment;
and
(f) The variation if granted, will not substantially impair implementation of the
community plan, including the official map.
(Prior Code, § 19-446)
(Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
134 Swansea - Land Usage
§ 153.087 AMENDMENTS; PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE; ACTION BY THE BOARD OF
TRUSTEES.
(A) General. Amendments to this chapter may be proposed by the Code Administrator, any
member of the Board of Trustees, any Planning and Zoning Board member or any party in interest.
Every amendment proposal shall be filed on a prescribed form in the office of the Code
Administrator, who shall promptly transmit each proposal, together with any comments or
recommendations he or she may wish to make, to the Planning and Zoning Board for a public
hearing.
(Prior Code, § 19-447)
(B) Public hearing; notice. The Planning and Zoning Board shall hold a public hearing on every
amendment proposal within a reasonable time after said proposal is submitted to them. At the
hearing, any interested party may appear and testify, either in person or by duly-authorized agent or
attorney. Notice indicating the time, date and place of hearing, and the nature of the proposed
amendment shall be given not more than 30 days, nor less than 15 days before the hearing by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the village.
(Prior Code, § 19-448)
(C) Action by the Board of Trustees. Within a reasonable time after the public hearing, the
Planning and Zoning Board shall submit an advisory report to the Board of Trustees. The Board of
Trustees shall act on the proposed amendment at its next regularly scheduled meeting following
submission of this report. Without another public hearing, the Board of Trustees may either pass or
reject the proposed amendment or may refer it back to the Planning and Zoning Board for further
consideration.
(Prior Code, § 19-449)
(Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 153.088 BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENTS FOR FINAL MINOR PLAT.
(A) A boundary adjustment final plat shall be filed when a subdivider/developer desires to make
minor adjustments to platted lots. A boundary adjustment final plat shall meet the following
conditions:
(1) Lot lines of no more than three platted lots may be adjusted on one boundary adjustment
plat.
(2) The resulting lot or lots shall not be reduced below the minimum sizes and dimensions
required by Ch. 154 of the Zoning Code; and
(3) The resulting lot or lots that do not conform to the above conditions shall be considered
a subdivision and must follow the procedures for subdivisions set forth in this chapter.
Subdivisions 135
(B) Boundary adjustments may be allowed for lawful lots existing in noncompliance with
minimum area, frontage and dimensional requirements of this chapter or Ch. 154, Zoning Code,
provided that resulting adjustment of lot lines does not increase the degree of non-compliance with
this chapter and Ch. 154 of the this code of ordinances.
(C) A Boundary adjustment plat shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor registered in
the State of Illinois. The plat shall indicate the existing and proposed adjusted lot lines. All existing
buildings, other structures and easements, whether platted or not, shall be indicated.
(D) Three copies of the boundary adjustment plat shall be fled with the Code Administrator. The
Code Administrator shall review the plat for conformity with the requirements set forth herein.
(E) The fee for filing of a boundary adjustment plat shall be the same as the fee for filing a Final
minor subdivision plat.
(F) If the Code Administrator find such plat and adjustment in property lines to be in order and
in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and Ch. 154, the Code Administrator shall
forward the plat to the Board of Trustees for approval. No review shall be conducted by the Planning
and Zoning Board.
(G) The Village Clerk shall attach a certified copy of the Board's resolution of approval or
disapproval to the plat. If the Board disapproves the plat, their resolution shall specify the aspects in
which the plat fails to meet the above conditions for approval.
(H) Upon approval, the owners and the Code Administrator or his deputy shall jointly file the
plat with the County Recorder of Deeds within 60 days after approval by the Board of Trustees. If
any such plat is not filed within this period, the approval shall expire. One copy of the filed plat shall
be retained by the owner and one copy shall be retained by the Code Administrator. The fee due to
the County Recorder of Deeds shall be paid by the owners.
§ 153.089 LOT CONSOLIDATION OF A MINOR FINAL PLAT.
(A) A lot consolidation plat shall be filed when the owner of two adjacent parcels desires to join
the two parcels into one lot.
(B) Lot consolidations may be allowed for lawful lots existing in noncompliance with minimum
area, frontage and dimensional requirements of this Chapter or Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances;
provided that resulting removal of lot lines does not increase the degree of non-compliance with this
Chapter or Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.
(C) A lot consolidation plat shall be prepared by a Professional Land Surveyor registered in the
State of Illinois. The plat shall indicate the existing and proposed adjusted lot lines. All existing
buildings, other structures and easements, whether platted or not, shall be indicated.
136 Swansea - Land Usage
(D) Three copies of the lot consolidation plat shall be filed with the Code Administrator. The
Code Administrator shall review the plat for conformity with the requirements set forth herein.
(E) The fee for filing of a lot consolidation plat shall be the same as the fee for filing a final
minor subdivision plat.
(F) If the Code Administrator find such plat and consolidation of parcels to be in order and in
compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances, the Code
Administrator shall forward the plat to the Board of Trustees for approval. No review shall be
conducted by the Planning and Zoning Board.
(G) The Village Clerk shall attach a certified copy of the Board's resolution of approval or
disapproval to the plat. If the Board disapproves the plat, their resolution shall specify the aspects in
which the plat fails to meet the above conditions for approval.
(H) The owners and the Code Administrator or his deputy shall jointly file the plat with the
County Recorder of Deeds within 60 days after approval by the Board of Trustees. If any such plat is
not filed within this period, the approval shall expire. One copy of the filed plat shall be retained by
the owner and one copy shall be retained by the Code Administrator. The fee due to the County
Recorder of Deeds shall be paid by the owner.
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
(A) (1) Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with or who
resists enforcement of any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25,
nor more than $500, plus costs, for each offense.
(2) Each day that a violation continues after notification is given thereof shall be considered
a separate offense.
(3) Notification shall be by regular mail from the village to the last known mailing address
of the violator.
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the village from taking any other lawful
action that may be necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-401)
(B) Any person violating the provision of § 153.053 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of
up to $750 for each violation as set forth in § 10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 19-329)
(Ord. 1646, passed 5-7-2012; Ord. 1700, passed 3-17-2014)
CHAPTER 154: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
154.001 Title
154.002 Purpose and intent
154.003 Regulatory powers
154.004 General prohibition
154.005 Jurisdiction
154.006 Interpretation
154.007 Conflicting laws
154.008 Existing agreements
154.009 Existing violations
154.010 Existing building permits
154.011 Existing zoning permits
154.012 Contiguous parcels
154.013 Minimum requirements
154.014 Compliance
154.015 Exemptions
154.016 Disclaimer of liability
154.017 Separability
154.018 Definitions
Zoning Districts and Map
154.030 Establishment of districts
154.031 Minimum area requirement for districts
154.032 Zoning map
154.033 District boundaries
154.034 Zoning of annexed land
154.035 Zoning subject to pre-annexation
General Zoning Regulations - All Districts
154.050 Unlisted uses prohibited
154.051 Registration required for non-residential use
137
138 Swansea - Land Usage
154.052 Meeting minimum area/bulk requirements
154.053 Exceptions to height limits
154.054 Exceptions to setback requirements
154.055 Allowable intrusions into yards
154.056 Area/bulk restrictions; accessory uses
154.057 Access to lots required
154.058 Sewers and private sewerage systems
154.059 Additional restrictions; specific uses
Specific Regulations for Districts
154.070 “C” - Conservation District
154.071 “SR-1” - Single-Family Residential District
154.072 “SR-2” - Single-Family Residential District
154.073 “SR-3” - Single-Family Residential District
154.074 “SR-4” - Single-Family Residential District
154.075 “MR-1” - Two-Family Residential District
154.076 “MR-2” - Multi-Family Residential District
154.077 “MH-1” - Mobile Home Residential District
154.078 “MH-2” - Mobile Home Residential District
154.079 “HB” - Highway Business District
154.080 “PB” - Planned Business District
154.081 “LI” - Light Industrial District
154.082 “HI” - Heavy Industrial District
154.083 “FPO” - Floodplain Overlay District
Non-Conformities
154.095 Purpose and intent
154.096 Non-conforming buildings and structures
154.097 Non-conforming uses
154.098 Non-conforming vacant lot of record
154.099 Two or more lots in common ownership
154.100 Non-conformities under permit authority
154.101 Certificates of non-conformance
Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
154.115 Purpose and intent
154.116 General provisions
154.117 Parking lot design standards
154.118 Requirements for parking spaces
154.119 Requirements for parking lot aisles
Zoning 139
154.120 Requirements for access
154.121 Requirements for construction
154.122 Lighting
154.123 Landscaping
154.124 Location of required parking
154.125 Loading area design standards
154.126 Requirements for loading spaces
154.127 Requirements for access
154.128 Requirements for construction
154.129 Requirements for buffer strips
154.130 Location of required loading spaces
154.131 Computation of required spaces
154.132 Table of parking spaces, by classification
154.133 Table of loading spaces, by classification
Sign Regulations
154.145 Purpose and intent
154.146 General prohibition
154.147 Strictly prohibited signs
154.148 Signs permitted in any zoning district
154.149 General restrictions
154.150 Special restrictions
154.151 Freestanding signs
154.152 Off-property freestanding signs
154.153 Projecting signs
154.154 Flush-mounted signs
154.155 Canopy, awning and marquee signs
154.156 Certificate of sign compliance
154.157 Non-conforming signs
154.158 Violations
Adult Uses
154.170 Purpose and intent
154.171 Definitions
154.172 Location
154.173 Measurement of distances
154.174 Licensing
154.175 Issuance and revocation of license
154.176 License fees and displaying of license
154.177 Entertainer’s license
154.178 Employees/patrons
140 Swansea - Land Usage
154.179 Periodic inspection
154.180 Expiration of license
154.181 Suspension of license
154.182 Revocation of license
154.183 Hearing on license denial, suspension or revocation
154.184 Hours of operation
154.185 Signage and window displays
154.186 Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos
154.187 Exhibition of nude entertainer prohibited
154.188 Culpable mental state required
154.189 Failure of official to meet time frame
Administration and Enforcement
154.200 Application fees
154.201 Authority
154.202 Zoning Administrator
154.203 Complaints
154.204 Corrective action orders; contents of order; service of order
154.205 Stop work orders
154.206 Emergency measures
154.207 Initial certificates of zoning compliance; issuance; application; duration of certificate;
relationship to building permits
154.208 Final certificates of zoning compliance; issuance
154.209 Certificates of non-conformance; issuance; application; duration of certificate
154.210 Certificates of sign compliance; issuance; application; duration of certificate
154.211 Appeals; hearing; decisions; stay of proceedings
154.212 Variations; authority to recommend variation; standards for issuance; application;
hearing; findings of fact, recommendation; action by the Board of Trustees; effect
of denial; duration of variation
154.213 Special use permits; authority to grant special use permits; standards for issuance;
application; hearing; findings of fact, recommendation; action by the Board of
Trustees; effect of denial; duration of permit
154.214 Amendments to the text; initiation; standards for amendment to the text; application;
hearing; findings of fact, recommendation; action by the Board of Trustees
154.215 Amendments to the official zoning map; initiation; standards for amendment to the map;
application; hearing; findings of fact, recommendation; action by the Board of
Trustees; effect of denial; duration of rezoning
154.999 Penalty
Appendix A: Illustrations
Zoning141
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the “Swansea Zoning Code”.
(Prior Code, § 20-101) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.002 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
This chapter is adopted so that:
(A) Adequate light, pure air and safety from fire and other dangers may be secured;
(B) The taxable value of land and buildings throughout the village may be conserved;
(C) Congestion in public streets may be lessened:
(D) Hazards to persons and damage to property resulting from the accumulation or runoff
of storm or flood waters may be lessened;
(E) The preservation of sites, areas and structures of historical, architectural and esthetic
importance may be facilitated; and
(F) The public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare may otherwise be promoted.
(Prior Code, § 20-102) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-1
§ 154.003 REGULATORY POWERS.
In order that the aforementioned purpose and intent may be achieved, the provisions of this
chapter support the following regulatory powers:
(A) To divide the entire village into districts of such number, shape, area and of such different
causes as may be deemed best suited to carry out the provisions of this chapter;
(B) To fix standards to which buildings or structures thereon shall conform;
(C) To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of such districts;
142 Swansea - Land Usage
(D) To establish, regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings to be erected;
(E) To establish, regulate and limit the building or setback lines on or along any street, trafficway,
drive, parkway or storm or flood water runoff, channel or basin;
(F) To regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas;
(G) To regulate and determine the area of open spaces within and surrounding buildings or
structures;
(H) To classify, to regulate and to restrict the use of property on the basis of family relationship;
(I) To prevent additions to, and alteration or remodeling of, existing buildings or structures in
such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations lawfully imposed under this chapter;
(J) To provide for the gradual elimination of uses, buildings and structures which are
incompatible with the character of the districts in which they are made or located; and
(K) To encourage the direction of building development to the best advantage of the entire
village.
(Prior Code, § 20-103) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.004 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
It shall be unlawful within the village to create, occupy, erect or otherwise develop any lot or
structure, or any part of any lot or structure, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-104) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.005 JURISDICTION.
This chapter shall be applicable only within the corporate limits of the village, except where
otherwise provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 20-105) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.006 INTERPRETATION.
Every provision of this chapter shall be construed liberally in favor of the village, and every
regulation set forth herein shall be considered the minimum requirement for the promotion of the
public health, safety and welfare.
(Prior Code, § 20-106) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
Zoning 143
§ 154.007 CONFLICTING LAWS.
Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter are either more restrictive or
less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards
or requirements shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 20-107) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.008 EXISTING AGREEMENTS.
This chapter is not intended to repeal any easement, covenant or other private agreement;
provided that, where the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards
or requirements than such easements, covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this
chapter shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 20-108) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.009 EXISTING VIOLATIONS.
(A) No building, structure or use, not lawfully existing on 4-30-1988, shall become or be made
lawful solely by reason of the adoption of this chapter and to the extent that, in any manner, the
unlawful buildings, structure or use is in conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the building,
structure or use remains unlawful hereunder.
(B) Any building, structure or use established or altered in violation of the provisions of the
ordinance which was in effect at the time of establishment or alteration of such building, structure or
use shall not be validated by the adoption of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-109) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.010 EXISTING BUILDING PERMITS.
Any building permit for a building or structure that does not conform with the provisions of this
chapter that was issued prior to 5-1-1988 shall only be valid for a period of six months from the date
of issuance, and no extension or re-issuance of a building permit for such buildings or structures
shall be granted unless the construction has begun and is partially completed or the proposed building
or structure or use is in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-110) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
144 Swansea - Land Usage
§ 154.011 EXISTING ZONING PERMITS.
Any zoning permit, including those for special uses and variations, which was issued prior to 5-
1-1988, but was not implemented by that date, shall be invalid one year from the date of issuance or
six months from the effective date of this chapter, unless substantially implemented by the applicant
prior to such time.
(Prior Code, § 20-111) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.012 CONTIGUOUS PARCELS.
When two or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area and dimensions to qualify
for a permitted use under the requirements of the zoning district in which they are located, are
contiguous and are held in one ownership, at the time of construction, such lots shall be considered a
single lot.
(Prior Code, § 20-112) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.013 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion and protection of the public, health, safety, morals and
welfare.
(Prior Code, § 20-113) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.014 COMPLIANCE.
(A) No building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
enlarged, moved or structurally altered; and no building structure or land shall hereafter be used,
occupied or arranged or designed for use or occupancy; nor shall any excavating or grading be
commenced in connection with any of the above matters, except as permitted by the regulations
herein which are applicable to the zoning district in which such building, structure or land is located.
(B) Except as may otherwise be provided, all structural alterations or relocations of existing
buildings occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring
hereafter, shall be subject to all regulations herein which are applicable to the zoning district in
which such buildings, uses or land shall be located.
(C) (1) Where a structure and use thereof of land lawfully exists on 4-30-1988, and is classified
by this chapter as a special use in the district where it is located, such use shall be considered a
lawful special use.
(2) A special use permit issued in accordance with procedures herein set forth shall be
required only for any expansion or major alteration of any such existing special use.
Zoning 145
(3) If an existing special use ceases for a period of more than six months, the special use
can only be re-established under the provisions of § 154.213 of this code of ordinances.
(D) Any legally established building, structure or use may continue subject to the provisions
hereof.
(E) Any lot of record existing on 4-30-1988 which is unable to meet the requirements of this
chapter as to lot area, lot width and yard requirements shall only be used in accordance with the
provisions hereof.
(Prior Code, § 20-114) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.015 EXEMPTIONS.
(A) As required by statute the type or location of any poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits,
vaults, laterals or any other similar distributing equipment of a public utility is exempt from the
requirements of this chapter.
(B) The provisions of this chapter shall not be enforced so as to impose regulations or required
permits with respect to land within a conservation district used strictly for agricultural purposes or
with respect to the erection, maintenance, repair or extension of buildings or structures used or to be
used entirely for agricultural purposes; except that, all such buildings shall conform to the yard
requirements, lot size requirements and building bulk limitations and sign provisions of this chapter.
All non-agricultural uses of the conservation district shall be in full compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
(C) Pipelines and other underground installations, to the extent that the same are completely
buried beneath the surface of the soil, are exempt from the requirements of this chapter; provided
that, any incidental or associated structures, installations or equipment except markers used in
connection with such pipe lines are subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(D) Chimneys, parapet walls, skylights, steeples, flag poles, smokestacks, cooling towers,
elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, water towers, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts,
tanks, ornamental towers and spires, wireless towers, radio transmission towers, radar installations,
telescopes, military installations of the U.S. Government, necessary mechanical appurtenances and
television or other antennas may exceed the height limitations of this chapter.
(E) No building or structure including those listed in division (D) above, which are subject to
notice under Federal Aviation Regulations par. 77, shall be constructed until approved by the Federal
Aviation Administration.
(Prior Code, § 20-115) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
146 Swansea - Land Usage
§ 154.016 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
(A) Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no official, board member,
agent or employee of the village shall render himself or herself personally liable for any damage that
may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
or her duties under this chapter.
(B) Any suit brought against any official, board member, agent or employee of the village, as a
result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his or her duties under this chapter shall be
defended by the Village Attorney until the final determination of the legal proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 20-116) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.017 SEPARABILITY.
(A) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall judge invalid any provision of this chapter, such
judgment shall not affect any other provision hereof not specifically included in said judgment.
(B) Further, if such court shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision hereof to a
particular property, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other
property not specifically included in said judgment.
(Prior Code, § 20-117) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.018 DEFINITIONS.
(A) Rules of construction. The following rules shall be observed and applied in the interpretation
of this chapter, except when the text clearly indicates otherwise.
(1) Words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in division (B)
below, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise; terms not defined in division (B) below shall
have their standard English dictionary meanings.
(2) Words denoting the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders.
(3) Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
(4) Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
(5) The term “shall” is mandatory; the term “may” is discretionary.
Zoning 147
(6) All distances shall be measured to the nearest integral foot. Six inches or more shall be
deemed one foot.
(7) Captions (i.e., titles of sections, divisions and the like) are intended to merely facilitate
general reference and in no way limit the substantive application of the provisions set forth
thereunder.
(8) References to sections shall be include all divisions within that section; but a reference
to a particular division designates only that division.
(9) A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of specific terms shall not
be limited to the enumerated class unless expressly limited.
(10) The word “lot” shall include plot and parcel.
(11) The words “building and/or structures” shall include all non-living improvements upon
the land.
(12) The phrase “used for” shall include the phrases “designed for”, “intended for”,
“occupied for or by” and “maintained for”.
(Prior Code, § 20-201)
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABUTTING. To have a common property line or district.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE. A building or use which:
(a) Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use;
(b) Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or principal use
served;
(c) Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal
building or principal use served; and
(d) Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or potential use served
with the single exception of such accessory off-street parking facilities as are permitted to locate
elsewhere than on the same zoning lot with the building or use served.
ACCESSWAY. A curb cut, ramp, driveway or other means for providing vehicular access
to an off-street parking or loading area.
ADJACENT. Lying near or in the immediate vicinity.
148 Swansea - Land Usage
ADJOINING. Touching or contiguous, as distinguished from lying near.
ADMINISTRATOR. See ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
ADVERTISING. See SIGN.
AERIALS or ANTENNAS. Structures or devices used to detect or radiate electromagnetic
waves; specifically, that part of a radar or of a radio-sending or radio-receiving set that consists of
that apparatus that radiates waves or receives them.
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. Any building or structure existing or
erected on land used principally for agricultural purposes, with the exception of dwelling units.
AGRICULTURE. The use of land for agricultural proposes, including farming, dairying,
pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture and animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary
accessory uses for packing, treating or storing the produce; provided, however, that, the operation of
any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities. Included are
truck-farming, poultry farming, bee-keeping, raising of fruit and berries, and the selling of
agricultural products, but shall not include mechanized industrial animal farms. AGRICULTURE
shall not include the commercial feeding of garbage to swine or other animals.
AISLE. A vehicular traffic-way within an off-street parking area used as a means of
access/egress from parking spaces.
ALLEY. A public or private way, at the rear or side of property, permanently reserved as a
means of secondary vehicular access to abutting property.
ALTERATION. Any change in size, shape, character, occupancy or use of a building or
structure.
AMENDMENT. A change in the provisions of this chapter, including the district map,
properly effected in accordance with state law and the procedures set forth herein.
ANCHOR. Any approved device to which a mobile or manufactured home is tied down to
keep it firmly attached to the stand on which it is placed.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL. Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the care,
observation or treatment of domestic animals.
APARTMENT. See DWELLING UNIT.
APARTMENT BUILDING. See DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.
Zoning 149
ASPHALT. A mixture of petroleum by-products and gravel used for paving to form an
impermeable, all-weather and dustless surface.
ATTACHED. As applied to buildings, having a common wall and/or a common roof.
AUDITORIUM. A room, hall or building made a part of a church, theater, school,
recreation building or building assigned to the gathering of people as an audience to hear lectures,
plays and other presentations.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY. A building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing
more than two automobiles, providing space, water, equipment or soap for washing of automobiles
by the operator or customer. Production line methods using mechanical devices are permitted.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. The general repair, engine rebuilding or reconditioning
of motor vehicles, collision service; such as body, frame and fender straightening and repair and
painting of motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. Incidental repairs, replacement of parts and motor
service of automobiles, but excluding any operation specified under “automobile repair, major”.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. Any building or premises used for the dispensing,
sale or offering for sale at retail to the public, automobile fuels stored only in underground tanks
located wholly within the lot lines; lubricating oil or grease for the operation of automobiles; and the
sale and installation of tires, batteries, other minor accessories and minor automobile repair, but not
including a bulk plant, conduct of major automobile repairs, automobile wrecking, automobile sales
or automobile laundries; provided, however, that, the washing of individual’s automobiles where no
chain conveyer is employed may be included.
AWNING. A roof-like cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the wall of a
building and may overhang the public way.
BANQUET HALL. A building, or portion thereof, primarily intended to accommodate large
groups of diners on special occasions.
BASEMENT. The portion of a building having more than one-half of its height below lot
grade.
BASEMENT, SUBGRADE. The portion of a building, which is partly underground, but
has at least one-half of its average height above lot grade.
BILLBOARD. See SIGN, BILLBOARD.
BLOCK. A track of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public
parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, municipal boundary lines,
township lines or county lines.
150 Swansea - Land Usage
BOARD OF APPEALS. The Planning and Zoning Board of the village.
BUFFER STRIP. An area of land undeveloped, except for landscaping, fences or other
similar uses intended to protect a use situated on one lot from the injurious effects of the use on the
adjacent lot.
BUIIDABLE AREA. The area of a lot remaining after the minimum open space and/or yard
requirements of this chapter have been complied with.
BUILDING. Any structure built, used, designed or intended for the support, shelter,
protection or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, and which is
permanently affixed to the land. When a BUILDING is divided into separate parts by unpierced fire
or party walls extending continuously from the ground through all stories to and above the roof, each
part shall be deemed a separate BUILDING. See also UNIPLEX.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY. See ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE.
BUILDING, DETACHED. A building surrounded by an open space on the same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the sidewalk level, or its equivalent
established grade opposite the center of the front of a building to the highest point of the underside of
the ceiling beams, in the case of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean level
of the underside of the rafters between the eaves and the rise of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. Where
no sidewalk level has been established, the HEIGHT OF A BUILDING may be measured from the
mean elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building.
BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Building Code Administrator for the
construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A non-accessory building in which a principal use of the lot on
which it is located is conducted.
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL. Any building that is used exclusively for permitted
residential uses.
BUILDING, SERVICE. As applied to the manufactured home regulations of the Land
Development Code, a building in which laundry facilities or other such service facilities are
provided.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE. The minimum distance between a street right-of-way and the
nearest supporting member of any structure on the lot.
BULK. A term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or structures and their
location with respect to one another, including:
(a) Height and area of buildings;
Zoning 151
(b) Location of exterior walls in relation to lot lines, streets or other buildings;
(c) All open space allocated to buildings; and
(d) Amount of lot area required for each dwelling unit.
BUSINESS. An occupation, employment or enterprise, which occupies time, attention,
labor and materials; or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold or where services are offered.
CANOPY. A roof-like structure projecting from a wall and supported in whole or in part by
vertical supports to the ground, and erected primarily to provide shelter from the weather.
CANOPY, SERVICE STATION. A roof-like structure, usually self-supporting and
detached, and erected primarily to provide shelter from the weather at self-service gas pumps.
CAR TITLE LOAN ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment whose primary business is to
offer short-term loans in exchange for the borrower’s title to his or her vehicle as security.
CARPORT. An open-sided, roofed automobile shelter, usually formed by extension of the
roof from the side of a building.
CENTERLINE.
(a) The centerline of any right-of-way having a uniform width;
(b) The original centerline, where the right-of-way has been widened irregularly; and
(c) The new centerline, whenever a road has been relocated.
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE, FINAL. A permit issued by the Zoning
Administrator indicating that a lot or newly completed structure or use complies with all pertinent
requirements of this chapter and may, therefore, be occupied or used.
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE, INITIAL. A permit issued by the Zoning
Administrator indicating that a proposed lot, structure or use is in conformity with the requirements
of this chapter.
CHILD CARE CENTER. State-licensed day care centers, which receive preschool or
school age children, or both, for short-term or extended hours of care, or out-of-school hours, and
which provide essential personal care, protection, supervision, training and programs to meet the
needs of the children served.
CLINIC, MEDICAL OR DENTAL. An organization of specializing physicians or dentists,
or both, who have their offices in a common building. A CLINIC shall not include inpatient care.
152 Swansea - Land Usage
CLUB/LODGE. A not-for-profit association of persons who are bona fide members
organized for some purpose(s) and paying regular dues and whose facilities are restricted to members
and their guests; not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily
carried on as a commercial enterprise.
COMMERCIAL USE/ESTABLISHMENT. Any use or establishment wherein goods are
purchased or sold, whether to the consuming public (retail) or to other businesses (wholesale).
COMMON OPEN SPACE. Land unoccupied by structures, buildings, streets, rights-of-way
and automobile parking lots and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a
planned unit development. COMMON OPEN SPACE may contain structures for recreational use.
CONDOMINIUM. A form of cooperative ownership, which permits individual ownership
of a specific part of a building, with common ownership of all spaces beyond the specific apartments.
Each apartment can be owned in fee simple, with no restrictions on the sale, rental or transfer of
same, other than restrictions on all real estate. CONDOMINIUMS must meet requirements of the
state law.
CONDOMINIUMS, BUSINESS. A form of cooperative ownership, which permits
individual ownership of a specific part of a building, with common ownership of all spaces beyond
the specific units. Each unit can be owned in fee simple, with restrictions on the sale, rental or
transfer of same, other than the restrictions on all real estate. BUSINESS CONDOMINIUMS must
meet the requirements of state law and § 154.079(H) of this chapter.
CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. Any building or structure which complies
with all the regulations of this chapter or of any amendment hereto governing bulk for the zoning
district in which such building or structure is located.
CONFORMING USE. Any use which occupies a building, structure or lot and which
complies with the regulations of this chapter or of any amendment hereto governing permitted and
special uses for the zoning district, in which such use are located.
CONVALESCENT HOME. See NURSING HOME, HOME FOR THE AGED, HOMES
FOR ILL OR PHYSICALLY INFIRM PERSONS and related definitions; HOSPITAL,
INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY, SHELTERED CARE FACILITY, SHELTERED CARE
HOME and SKILLED NURSING FACILITY.
CORNER LOT. See LOT, CORNER.
CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDER. A legally binding order issued by the Zoning
Administrator in accordance with the procedures set forth herein, to effect compliance with this
chapter.
COSMETIC TATTOOING. The practice commonly referred to as permanent makeup, in
which micropigmentation or intradermal cosmetics are applied to permanently or semi-permanently
simulate the appearance of common cosmetic applications such as eyeliner, lip liner, lip color,
eyebrow
2018 S-1
Zoning 152A
enhancement, and beauty marks, or to otherwise permanently or semi-permanently restore or
improve the appearance of damaged or disfigured skin and other bodily features to natural coloration
and condition.
COURT. An open unoccupied space other than a yard on the same lot with a building,
which is totally or partially enclosed by building or buildings and is completely open to the sky.
2018 S-1
152B Swansea - Land Usage
Zoning 153
CURB LEVEL. The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the
center of such front. Where a building faces on more than one street, the CURB LEVEL shall be the
average of the levels of the curbs at the center front of each street. Where no curb elevation has been
established, the level of the centerline of the street shall be considered the CURB LEVEL.
DAY CARE CENTER. Any state licensed child day care facility receiving more than eight
children for daytime care during all or part of the day. The term DAY CARE CENTERS includes
facilities called CHILD CARE CENTERS, DAY NURSERIES, NURSERY SCHOOLS,
KINDERGARTENS, PLAY GROUPS and CENTERS OR WORKSHOPS FOR MENTALLY OR
PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED without stated educational purposes. The term does not include:
(a) Kindergartens or nursery schools or other daytime programs operated by public or
private elementary school systems or secondary level school units or institutions of higher learning;
(b) Facilities operated in connection with a shopping center or service, or other similar
facility, where transient children are cared for temporarily while parents or custodians of the children
are occupied on the premises, or in the immediate vicinity and readily available;
(c) Any type of DAY CARE CENTER that is conducted on federal government
premises; or
(d) Special activities programs, including athletics, crafts instruction and similar
activities conducted on an organized and periodic basis by civic, charitable or governmental
organizations.
DAY CARE HOME. Any state licensed child day care facility receiving eight or fewer
children for daytime care during all or part of the day, and within the residential premises of the
person so licensed. Such homes must meet the requirements of a home occupation in order to be a
permitted or special use in some districts.
DAY NURSERIES. State-licensed day care centers, which receive preschool age children
for short-term or extended hours of care, and which provide essential personal care, protection,
supervision, training and programs to meet the needs of the individual children served.
DETACHED. As applied to buildings, surrounded by yards on the same lot as the
buildings.
DEVELOP. To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a tract of land, or to
undertake any activity, such as grading, in preparation therefore.
DISTRICT. A portion of the territory of the village wherein certain uniform requirements
or various combinations thereof apply to structures, lots and uses under the terms of this chapter.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS. An establishment which is designed to provide, either
wholly or in part, service to customers while in their automobiles parked upon the premises.
154 Swansea - Land Usage
DRIVEWAY. A minor way commonly provided vehicular access to a garage or off-street
parking area.
DUPLEX. A dwelling which has accommodations for two families.
DWELLING. A building or portion thereof, but not including a house trailer, mobile home
or manufactured home, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including singlefamily
dwelling units, two-family dwelling units and multiple-family dwelling units, but not including
hotels, boarding or lodging houses.
DWELLING, ATTACHED. A dwelling containing two or more dwelling units and adjoined
to other dwellings by party wall or walls, originally constructed for said purposes.
DWELLING, CONVERTED. Any building which was originally designed and constructed
as a one-, two- or three-family dwelling, but which has been changed or altered by the construction
of additional dwelling units to provide for more families than the original building.
DWELLING, DETACHED. A dwelling unit, which is surrounded on all sides by open
space on the same lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A dwelling containing three or more dwelling units,
originally constructed for said purpose, and not including converted dwellings.
DWELLING, SEMI-ATTACHED. A dwelling, which is jointed to another dwelling by a
garage, carport, recreational structure or other non-residential facility.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A dwelling containing accommodations for occupancy
only by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two
families, each living independently of the other.
DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a dwelling designed for occupancy by one
family for living purposes and having its own permanently installed cooking and sanitary facilities.
EASEMENT. A right to use another person’s real property for certain limited purpose.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. A public, parochial, charitable or non-profit junior
college, or university, other than trade or business schools, including instructional and recreational
uses, with or without living quarters, dining rooms, restaurants, heating plants and other incidental
facilities for students, teachers and employees.
EFFICIENCY UNIT. A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room, exclusive of
bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closet or dining alcove directly off the principal room.
Zoning 155
ENCLOSED. As applied to a building, covered by a permanent roof and separated on all
sides from adjacent open space or other building by fixed exterior walls or by common walls, with
openings only for windows and doors.
ENLARGE. To increase the size (floor area, height and the like) of an existing principal
structure or accessory use, or to devote more land to an existing use.
ERECT. To build, construct.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES. Services provided by public and private utilities necessary for the
exercise of the principal use or service of the principal structure. These SERVICES include
underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, water, sanitary sewerage, storm water drainage,
and communication systems and accessories thereto, such as poles, towers, wires, drains, vaults,
culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch basins, water storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm
boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift stations, hydrants and the like, but not including
buildings that do not need to be in the immediate area of the uses they service.
ESTABLISHMENT. Either of the following:
(a) An institution, business, commercial or industrial activity that is the sole occupant
of one or more buildings; or
(b) An institution, business, commercial or industrial activity that occupies a portion of
a building such that:
1. The activity is a logical and separate entity from the other activities within the
building and to a department of the whole; and
2. The activity has either a separate entrance from the exterior of the building, or
a separate entrance from a common and clearly defined entry way that has direct access to the
exterior of the building.
EXCAVATION. Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed
and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
EXISTING. Actually constructed or in the operation on the effective date of this chapter.
EXISTING GRADE. The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation
or filling.
156 Swansea - Land Usage
FAMILY. An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or
a group of not more than four persons, not related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as
a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, but not including sororities, fraternities or other similar
organizations.
FARM. Land being used for agricultural purposes.
FARM HOMESTEAD. The building located on a farm that is the residence of the farm
owner or tenant operator.
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT. See RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD.
FENCE. Any construction of wood, metal, wire mesh, masonry or other material erected
for the purpose of assuring privacy, protection or restraining animals.
FENCE, DECORATIVE. A fence intended primarily for aesthetic purposes.
FILL. Earth, gravel, small rock or rubble (not to exceed three inches in diameter) used to
build up a piece of land.
FLOOD BASE ELEVATION. That elevation of the highest flood of record, determined by
the Village Engineer’s record of the elevations of the highest flood at locations as indicated on the
floodplain map of the village on file in the office of the Village Clerk. FLOOD BASE
ELEVATIONS at intermediate locations shall be interpolated along the watercourse between the two
nearest flood base elevations, one for each upstream and downstream. The controlling flood base
elevation for any building site shall be the same as the flood base elevation at the nearest point of the
watercourse.
FLOODPLAIN. The area of land adjoining a watercourse or other body of water, which has
been or may be hereafter covered by flood water.
FLOODPLAIN MAP. Any accepted engineering standards or mapping used to delineate the
minimum flood base elevations for the village, and may include the following:
(a) The National Flood Insurance Program Flood Insurance Rate Map for the village,
as amended from time to time;
(b) Geologic maps prepared by the State Geologic Survey;
(c) Mapping and/or source information from the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service;
(d) Mapping and/or source information from the County Soil and Water Conservation
District; and
Zoning 157
(e) Maps of ground water conditions prepared by the state water survey.
FLOOD-PROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to
properties and structures subject to flooding, intended primarily for the reduction or elimination of
flood damages to properties, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents of buildings in a
flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY. The channel of the stream or body of water and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains designated by the village as necessary to carry and discharge the flood water
flow of any such river, stream or other body of water.
FLOOR AREA.
(a) For determining off-street parking and loading requirements, the sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the several floors of a building, or portion thereof, devoted to such use, including
accessory storage areas located within selling or working space such as counters, racks or closets and
any floor area devoted to retailing goods, or to business or professional offices; and
(b) However, FLOOR AREA, for the purposes of measurement for off-street parking
spaces, shall not include: floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes (except as otherwise noted
herein); floor area devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities, including aisles, ramps and
maneuvering space, or mechanical or storage floor area other than area devoted to retailing activities,
to the production of goods or to business or professional offices.
FREEWAY. A traffic-way providing at least two lanes going each direction with a median
strip preventing crossover between the two lanes. FREEWAYS are characterized by high-speed
travel, limited access to adjoining property owners and generally serve as vehicle transportation
routes within an urbanized area or between urban areas or states.
FRONTAGE. The portion of a lot or parcel directly abutting a dedicated street.
GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal
building which is intended and used to store not more than four private motor vehicles owned by
members of the family or families residing upon the premises, may be rented for the storage of
private motor vehicles of persons not residing on the premises; except that, all the space in a garage
of one or two-car capacity may be so rented. Such a garage may be used for the storage of not more
than one commercial truck having a load capacity of three-fourths of a ton or less.
GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any building other than a private or storage garage where motor
vehicles are equipped, repaired, serviced, hired, sold or stored.
158 Swansea - Land Usage
GARAGE, STORAGE. Any building used for the storage only of motor vehicles pursuant to
previous arrangements and not to transients, and where no equipment, parts, fuel, grease or oil is
sold and vehicles are not equipped, serviced, repaired, hired or sold. No commercial motor vehicle
exceeding two tons capacity shall be stores in any STORAGE GARAGE.
GRADE. The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior
walls of the building or structure.
GRADE, STREET. This term shall have the same meaning as the term CURB LEVEL.
GRADING. Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions
resulting from any excavation or fill.
GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS. A guarantee to the village that the requirements of
this chapter will be met in full by a specified date. Such GUARANTEE can be in the form of a
certificate of deposit, irrevocable letter of credit, performance bond or other form that will enable the
village to obtain and use funds provided by the permittee to complete the required improvements in
the event the permittee fails to do so.
HARDSHIP. A condition that would result from the strict application of the terms of this
chapter; provided, the following criteria are met:
(a) The condition is unique to the property and is not applicable generally to other
property within the district;
(b) The situation was not created by anyone having an interest in the property;
(c) The request for a hardship variation is not based exclusively on a desire to make
more money out of the property; and
(d) The hardship exists due to the particular physical characteristics of the property in
question.
HOME FOR THE AGED. Any home operated not-for-profit under the auspices of a
religious, fraternal, charitable or other not-for-profit organization, or by a county pursuant to 55
ILCS 5/5-22001, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or operated not-for-profit under an
endowment, which through its ownership or management, and its principal objective, provides
maintenance, personal care, nursing or sheltered care to aged persons, and in the conduct of which
provides such service or services to three or more persons over 60 years of age.
HOME FOR ILL OR PHYSICALLY INFIRM PERSONS. A home providing meals,
shelter, assistance with personal functions, general supervision and professional nursing assistance
for persons, because of age or physical or mental disability, incapable of maintaining their own
residence and caring for their own needs.
Zoning 159
HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation or profession, practiced by a member of the family
residing on the premises in connection with which there is no indication from the exterior that the
building is being utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling; provided that, a
professional person may use his or her residence for consultation, emergency treatment or
performance of religious rites.
HOSPITAL or SANITARIUM. An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and
operation of facilities of the diagnosis, treatment or care for not less than 24 hours in any week of
three or more non-related individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity or other
abnormal physical conditions.
HOTEL. An establishment which is open to transient guests in contradistinction to a
boarding, rooming or lodging house, and is commonly known as a HOTEL in the community in
which it is located; and which provides customary hotel services such as maid service, the furnishing
and laundering of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service, the use and upkeep of furniture
and bellboy service.
IMMOBILIZE. As applied to a mobile home, to remove the wheels, tongue and hitch
and/or to place on a permanent foundation.
INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITY. A private boarding home, institution, building,
residence or other place in which its ownership or management provides living accommodations for
elderly tenants without providing medical or nursing care. Said accommodations are typically
independently-leased apartments or rooms that include individual sanitary, but not full cooking
facilities, thus differentiating said accommodations from multi-family dwelling units as defined.
Meals, maintenance and other services are typically included in the monthly lease rate. The intent of
INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITIES is to provide an alternative to nursing care for elderly
residents who still desire to live independently, do not require medical supervision, but could benefit
from the social interaction of living with other people of similar age and interests.
INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY. Basic nursing care and other restorative services
under periodic medical direction. Many of these services may require skills in administration. Such
facilities are for patients who have long-term illness or disabilities which may have reached a
relatively stable plateau.
INTERSECTION. The point at which two or more public rights-of-way (generally streets)
meet.
JUNK YARD. A tract of land, including any accessory structures thereon, that is used for
buying, selling, exchanging, storing, baling, packing, disassembling or handling waste or scrap
materials. Such scrap materials include vehicles, machinery and equipment not in operable condition
(or part thereof), and metals, glass, paper, plastics, rags and rubber tires. A lot on which three or
more inoperable vehicles are stored shall be deemed a JUNK YARD. A JUNK YARD includes an
automobile wrecking yard.
160 Swansea - Land Usage
KENNEL. An establishment providing boarding or day care services for dogs, cats and/or
other household pets, with indoor and outdoor play areas. Except for standard vaccinations, no
medical treatment shall be provided to the animals at this facility. Animals may be groomed, trained,
exercised and socialized, but not bred or sold. As an accessory to the standard boarding/day care
services, a KENNEL may also be engaged in the business of retail sales of pet food and supplies.
Facilities of this nature may also be known as ANIMAL DAY CARE FACILITIES or DOG DAY
CARE FACILITIES.
KINDERGARTEN. State-licensed day care centers which receive children between the ages
of four and six years, and which are established and professionally operated primarily to conduct
educational programs for early childhood development.
LABORATORY, RESEARCH. A building or group of buildings in which are located
facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation, but not facilities for the
manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
LIVABLE FLOOR AREA. All internal floor area of a dwelling unit excluding basements,
garages and utility rooms.
LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE OR BERTH, OFF-STREET. An open, hardsurfaced
area of land other than a street or public way, the principal use of which is for the standing,
loading and unloading of motor vehicles, tractors and trailers, to avoid undue interference with
public streets and alleys.
LOT. A tract of land intended for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership or development. A LOT may be a ZONING LOT and may or may not coincide with a
LOT OF RECORD.
LOT AREA, GROSS. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lot
lines, but not including any area occupied by the waters of a duly-recorded lake or river.
LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the interior angle of such
intersection not exceeding 135 degrees.
LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line
of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries. For the fronting of the radius of a cul-de-sac, or
fronting on a “partial cul-de-sac” as a “bump out” on the outside radius of a roadway curve, LOT
DEPTH shall be measured along a line perpendicular to a tangent on any point of the outside radius
of the front lot line.
LOT INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
LOT LINE. An imaginary line at the edge or boundary of a zoning lot, or a line at the
boundary of a lot of record.
Zoning 161
LOT LINE, CORNER SIDE. The boundary of a corner lot that abuts a dedicated street
other than the front lot line.
LOT LINE, FRONT. The lot line abutting a dedicated street. In the case of a corner lot, the
lot line abutting the street having the least length shall be the FRONT LOT LINE. In the case of a
through lot, the Zoning Administrator shall establish the FRONT LOT LINE.
LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a lot, which is most distant from, and is, or is most
nearly, parallel to, the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot, which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD. A lot, which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been
recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds, or a parcel of land, the deed to which was
recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds, in accordance with state law.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot the street side lot line of which is substantially a
continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear.
LOT, THROUGH (DOUBLE FRONTAGE). A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along
two, more or less, parallel dedicated streets, and which is not a corner lot.
LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at the
narrowest width within the first 25 feet of lot depth immediately in back of the front yard setback
line.
LOT, ZONING. A single tract of land located within a single block, which (at the time of
filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed
or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Therefore, a ZONING LOT OR LOTS
may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
MAINTENANCE. The routine upkeep of a structure, premises or equipment, including the
replacement or modification of structural components to the extent necessary to keep said structure in
sound condition.
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE. A traffic-way with at least two lanes in each direction. A
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE may or may not be a freeway, arterial street, secondary arterial street
or collector street.
MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis in accordance with the National Manufactured Home Construction and
Safety Standards, and designed to be used as a dwelling by one family, including the plumbing,
heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein.
162 Swansea - Land Usage
MANUFACTURED HOME, DEPENDENT. A manufactured home, which does not have a
toilet and bath or shower facilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME, INDEPENDENT. A manufactured home with self-contained
toilet and bath and shower facilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. An area of land under unified ownership and control on
which two or more occupied manufactured homes are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue
purposes, and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosed use or intended use as
part of the equipment of such manufactured home park.
MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE. Any portion of a manufactured home park designed
for the use or occupancy by one manufactured home.
MANUFACTURED OFFICE. A detached structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed and intended to be used as an office. Such
offices shall fully comply with the village’s Manufactured Home Code.
MARQUEE. A roof-like structure of a permanent nature, which projects from the wall of a
building and overhangs the public way.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment having a fixed place of business where
any person, firm, association or corporation engages in, or carries on or permits to be engaged in or
carried on, any of the activities of therapeutic massage, as defined. Exception: chiropractor offices,
physical therapy facilities and offices of other licensed medical professionals.
MASSAGE, THERAPEUTIC. Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the external soft parts of the human
body with the hands, or other parts of the body, or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical
device, apparatus or appliance, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol,
liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations
commonly used in this practice, and performed by a massage therapist (as defined).
MASSAGE THERAPIST. Any person who has obtained the minimum number of hours of
education as required by the state from a recognized school training in therapeutic message, and is
properly licensed by the state, and who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of
therapeutic massages, as defined. Exception: chiropractors, physical therapists and other licensed
medical professionals.
MASSAGE SERVICE, ON-CALL. Any business, the function that is to engage in or carry
on therapeutic massages at a location designated by the customer or client rather than at a therapeutic
massage establishment.
Zoning 163
MEZZANINE. An intermediate story between the floor and ceiling of a main story and
extending over only part of the main floor.
MOBILE CLASSROOM, TEMPORARY. A detached structure, built on a permanent
chassis so that it is transportable in one or more sections, but specifically designed for use as a
temporary accessory classroom for an established educational facility. Such CLASSROOMS must
fully comply with the village’s building codes.
MOBILE HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which was built on a
permanent chassis prior to the enactment of the National Manufactured Home Construction and
Safety Standards, and is designed to be used as a dwelling by one family, including the plumbing,
heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. See MANUFACTURED HOME.
MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel not less than five acres in area in single
ownership/control, developed with facilities for accommodating occupied mobile homes in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
MOBILE HOME SPACE. A portion of a mobile home park designed and improved for the
placement of one mobile home and the private use of the occupants thereof.
MOBILE HOME STAND. The part of a mobile home space beneath the mobile home that
includes the concrete slab or runners on which the home is placed and to which it is anchored.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED OFFICE. A detached structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed and intended to be used as an office.
Such offices must fully comply with the village’s Manufactured Home Code.
MOBILE OR PORTABLE MARQUEE. A term used to describe any sign designed to be
moved from place to place, including, but not limited to, signs attached to wood or metal frames
designed to be self-supporting and movable; or paper, cardboard or canvas signs wrapped around
supporting poles.
MODULAR HOME. Any detached single-family dwelling that is transported to the site
where it will be permanently located in assembled or non-assembled form, and that fully complies
with the adopted Building Code.
MOTEL. An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached living or sleeping
accommodations with bathroom and closet space, located on a single zoning lot and designed for use
by transient automobile tourist. A MOTEL furnishes customary hotel services such as maid service,
and laundering of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service and the use and upkeep of
furniture. In a MOTEL, less than 50% of the living and sleeping accommodations are occupied or
designed for occupancy by person other than transient persons.
164 Swansea - Land Usage
MOTOR VEHICLE. Any passenger, vehicle, truck, tractor, tractor-trailers, truck-trailer,
trailer or semi-trailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR, MAJOR AND MINOR. See AUTO REPAIR, MAJOR AND
MINOR.
NON-CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A building or structure or portion
thereof lawfully existing on the effective date of this chapter or at the time of adoption of any
amendment thereto, which:
(a) Was designed, erected or structurally altered for a use that does not conform to the
use regulations of the district in which it is located; and
(b) Does not comply with the bulk and other requirements of this chapter in the zoning
district in which the building or structure is located.
NON-CONFORMING USE. A use which lawfully occupies a building or land on the
effective date of this chapter or at the time of adoption of any amendment thereto, and which does
not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
NON-CONFORMING VACANT LOTS OF RECORD. Vacant lots of record which
lawfully existed on the effective date of this chapter or at the time of adoption of any amendment
thereto, and which do not meet the lot size requirements of the district in which they are located.
NUISANCE. Any thing, condition or conduct that endangers health or unreasonably offends
the senses, or obstructs the free use and comfortable enjoyment of property, or essentially interferes
with the comfortable enjoyment of life.
NURSERY. A tract of land on which trees, shrubs and other plants are raised for
transplanting and/or sale, and including any structure in which said activities are conducted.
NURSERY SCHOOLS. State-licensed day care centers which receive children between the
ages of two and six years and which are established and professionally operated primarily for
educational purposes to meet the children served.
NURSING HOME. A private home, institution, building, residence or other place whether
operated for profit or not, or a county home for the infirm and chronically ill operated pursuant to 55
ILCS 5/5-21001, as now or hereafter amended, or any similar institution operated by a political
subdivision of the state which provides, through its ownership or management, maintenance,
personal care or nursing for three or more persons, not related to the applicant or owner by blood or
marriage, or any similar facility in which maintenance is provided to three or more persons who by
reason of illness or physical infirmity require person care or nursing.
Zoning 165
OCCUPIED LAND AREA. For computing off-street parking and loading space
requirements, that area of a lot occupied by all buildings, structures and accessory uses which in
combination encompass the operation of the principal use. OCCUPIED LAND AREA is normally
used in computing required parking for uses, which typically are not completely enclosed. Examples
are vehicle sales lots and outdoor recreational facilities.
OFF-STREET LOADING. See LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE.
OFFICE. Any building or portion thereof in which the business (usually clerical and
administrative affairs) of a commercial/service enterprise or professional person is transacted.
OPEN SALES LOT. A lot or parcel of land used or occupied for the purpose of buying,
selling or trading of all goods and commodities and including the storage of same prior to sale of
exchange.
OPEN SPACE. Any land developed as yards, parks, recreational areas including
community centers, and landscaped green areas and exclusive of areas developed for off-street
parking.
OVERLAY DISTRICT. A zoning district superimposed over one or more standard
(primary) zoning districts or portions thereof for the purpose of controlling developmental problems
caused by such factors as steep slopes, wet soils, flooding and the like.
OWNER. Any individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity having possessory
interest entitled to exclusive possession in land, buildings or possessions.
PARCEL. Contiguous land in one ownership.
PARK. Land used for active or passive recreation owned or controlled by a local park
district, school district, county forest preserve district, homeowner’s association, the village or
another governmental entity or not-for-profit organization, including, but not limited to, playgrounds,
nature trails, walking paths, swimming pools, athletic fields, basketball and tennis courts, baseball
and soccer fields or similar public land within the village.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE. An open, hard surfaced area, other than a public way or
street, designed, arranged and made available for the storage of private passenger automobiles only
of occupants of the building of buildings for which the parking area is developed and is necessary.
PARKING LOT. Public or private land intended for the use as a facility of parking motor
vehicles. Parking may be with or without fee.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE. Space within a public or private parking area
exclusive of access drives, for the storage of one-passenger automobiles or commercial vehicles
under one and one-half tons’ capacity.
166 Swansea - Land Usage
PARTY WALL. A fire wall on an interior lot line used for or adapted for a joint service
between two buildings, or two units within the same building.
PAWN SHOP. An establishment whose primary business is to offer monetary loans in
exchange for an item of value.
PAYDAY LOAN ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment whose primary business is to offer
small, short-term loans to cover the borrower’s expenses until his or her next payday.
PERFORMANCE BOND. See GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD. A criterion established to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic
or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat generated by, or inherent
in, uses of land or buildings. The more frequently used performance criteria include the following:
(a) Active intense burning, which is the rate of combustion described by material that
burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly. Examples include sawdust-powdered
magnesium and pyroxylin;
(b) Closed cup flash point, which is the lowest temperature at which a combustible
liquid, under prescribed conditions, will give off a flammable vapor, which will burn momentarily;
(c) Decibel, which is a unit, which describes the sound pressure level or intensity of
sound. A sound level meter is calibrated in decibels;
(d) Detonable material, which is a material, which decomposes by detonation. Such
material includes explosives, unstable compounds and fissionable matter;
(e) Earth-borne vibration, which is the periodic displacement, measured in inches of
earth;
(f) Fireproof container, which is an enclosure of steel or concrete, but not lead or
other low-melting metals or alloys, unless the lead or low-melting metals are completely encased in
steel;
(g) Flash point, which is the lowest temperature at which flammable liquid will
momentarily burn under the prescribed conditions. The tag flash point testers shall be authoritative;
(h) Foot candle, which is a unit of illumination; technically, the illumination at all
points one-foot distance from a uniform point source of one (ten candle power);
(i) Free burning, which implies a rate of combustion described by a material, which
burns actively and easily supports combustion;
(j) Frequency, which signifies the number of oscillations per second in a sound wave
and is an index of the pitch of the resulting sound;
Zoning 167
(k) Impact noise, which is a short duration sound such as those from a foregoing
hammer or punch press;
(l) Impulsive noise, which is a sound which is no longer than two seconds in duration,
followed by no less than a two-second rest;
(m) Intense burning, which implies a rate of combustion described by a material that
burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly;
(n) Microcurie, which is a one-millionth of a curie, which is a standard unit of
radioactivity;
(o) Moderate burning, which implies a rate of combustion described by material which
supports combustion and is consumed slowly as it burns;
(p) Noxious matter, which is a material which is capable of causing injury to living
organisms by chemical reaction and is capable of causing detrimental effects upon the physical or
economic well being of individuals;
(q) Octave band, which is a prescribed interval of sound frequencies, which classifies
sound according to its pitch;
(r) Odor threshold, which is the lowest concentration of odorous matter in air that will
produce an olfactory response in a human being;
(s) Odorous matter, which is any matter or material that yields an odor which is
offensive in any way;
(t) Particulate matter, which is material other than water, which is suspended in or
discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid;
(u) Preferred frequency octave bands, which are a standardized series of octave band
prescribed by the U.S.A.S.I. in SI.6-1967, Preferred Frequencies for Acoustical Measurements;
(v) Ringelmann chart, which is a chart on which is described in the U.S. Bureau of
Mines Information Circular 6888 or its successor, and on which are illustrated graduated shades of
gray for use in estimating the light-obscuring capacity of smoke;
(w) Ringelmann number, which is the shade of smoke as it appears on the standard
Ringelmann Chart published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines Information Circular No. 8333 (1967);
(x) SCF (Standard Cubic Feet), which is the measure of the volume of a gas, at any
other conditions, reduced to 1,473 pounds per square inch absolute and 60°F;
168 Swansea - Land Usage
(y) Slow burning or incombustible, which implies materials, which do not in
themselves constitute an active fuel for the spread of combustion. A material which will not ignite,
not actively support combustion during an exposure for five minutes to a temperature of 1,200°F,
shall be designed “incombustible”;
(z) Smoke, which is a small gas-borne particles, other than water, that form a visible
plume in the air;
(aa) Sound level of an operation or use, which is the intensity of sound measured in
decibels;
(bb) Sound level meter, which is an electronic instrument, which includes a microphone,
an amplifier and an output meter which, measures noise and sound pressure levels in a specified
manner. It may be used with the octave band analyzer that permits measuring the sound pressure
level in discrete octave bands;
(cc) Sound pressure level, which is the intensity of a sound measured in decibels
mathematically described as 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the
sound to a reference pressure of 0.0002 microbar;
(dd) Toxic matter, which is material, which is capable of causing injury to living
organisms by chemical means when present in relatively small amounts;
(ee) Threshold limit value, which is the maximum allowable airborne concentration of
toxic material, as established by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygenists;
(ff) United States of American Standards Institute (U.S.A.S.I.) which is a national
organization promulgating authoritative standards in any technical field (formerly, American
Standards Association); and
(gg) Vibration, which is the period displacement of oscillation of the earth.
PERMANENT OPEN SPACE. A contiguous land area that is designed for educational,
religious, recreational or institutional purposes, or such land which is recommended for such
designation by the village at or before the time of approval of a subdivision or planned development.
PERMITTED USE. A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or
districts provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations and standards of such district.
PERMITTEE. The person to whom a zoning certificate is issued.
PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, organization or corporate body.
Zoning 169
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land of a
size sufficient to create its own environment, controlled by a single landowner or by a group of
landowners in a common agreement as to control, to be developed as a single entity, the environment
of which is compatible with adjacent parcels, and the intent of the zoning district of districts in which
it is located; the developer may be granted relief from specific land-use regulations and design
standards and may be awarded certain premiums in return for assurances of an overall quality of
development, including any specific features which will be of exceptional benefit to the community
as a whole and which would not otherwise be required by this chapter.
POLE BANNER. A sign attached to a utility pole that commemorates an event or a matter
of significant public interest. Examples of POLE BANNERS may be the publicizing of the
anniversary of a major public or private institution, or the identifying of a particular neighborhood or
area.
PORCH. A roofed-over structure projecting out from the walls of a main structure and
commonly open to the weather in part.
PREMISES. A lot and all the structures and uses thereon.
PRINCIPAL USE. The main use of land or building as distinguished from a subordinate or
accessory use. A PRINCIPAL USE may be “permitted” or “special”.
PROPERTY LINE. An imaginary line at the edge or boundary of a zoning lot or line at the
boundary of a lot of record.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE. A publicly-owned area; including, but not limited to, the
following: parks; playgrounds; forest preserves; waterways; parkways; and streets.
PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm or corporation duly authorized to furnish under
regulation to the public, electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraph, transportation, water or
sewerage systems.
PUBLIC WAY. Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or other public thoroughfare.
RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for track
operation, but not including freight depots, or stations, loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses,
car or locomotive shops or car yards.
RECONSTRUCT. As applied to non-conforming structures, to rebuild after damage of
destruction.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A term encompassing any type of vehicle used primarily for
pleasure, such as travel-trailers, motor homes, boats, snowmobiles and the like.
REFUSE. Garbage (food wastes) and trash, but not sewage or industrial wastes.
170 Swansea - Land Usage
RELOCATE. To move to another portion of a lot or to a different lot.
RENT-TO-OWN ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment that offers furniture, appliances,
computers, jewelry and other home products and electronic goods for rental with an option of
ownership.
REPAIR. To restore to sound condition, but not to reconstruct.
RESERVOIR PARKING. Off-street parking spaces or lot areas allocated to temporary
standing motor vehicles awaiting entrance to a particular establishment.
RESTAURANT. A business where the dispensing of edible foodstuff and/or beverage on the
premises is the principal business operation; including a cafeteria, coffee shop, lunch room, tearoom
and dining room, but not including a drive-in or fast-food restaurant.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN. A restaurant that dispenses foodstuff and/or beverages to
persons in parked or stopped motor vehicles.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD. A restaurant whose principal business is the dispensing of
edible foodstuffs and/or beverages in disposable containers to be eaten on the premises or taken out.
This type of restaurant is usually self-service and may include a drive-thru service window.
RESTRICTIVE. Tending to keep within prescribed limits.
RETAIL, RETAIL STORE. Sale to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption and not
for resale.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land dedicated for street purpose.
SCHOOL. A public or private institution which offers instruction in any of the branches of
learning and study comparable to that taught in the public schools under the state’s school laws,
including, pre-schools, kindergarten, elementary school, and junior and senior high schools, special
education schools, vocational schools, junior colleges or colleges and universities, excluding trade,
business or commercial schools. SCHOOL shall include all school grounds.
SCREENING. Trees, shrubs, walls, solid fences and the like used as means of view and
noise control.
SEMI-FINISHED MATERIALS. Materials, which have been sufficiently processed at
heavy industrial facilities so that they are no longer in their raw state, but are readily usable by light
industry of assembly or manufacture into consumer goods.
SERVICE BUILDING. See BUILDING, SERVICE.
Zoning 171
SERVICE STATION. A building and premises or portion thereof designed and used for the
retail sale of gasoline or other automotive fuel, oil and automotive parts, supplies and accessories. A
SERVICE STATION may include facilities for washing vehicles and for making minor automotive
repairs.
SERVICE USE/ESTABLISHMENT. Any use or establishment where services are provided
for remuneration either to individuals or to other firms.
SETBACK. The distance between the exterior lot lines and any structure on the lot.
SHELTERED CARE FACILITY. A facility, which provides care and assistance,
supervision overnight and a suitable activities program. Provisions are made for medical care as
necessary. Such FACILITIES are for individuals who do not need nursing care, but do need
personal care assistance, supervision and/or oversight in meeting their daily personal needs.
SHELTERED CARE HOME. Any county sheltered care home or a sheltered care home
operated as part of a county nursing home pursuant to (55 ILCS 5/5-21001) or a private boarding
home, institution, building, residence or other place, whether operated for profit or not which,
through its ownership or management, provides sheltered care to three or more persons who are not
related to the applicant or owner by blood or marriage, or any similar facility in which maintenance
is provided to three or more persons who by reason of physical infirmity require personal care.
SIGN. A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to or
painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or piece of land and which
directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business.
SIGN AREA. The area within an imaginary rectangle which, when drawn, would
completely enclose all the letters, parts or symbols of a sign. Sign supports and poles, unless intrinsic
to the advertising contained on the sign, are not included as part of the SIGN AREA.
SIGN, BILLBOARD. Any single or double-faced sign displaying messages or advertising
not associated with the premises on which said sign is located or to which it is fixed, subject to the
exceptions of § 154.158 of this chapter.
SIGN, CANOPY, MARQUEE. Any sign affixed to, painted on or suspended from an
awning, canopy, marquee or similar overhang.
SIGN, FLUSH-MOUNTED. Any sign mounted in such a way that the plane of its face is
parallel to the plane of the wall to which it is attached, including those signs integrated into the
surface of the wall itself.
SIGN, FREESTANDING. Any sign permanently mounted on a pole, pedestal, standard or
base which stands apart from and is not attached to any building or structure.
172 Swansea - Land Usage
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION. A sign indicating the name and address of building, or the
name of an occupant thereof, and the practice of a permitted occupation therein.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED. A sign having its own light source.
SIGN, PROJECTING. Any sign which is attached to a building or structure, but which
projects from the plane of the wall to which it is attached by more than 18 inches.
SIGN, PUBLIC INTEREST. A temporary sign erected on private property which
publicizes an event of general public interest that is to be held in the near future.
SIGN, WINDOW. Any sign visible from the exterior of the building or structure, which is
painted directly on the surface of a window or affixed to or suspended immediately behind the
window for the purpose of informing the passerby of the identity of the proprietor or business, or of
the product of service which can be obtained on the premises.
SKIRTING. The covering affixed to the bottom of the exterior walls of a mobile home to
conceal the underside thereof.
SPECIAL USE. A use, either public or private, which, because of its unique
characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a particular district or districts.
After due consideration, in each case, of the impact of such use upon neighboring land and of the
public need for the particular use at the particular location, such use may or may not be granted,
subject to the terms of this chapter.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT. A permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
to regulate development of a special use.
SPECIALIZED LIVING ACCOMMODATION. A living accommodation for individuals
needing special assistance, care, supervision, support or treatment including community living
facilities and community residential alternatives, as defined by statute, and including homes for the
aged.
STOP WORK ORDER. A type of corrective action order used by the Zoning Administrator
to halt work in progress that is in violation of this chapter.
STORAGE, OUTDOOR. The outdoor accumulation of vehicles, equipment or products, or
materials for permanent or temporary holding.
STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface
of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the
ceiling next above it. Any portion of a STORY exceeding 14 feet in height shall be considered as an
additional STORY for each 14 feet or fraction thereof.
Zoning 173
STORY, HALF. The portion of a building under a gable, hip or mansard roof, the wall
plates of which, on at least two opposite exterior walls, are not more than four and one-half feet
above the finished floor of such story. In the case of one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and
multiple-family dwellings, less than three stories in height, a HALF STORY in a sloping roof shall
not be counted as a story for the purposes of this chapter. In the case of multiple-family dwellings
three or more stories in height, HALF STORY shall be counted as a story.
STREET. An improved strip of land designed for the conveyance of motor vehicles, and
including any unimproved right-of-way, or any strip of land on which such improvements are
planned. Any of the following may be termed a STREET: freeway, arterial street, secondary street,
collector street, dedicated street, residential street, business street, industrial street. For the purposes
of this chapter, freeways, arterial streets, secondary arterial streets, collector streets, major
thoroughfares, residential streets, business streets and industrial streets may meet the requirement for
dedicated STREETS.
STREET, ARTERIAL. A traffic-way generally providing two lanes going each direction. A
median strip may or may not be present. ARTERIAL STREETS are characterized by moderate to
high-speed travel, possible limitations on access to adjoining property owners and generally serve as
vehicle transportation routes within a region.
STREET BANNER. A temporary sign spanning over the width of a public street, which
publicizes an event of general public interest that is to be held in the near future. An example of a
STREET BANNER may be the publicizing of a local festival.
STREET, BUSINESS. A street within a business district or on the boundary of a business
district. A BUSINESS STREET may also be an arterial street, secondary arterial street or collector
street or major thoroughfare.
STREET, COLLECTOR. A street which performs the function of linking the various points
of vehicular access along its route and delivering such traffic to an arterial of secondary arterial
street.
STREET, DEDICATED. A street designated for public use and for which the responsibility
of maintenance has been accepted by federal, state, county, township or village governments.
STREET, INDUSTRIAL. A street developed to serve an industrial district.
STREET LINE. The division line between private property and a dedicated street.
STREET, PRIVATE. A traffic-way not maintained or owned by a governmental entity.
STREET, RESIDENTIAL. A dedicated street within a residential zoning district, excluding
freeways, arterial streets and secondary arterial streets.
174 Swansea - Land Usage
STREET, SECONDARY ARTERIAL. A traffic-way providing one or two lanes in each
direction. A median strip is rarely present. SECONDARY ARTERIAL STREETS are characterized
by moderate speed travel (higher speeds may be allowed in sparsely populated areas), residential
access is discouraged and the length of such streets is limited.
STRINGENT. Binding, exacting.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change, other than incidental repairs which would
prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as the addition, removal or alteration
of bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations.
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or is
attached to something having location on the ground including a fence or freestanding wall. A sign,
billboard or other advertising medium, detached or projecting, shall be construed to be a
STRUCTURE.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY. A movable structure not designed for human occupancy nor
for the protection of goods or chattels and not forming an enclosure. A sign, billboard or other
advertising device detached or projecting shall be construed to be a TEMPORARY STRUCTURE.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE. A swimming pool and the apparatus and equipment
pertaining to the swimming pool, maintained by an individual for the sole use of his household and
guests without charge for admission, and not for the purpose of profit or in connection with any
business operated for profit, located on a lot as an accessory use to a residence.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC. A swimming pool and the apparatus and equipment
pertaining to the swimming pool, maintained and operated by a private party for gain; or by a
municipality or other unit of government for the general public whether or not an admission fee is
charged.
TAVERN, LOUNGE or BAR. A building or portion thereof where liquors are sold to be
consumed on the premises, but not including restaurants where the principal business is serving food.
TOPOGRAPHY. The relief features or surface configuration of an area.
TOW STORAGE LOT. Any premises where vehicles are stored by the tow company on a
temporary basis for retrieval by owner or legally authorized person entitled to the vehicle.
TOWING AND STORAGE COMPANY. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation
engaged in towing and temporary storage of vehicles whether wrecked, abandoned, inoperable or for
any other purpose.
TOWNHOUSE. A type of multi-family dwelling, one or two stories in height, in which
typically the living room, dining room and kitchen are on the ground floor with sleeping rooms on
the second floor. Dwelling units typically have a common sidewall and are owner occupied.
Zoning 175
TRAILER. A vehicle without motive power used or adaptable for living, sleeping, business
or storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses or skirting,
and has been reasonable may be equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure
from place to place. The term TRAILER shall include CAMP CAR and HOUSE CAR. A permanent
foundation shall not change its character unless the entire structure is erected in accordance with the
adopted Building Code.
TRAVEL TRAILER. A manufactured home eight feet or less in width and less than 25 feet
in length which is designed for temporary occupancy, generally for recreation or vacation purposes.
TRAVEL TRAILERS shall include camping trailers within the limits of said dimensions, mounted on
a motor vehicle or otherwise. TRAVEL TRAILERS shall not be considered a manufactured home
pursuant to the provisions of Ch. 151 of this code of ordinances.
UNIFIED CONTROL. The combination of two or more tracts of land wherein each owner
has agreed that his or her tract of land shall be developed as part of a planned unit development and
shall be subject to the control applicable to the planned unit development.
UNIPLEX. A dwelling which has accommodations for two families, divided by a common
or party wall, in which each family area is separately owned.
USE. The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged or intended or
for which it is occupied, maintained, let or leased.
USE, LAWFUL. The use of any structure of land that conforms with all of the regulations
of this chapter or any amendment hereto and which conforms with all of the codes, ordinances and
other legal requirements, as existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter or any amendment
thereto, for the structure or land that is being examined.
USE, NON-CONFORMING. See NON-CONFORMING USE.
UTILITY SUBSTATION. A secondary utility facility such as an electrical substation, gas
regulator station, telephone exchange facility, sewage treatment plant and the like.
VACANT. As applied to a lot, no structure is situated thereon.
VALUE. Valuation of a building shall be the assessed valuation, or where no assessed
valuation exists, its appraised valuation as converted to assessed valuation.
VARIATION. A relaxation of the strict application of setbacks, specific parking
requirements, specific signage regulations or specific floodplain regulations, for a particular lot or
structure where such variations will not be contrary to the public interest and where, due to
conditions peculiar to the property and the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement
of those provisions of this chapter
176 Swansea - Land Usage
would result in unnecessary hardship or practical difficulties. A VARIATION, as herein defined,
shall not be granted by the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals unless said request is in
compliance with one or more of the divisions of § 154.212(B) of this chapter.
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT. A business establishment engaged in selling to retailers
or jobbers rather than consumers.
YARD. An open space on the same zoning lot with a building a structure, unoccupied and
unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter. YARD
extends along a lot line, and to a depth or width specified in the yard requirements for the zoning
district in which such zoning lot is located.
YARD, CORNER SIDE. A side yard, which adjoins a public street.
YARD, FRONT. A yard extending along the full length of the front lot line between the side
lot lines.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE. A side yard, which is located immediately adjacent to another
zoning lot or to an alley separating such side yard from another zoning lot.
YARD, REAR. A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side
lot lines.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The person designated by the President and Board of
Trustees as the officer responsible for enforcing and administering all requirements of this chapter.
ZONING DISTRICT. See DISTRICT.
ZONING LOT. See LOT, ZONING.
ZONING MAP. The map incorporated into this chapter as part hereof, designating zoning
districts.
(Prior Code, § 20-202) (Ord. 1438, passed 2-8-2006; Ord. 1473, passed 11-6-2006; Ord. 1494,
passed 8-7-2007; Ord. 1525, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 1533, passed 11-17-2008; Ord. 1699, passed 3-
17-2014; Ord. 1812, passed 3-5-2018)
2018 S-1
Zoning 177
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
§ 154.030 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
In order to implement the regulatory scheme of this chapter so as to achieve the objectives
enumerated in § 154.002 of this chapter, the entire village is hereby divided into the following
zoning districts:
Zoning District Minimum Area
C Conservation None
FPO Floodplain Overlay None
HB Highway Business 2 acres
HI Heavy industrial 5 acres
LI Light Industrial 3 acres
MH-1 Manufactured Home Residential 3 acres
MH-2 Manufactured Home Residential (Park) 3 acres
MR-1 Two-Family Residential 3 acres
MR-2 Multi-Family Residential 3 acres
PB Planned Business 1 acre
SR-1 Single-Family Residential 5 acres
SR-2 Single-Family Residential 5 acres
SR-3 Single-Family Residential 5 acres
SR-4 Single-Family Residential 5 acres
(Prior Code, § 20-301) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.031 MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENT FOR DISTRICTS.
In meeting the minimum area requirement, which is intended to prevent spot zoning, zoning
districts shall be comprised only of contiguous parcels and not of numerous non-contiguous parcels
the acreage of which, when aggregated, happens to equal or exceed the required minimum area for
that district.
(Prior Code, § 20-302) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
178 Swansea - Land Usage
§ 154.032 ZONING MAP.
(A) Map boundaries. The boundaries of the listed zoning districts are hereby established as
shown on the village's official zoning map. Said official map, including all notations and other
information thereon, is hereby made a part of this Code by reference. The official zoning map shall
be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
(B) Annual publication. In accordance with state law (65 ILCS 5/11-13-19), the Board of
Trustees shall publish the village zoning map not later than March 31 of each year if there have been
any changes in zoning regulations or district boundaries during the preceding calendar year.
§ 154.033 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts shown on the
zoning map, the following rules shall apply.
(A) District boundary lines are either the centerline of railroads, highways, streets, alleys or
easements, or the boundary lines of sections, divisions of sections, tracts or lots, or such lines
extended, unless otherwise indicated.
(B) In areas not subdivided into lots or blocks, wherever a district is indicated as a strip adjacent
to and paralleling a street or highway, the depth of such strips shall be in accordance with the
divisions shown on the map, measured at right angles from the centerline of the street or highway,
and the length of frontage shall be in accordance with dimensions shown on the map from section,
quarter-section or division lines or railroad rights-of-way, unless otherwise indicated.
(C) All streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise
specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zoning district as the property immediately
abutting on such alleys, streets, public ways, waterways and railroad rights-of-way.
(D) Where the centerline of a street, alley, public way, waterway or railroad right-of-way serves
as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise indicated, shall deemed to be the
same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline.
(Prior Code, § 20-304) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.034 ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND.
The zoning classification of any land annexed to the village shall be determined by the Board of
Trustees at the time of annexation and specified in the annexation ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 20-305) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
Zoning 179
§ 154.035 ZONING SUBJECT TO PRE-ANNEXATION.
(A) Where a pre-annexation agreement is in effect that precludes the changing of zoning district
classifications on the subject property, the provisions of the zoning ordinance in effect on the date of
annexation and the zoning district classifications specified in the pre-annexation agreement shall
apply.
(B) The provisions of this chapter, or any subsequent amendments hereto, shall not apply until
such time as the term of the pre-annexation agreement has expired or the owner has agreed to the
application of such provisions.
(C) Within six months prior to the expiration of any such annexation agreement, the Planning
and Zoning Board of Appeals shall initiate an amendment to apply the appropriate zoning
classifications to the subject property once the agreement expires. Such amendments shall be in
accordance with § 154.215(A) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-306) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS - ALL DISTRICTS
§ 154.050 UNLISTED USES PROHIBITED.
Whenever any use is not specifically listed as permitted or special within a particular zoning
district, such use shall be deemed prohibited in that district, unless the Board of Trustees determines
that the unlisted use is similar to and compatible with the listed uses, and allows such use by
amending this chapter in accordance with § 154.214(A) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-401) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.051 REGISTRATION REQUIRED FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL USE.
In order to assure that the purpose and intent of this chapter is achieved, every non-residential
use of property in any zoning district in the village shall be registered with the Zoning Administrator
each year during the month of April.
(A) Forms for such registration shall be provided by the Zoning Administrator and shall request,
but not be limited to, the following information:
(1) The name of the owner or operator of the non-residential use;
(2) The location of the use;
180 Swansea - Land Usage
(3) The nature of any services or products to be offered to the public whether sold at retail,
wholesale or without charge;
(4) The average number of any employees to be employed at the location;
(5) The nature of any toxic or flammable compounds, chemicals or other such substances
stored or used at said location; and
(6) The number of any and all certificates of registration required under the Retailers
Occupation Tax Act, 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq., Service Occupation Tax Act, 35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.,
Use Tax Act, 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq., and any similar acts of the state.
(B) Fees for such registration shall be assessed as stated in § 110.03 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 20-402) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.052 MEETING MINIMUM AREA/BULK REQUIREMENTS.
Every lot must meet the minimum area/bulk requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located, as those requirements relate to lot area, dimensions and setbacks, so that requirements are
met independent of, and without utilizing any portion of, any abutting lot.
(Prior Code, § 20-403) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.053 EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITS.
(A) Necessary appurtenances. Chimneys, church spires, parapet walls, cooling towers, elevator
bulkheads, fire towers, antennas or other necessary appurtenances commonly constructed above the
roof line shall be permitted to exceed the maximum height limitations of the district in which they are
located if they comply with all other pertinent ordinances of the village.
(B) Intersections. On corner lots, in the triangular portion of land bounded by intersecting street
lines and a line joining these street lines at points 30 feet from the point of intersection, no
obstruction, whether natural or human-made, shall intrude into the air space that is between two feet
and ten feet above the level of the adjacent street.
(C) Accessory uses. Provided that, there shall be no height restriction on agriculture-related
accessory structures, no accessory use in any zoning district shall be higher than:
(1) Fifteen feet in a conservation or any residential zoning district; or
(2) Twenty-five feet in any other zoning district.
(Prior Code, § 20-404) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
Zoning 181
§ 154.054 EXCEPTIONS TO SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Corner lots and through lots. Every building or structure constructed on a “corner lot” or a
“through lot”, as defined, shall meet the minimum front setback requirement of the district in which
it is located, for every yard area that fronts a dedicated street, unless otherwise indicated.
(B) Built-up areas. In all residential zoning districts, where lots having 50% or more of the
frontage on one side of a street between intersections are developed with buildings, and the front
setbacks of those lots do not differ by more than ten feet, the minimum required front setback
between those intersections, shall be the average of the existing front setbacks; provided, however,
that, in any such area, no front setback greater than 50 feet shall be required.
(C) Accessory uses. Any accessory use in any residential or conservation district, unless
specifically indicated otherwise, may be located as close as five feet to any side or rear lot line;
provided, however, that, any accessory use attached to a principal structure shall be considered to be
part of that structure and must meet the setback requirements of the district in which it is located, as
those requirements apply to the principal structure.
(Prior Code, § 20-405) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.055 ALLOWABLE INTRUSIONS INTO YARDS.
To the extent indicated below, the following features of principal buildings may intrude into
required yards without thereby violating the minimum setback requirements.
Features Maximum Intrusions
Attached canopies, roof overhangs 4 feet
Balconies 4 feet
Cornices, chimneys, planters or similar architectural
features
2 feet
Fire escapes 4 feet
Patios No limit
Porches, if not enclosed and at ground level 6 feet
Service station canopies which are at least 10 feet high To within 10 feet of any lot line
(Prior Code, § 20-406) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
182 Swansea - Land Usage
§ 154.056 AREA/BULK RESTRICTIONS; ACCESSORY USES.
Any “accessory use”, as defined, shall be deemed permitted in a particular zoning district if such
use is accessory to a principal structure or use which is allowed in that particular zoning district as
either a permitted or special use, is not used as a dwelling, and complies with the following
restrictions.
(A) Front yard restriction. No accessory use in any zoning district shall be located in any part of
any front yard that is required as a result of the setback regulations of such district.
(B) Lot coverage restriction. All accessory uses on any one lot in any zoning district, shall not
occupy more than 30% of the rear yard area that is required as a result of setback regulations of such
district.
(Prior Code, § 20-407) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.057 ACCESS TO LOTS REQUIRED.
(A) No building shall be erected on any lot unless such lot abuts, or has permanent easement of
access to, a public street or private street that conforms to the standards set forth in ordinances of
Ch. 153 of this code of ordinances.
(B) Frontage on an alley shall not be deemed as satisfying the requirement above.
(Prior Code, § 20-408) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.058 SEWERS AND PRIVATE SEWERAGE SYSTEMS.
In all zoning districts, the property owner of any building or place where people live, work or
assemble shall provide for the sanitary disposal of all sewage in accordance with the following
requirements.
(A) Requirement for public sewer connection. Whenever the distance from the property in
question to the nearest public sewer with available capacity does not exceed 200 feet, and such sewer
is reasonably accessible, all sewage shall be discharged into such system, whether or not a private
sewerage system already exists or is more convenient.
(B) Allowance for private sewerage system. Whenever the public sewerage system is not
reasonably accessible, a private sewerage system shall be installed and used. All private sewerage
system shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained in conformity with the following
requirements:
(1) State Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act, 225 ILCS 225/1 through 225/24, as
amended from time to time;
Zoning 183
(2) State Private Sewage Disposal Code No. 4.002, promulgated by the Director of the
State Department of Public Health, as amended from time to time;
(3) Pertinent, current regulations issued by the State Environmental Protection Agency; and
(4) Applicable codes and ordinances of the village, particularly those regulating
subdivisions.
(C) Issuance of certificate of compliance. The Zoning Administrator shall not issue any initial
certificate of zoning compliance unless, following consultation with the Village Engineer, he or she
is satisfied that the requirements of this section will be met.
(Prior Code, § 20-409) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.059 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; SPECIFIC USES.
Because of the nature of certain specific uses, which require additional regulations in order to
assure that the purpose and intent of this chapter is achieved, the following additional restrictions are
applicable to the uses listed below.
(A) Kennels.
(1) Any lot upon which a kennel is situated shall have a minimum area of three acres.
(2) Every kennel shall be located at least 200 feet from the nearest dwelling, and at least
100 feet from any lot line.
(B) Nursing homes.
(1) Any lot upon which a nursing home is situated shall have a minimum width and depth
of 200 feet and a minimum area of two acres.
(2) The principal building of any nursing home shall be located at least 25 feet from all lot
lines.
(C) Recreational vehicles.
(1) No more than two recreational vehicles shall be parked on any lot in any zoning district;
provided that, no restriction shall be placed upon the allowable number of recreational vehicles that
may be parked on the lot of a permitted business which sells such vehicles.
(2) No recreational vehicle shall be used as a dwelling in any zoning district.
(3) No recreational vehicle shall be used as an office or for any other commercial purpose
in any zoning district.
184 Swansea - Land Usage
(D) Services stations.
(1) All gasoline pumps and other such service facilities shall be located at least 25 feet from
any street, right-of-way line, side lot line or rear lot line.
(2) Every accessway to a service station shall be located at least 200 feet from the principal
building of any fire station, school, public library, church, park or playground, and at least 30 feet
from the intersection of any public streets.
(E) Swimming pools.
(1) No swimming pool, in any district, whether public or private, shall be located in any
front yard or intrude into any part of any side or rear yard that is required because of the setback
regulations in that district; provided, however, that, in any residential district a swimming pool may
be located as close as ten feet to any side or rear lot line, inclusive of corner lots.
(a) When, in the case of a corner lot, a pool is installed in a side yard area normally
restricted by setback regulations, the required wall or fence shall be a separate wall or fence,
regardless of whether the pool is installed in-ground or above ground.
(b) When, in the case of a corner lot, a pool is installed in a side yard area normally
restricted by setback regulations, the provisions of § 154.052 of this chapter must be followed.
(2) (a) Every in-ground swimming pool which is more than two feet deep shall be enclosed
by a wall or fence at least four feet in height.
(b) Any passage through such wall or fence shall be equipped with a gate, the latch of
which can be secured and locked.
(3) Every above ground swimming pool which is more than two feet deep shall be enclosed
by a separate wall or fence at least four feet in height; provided, however, that, a separate wall or
fence shall not be required (unless otherwise indicated by division (E)(1) above if every point of the
pool wall is at least four feet above the ground).
(a) Any passage through a separate wall or fence shall be equipped with a gate the
latch of which can be secured and locked.
(b) Access to a pool, the wall of which is at least four feet above the ground and which
is not protected by a separate wall or fence, shall be restricted by a ladder that is raised or removed
when the pool is not in use.
Zoning 185
(F) Utility substations. Every electrical substation, gas regulator station, telephone exchange
facility, private sewage treatment plant, private water storage facility or similar facility shall be
deemed a special use and shall conform to the following regulations in addition to any regulations
required by said special use.
(1) Every lot on which any such facility is situated shall meet the minimum area and
dimensions requirements of the district in which it is located and every building, structure or use of
any such facility shall be located at least 25 feet from all lot lines, or shall meet the district setback
requirements, whichever is greater.
(2) In any residential district, every such facility shall be designed, constructed and
operated so that it is compatible with the residential character of the area.
(3) Screening at least ten feet in height and of sufficient density to block the view from
adjacent property shall be installed around every such facility.
(4) If the installed screening is not a fence and the Zoning Administrator determines that
such a facility poses a safety hazard, he or she shall require that a secure fence at least ten feet in
height be installed behind the required screening.
(G) Home occupations.
(1) There are permitted in any residential dwelling home occupations of the type frequently
found in dwellings used for residential purposes.
(2) Any home occupation shall comply with the following standards, in addition to ail of
the standards applicable to the district in which it is located:
(a) No person shall be employed other than members of the immediate family
occupying such dwelling.
(b) No stock in trade, except articles produced by the members of the immediate family
residing on the premises, shall be displayed or sold upon the premises.
(c) No alteration of the principal building shall be made which changes the character
thereof as a dwelling.
(d) No more than 25 percent of the area of one story of the principal building shall be
devoted to any home occupation, except the letting of rooms to roomers or boarders.
(e) The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal building that
is used as the residential dwelling, except that persons furnishing child care may provide outdoor
recreation on the premises.
186 Swansea - Land Usage
(f) No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
(g) No home occupation shall be operated in such a manner as to cause a nuisance.
(3) Permitted home occupations include, but are not limited to, the following occupations;
provided, however, that each listed occupation shall be subject to the requirements of this section as
well as to any limitations specifically imposed on such occupation by this section:
(a) Artists, sculptors, or authors.
(b) Day care homes.
(c) Dressmakers, seamstresses, or tailors.
(d) Lawyers, architects, engineers, realtors, insurance agents, brokers and members of
similar professions.
(e) Ministers, rabbis, priests, imams, and other leaders of religious orders.
(f) Music or dancing teachers, tutors, or similar specialized instruction, provided that
the instruction shall be limited to one pupil at a time, except for occasional groups.
(g) Physicians, dentists, or other licensed medical practitioners.
(h) The letting for hire of not more than two rooms for rooming or boarding use for
not more than two persons, neither of whom is a transient.
(4) Permitted home occupations shall not in any event be deemed to include the following:
(a) Animal hospitals.
(b) Barbershops or salons.
(c) Beauty parlors.
(d) Clinics or hospitals.
(e) Dance schools.
(f) Mortuaries.
(g) Nursery schools.
(h) Private clubs.
Zoning 187
(i) Renting of trailers.
(j) Repair shops or service establishments, except the repair of electrical appliances,
computers and computer equipment, cameras, or other similar small items.
(k) Restaurants.
(l) Stables or animal kennels.
(H) Home occupations, as a special use. Every home occupation allowed as a special use in the
village shall meet the following criteria.
(1) In any residential or conservation district, no alterations shall be made to the dwelling
to accommodate the home occupation which materially change the residential character of the
building.
(2) The total area devoted to the home occupation shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor
area of the dwelling, or 500 square feet, whichever is less.
(3) In any residential or conservation district, no unenclosed area shall be used for the
storage of equipment or materials used in connection with the home occupation. For the purpose of
this section, ENCLOSED shall mean within the dwelling, a storage building or a detached garage.
(4) No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare or electrical interference,
which is noticeable at or beyond the lot lines, shall be generated.
(5) At least two off-street parking spaces, in addition to those required for the residential
use of the property, shall be provided.
(6) Any sign erected in connection with a home occupation, shall conform with the
provisions of § 154.149 of this chapter.
(7) Only members of the family residing in the dwelling shall be employed in connection
with the home occupation.
(8) No home occupation shall be established unless the owner has first registered the nonresidential
use of the property with the Zoning Administrator, and in accordance with § 154.051 of
this chapter.
188 Swansea - Land Usage
(9) Vehicular traffic to and from the site of the home occupation and occurring as a result
of said activity shall not exceed four vehicles at any one interval, on a regular, continuing basis.
(I) Agricultural activities.
(1) (a) No barn, stable, shed or other structure intended to shelter farm animals, shall be
erected closer than 300 feet from any existing dwelling, or closer than 200 feet from any lot line of
any residential property, whichever distance is greater.
(a) Fences shall be erected, or other means taken, to prevent farm animals from
approaching closer than 300 feet from any existing dwelling or 200 feet from any residential lot line,
whichever distance is greater.
(2) (a) No agricultural equipment or commodities, including, but not limited to, baled
crops, fertilizer, pesticides or herbicides, shall be stored outdoors and closer than 300 feet from any
existing dwelling or 200 feet from any residential lot line, whichever distance is greater.
(b) Such equipment or commodities which are stored completely within an enclosed
structure shall not be located closer than 100 feet from any residential lot line.
(J) Fences.
(1) Easements and rights-of-way. Fences shall not be constructed on or over any dedicated
public drainage or public rights-of-way. Construction may be allowed in utility easements; however,
owners are responsible to replace or remove, at their cost, fences, and hedges that might be removed
or damaged during utility repairs/ improvements by the village or other approved entities. The
village will attempt to notify owners in advance about required removals but reserves the right to
remove a fence, wall, or hedge in an easement without advance notice, as emergency or other
scheduling considerations warrant. Trees are prohibited in all easements and ali public rights-of-way.
(2) Front yard. Fences not exceeding 36 inches in height may be erected in the front yard
of any lot. Provided the fence is no more than one third opaque, and the materials are made of only
plastic, wood, or aluminum/iron rail in front yard areas.
(3) Side yard. Fences not exceeding six feet in height may be erected in the side yard of
any lot provided they do not extend beyond the front setback line.
(4) Rear yard. Fences not exceeding six feet in height may be erected in the rear yard of
any lot.
(5) Placement offences.
(a) Fences may be erected along lot lines.
Zoning 189
(b) All structural or supporting members of any fence must be constructed to be within
or toward the area to be enclosed. This provision will not preclude home owners to share a fence on
the property line.
(6) Illinois Drainage Code. No fence, wall or other obstruction shall be erected in violation
of the Illinois Drainage Code, 70 ILCS 605/1-1 et seq.
(7) Rights-of-way. No fence, or other obstruction shall be erected within any public rightof-
way, except by written permission of the Code Administrator.
(8) Barbed wire and similar material.
(a) If already constructed and installed upon property lines or property abutting streets,
highways, alleyways, or any public right-of-way within a residential zoning. Up to three strands of
barbed wire may be used on top of a fence abutting the public right-of-way in Planned Business,
Light Industrial, Heavy Industrial zoning districts so long as the wire does not protrude beyond the
property line.
(b) Any newly constructed fences containing barbed wire or similar material must be
setback at least five feet from property lines and public rights-of-way, they are only permitted in
planned business, light industrial, and heavy industrial zoning classifications.
(c) Fences constructed with razor wire, ribbon wire and material(s) of similar design
are prohibited.
(d) Electric fences are not permitted in the village except when used to contain grazing
animals in an area zoned to allow such a use. Electric fences must be set back at least five feet from
the property line and/or must be enclosed by additional fencing or other barriers which prevent
access to the electric fence by small children on the adjacent property.
(e) All fences not in compliance with this section shall, within 20 days of notification
from the Village of Swansea, shall be removed by the owner or, upon failure to remove the fence;
the Code Administrator is empowered to cause the removal of the fence, the cost of which shall be
billed to the owner.
(K) Junk yards.
(1) No part of any junk yard, including any lot on which three or more inoperable vehicles
are stored, shall be located closer than 500 feet from any residential lot line.
(2) All vehicles, parts and equipment shall be stored completely within an enclosed
structure, or within an area screened by a wall, solid fence or closely-planted shrubbery at least ten
feet high and of sufficient density to block the view from adjacent property.
190 Swansea - Land Usage
(L) Aerials and antennas.
(1) In any residential or business district, no aerial or antenna shall be located in any front
or side yard.
(2) In any zoning district, no aerial or antenna shall exceed the height limit regulation of the
Federal Communication Commission.
(M) Special regulations for aerials, antennas and telecommunications facilities.
(1) Selected definitions.
CO-LOCATION (CO-USE). The location of two or more antenna or other
telecommunication devices on a single telecommunications tower or other supporting structure.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. An unmanned facility consisting of a
telecommunication tower and any accessory structures required to provide support services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER.
1. A structure, excluding buildings, of at least 40 feet in height, which supports
telecommunication antenna or other wireless communication equipment for either transmitting or
receiving. Design examples of TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS are described as follows:
a. Monopoles;
b. Self-supporting lattice; and
c. Guyed.
2. The term shall not include equipment used by amateur radio operators, which
meet the requirement of division (M)(3) below.
(2) Purpose and intent.
(a) To direct the installation of aerials, antennas and telecommunications facilities
within the village;
(b) To protect the public health and safety;
(c) To protect residential areas and land uses from the potential adverse impacts of
aerials, antennas and telecommunication towers;
Zoning 191
(d) To minimize adverse visual impacts and avoid potential damage to adjacent
properties from tower failure, through careful engineering, design, siting and screening;
(e) To accommodate the growing need for telecommunication facilities; and
(f) To encourage and promote co-location of existing and new telecommunication
facilities as a primary option rather than construction of single-use facilities.
(3) Special regulations.
(a) The distance from the base of an aerial, antenna or telecommunication tower to the
nearest property line shall not be less than the height of the aerial, antenna or tower.
(b) Exception: “monopole” towers will not be required to meet the setback
requirements as mentioned above when designed to fail at a point equal to no more than one-third of
the height of the tower when measured from the top.
(c) Six-foot high security fencing shall be installed around the base and guy anchors of
all telecommunication facilities.
(d) Closely planted evergreen trees or shrubs at least six feet high shall be planted
around the exterior of any security fencing and around the base and guy anchors of a
telecommunication facility.
(e) Additional deciduous trees at least two inches in girth, plus evergreen trees at least
six feet in height, shall be planted around the perimeter of the property (near the property lines) upon
which a telecommunication facility is located in order to provide additional screening of the tower
from passersby.
(f) Any person, firm or corporation wishing to construct a telecommunication tower
shall seek permission to co-locate or co-use an existing tower. No person, firm or corporation shall
refuse co-location of other equipment.
(g) Any person, firm or corporation wishing to construct a telecommunication tower
and/or facility, shall provide a bond to the village in the amount of $20,000 or 20% of the
construction costs, whichever is less. Said bond shall be kept in full force during the time the tower
and/or communication facility is in operation. The bond shall be conditioned upon full indemnity to
the village should the facility become obsolete and the owner fails to remove said tower and/or
facility within six months of becoming obsolete, or in the event the tower of facility falls into a state
of disrepair.
192 Swansea - Land Usage
(N) Therapeutic massage establishments. No therapeutic massage establishment shall be
established, operated or maintained within the village unless the establishment complies with the
following minimum requirements.
(1) Licenses of all therapeutic massage therapists operating within a therapeutic massage
establishment shall be posted in plain site at all times in the establishment.
(2) No person other than licensed massage therapists (as defined) shall engage in the
practice of performing massages for commercial purposes. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools,
showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other facilities shall be kept in good repair and maintained in
a clean and sanitary condition at all times. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor cabinets, shower
compartments, pool areas and toilet areas shall be thoroughly cleaned at the end of each business
day.
(3) Oils, creams, lotions and other preparations used in administering therapeutic massages
shall be kept in clean, closed containers.
(4) Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linens, towels and
other materials used in connection with administering therapeutic massages.
(5) All therapeutic massage establishments shall provide clean, laundered sheets and towels
in sufficient quantity, which shall be laundered after each use.
(6) The main entrance door utilized by the general public, serving a therapeutic massage
establishment, shall remain unlocked at all times during business hours.
(7) Business hours of operation for therapeutic massage establishments shall be between
6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(8) No person other than licensed massage therapists (as defined) shall engage in the
practice of performing massages for commercial purposes.
(9) Only massage therapists (as defined) may own, operate or be employed to engage in the
practice of therapeutic massage by an on-call massage service.
(10) The sexual or genital areas of patrons shall be covered by clothes, undergarments or
towels.
(11) It shall be unlawful for any person in a therapeutic massage establishment to knowingly
place his or her hand(s) upon, or to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle, in any manner,
or to massage the genital area of any person.
(12) No massage therapist, employee or operator shall perform, offer or agree to perform
any act which would require the touching of a patron’s genital area.
Zoning 193
(O) Pawn shops, car title loan, payday loan and rent-to-own establishments.
(1) Purpose.
(a) The purpose of this division (O) is to regulate pawn shops, car title loan, payday
loan and rent-to-own establishments in order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the village. These types of businesses usually are directed towards people with minimal
financial reserves who need funds quickly, and are not able to access other types of financing like
bank loans, charge cards or family members who can lend them the needed cash or they are directed
towards those who are not able to purchase certain consumer goods (such as televisions, furniture
and the like) through standard purchasing methods. Therefore, it is in the best interest of the village
to regulate these businesses and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
deleterious secondary effects of these uses within the village.
(b) The provisions of this division (O) have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing
a limitation or restriction on these uses, or to deny access by these uses to their intended market.
(2) Findings.
(a) Pawn shops, car title loan, payday loan and rent-to-own establishments, as defined
herein, should be regulated.
(b) They should be segregated from one another and from houses of worship, schools,
parks and residential neighborhoods to protect the public health, welfare and safety because, inter
alia, these uses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse
secondary effects, including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, illicit drug use,
decreased desirability of and negative impacts on the use of surrounding properties, blight and litter.
(c) The village has a substantial government interest in preventing each of the
aforementioned adverse effects.
(3) Location.
(a) The property line of any pawn shop, car title loan shop, payday loan shop or rentto-
own establishment shall be no less than 300 feet from the nearest property line of any
residentially-zoned property, school, park, church, synagogue or other place of worship.
(b) The property line of any pawn shop, car title loan shop, payday loan shop or rentto-
own establishment shall be no less than 650 feet from the nearest property line of any other pawn
shop, car title loan shop, payday loan shop or rent-to-own establishment.
(Prior Code, § 20-410) (Ord. 1482, passed 3-5-2007; Ord. 1533, passed 11-17-2008; Ord. 1647,
passed 5-21-2012; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
194Swansea - Land Usage
SPECIFIC REGULATIONS FOR DISTRICTS
§ 154.070 “C” - CONSERVATION DISTRICT.
(A) General. The C Conservation District encompasses areas that are presently undeveloped or
sparsely developed and that, for various reasons, should remain so for the foreseeable future. Tracts
of land in this district, which provide the village with valuable natural resources, open space and aid
in maintaining the stability of the natural environment, should be preserved and protected. Tracts of
land in this district, which are fertile and relatively level, may best be suited for agricultural pursuits.
Other tracts in this district may have such poor soils, steep slopes, inadequate natural drainage or
other problems, so that the provision and maintenance of roads, utilities and storm water drainage
systems would present an impractical or burdensome expensive to the tax-paying public.
(Prior Code, § 20-501)
(B) Permitted uses. The following shall be considered permitted uses in the C District:
(1) Agriculture, including all uses commonly classified as such, in accordance with the
requirements of § 154.059(I) of this chapter;
(2) Nurseries, greenhouses, temporary produce stands;
(3) Cemeteries;
(4) Government uses of the village;
(5) Single-family dwellings, conventionally constructed;
(6) Public libraries, playgrounds, parks and recreational or community centers or grounds;
(7) Temporary buildings or trailers for construction purposes and for a period not to exceed
the period of construction; and
(8) Accessory uses, buildings and structures in accordance with § 154.055 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-502)
(C) Special uses. The following shall be considered special uses in the C District and allowed
only in accordance with § 154.213(A) of this chapter:
(1) Agricultural implements sales;
(2) Amusement facilities such as go-cart tracks and miniature golf courses;
(3) Animal hospitals;
Zoning 195
(4) Churches and related religious facilities;
(5) Clubs or lodges, private; but not those which have as their chief activity a service
customarily carried on as a business;
(6) Golf courses of regulation size;
(7) Government uses other than those of the village;
(8) Home occupations in accordance with § 154.059(G) or (H) of this chapter;
(9) Institutions such as convents, retreat houses and seminaries;
(10) Kennels in accordance with § 154.059(A) of this chapter;
(11) Nursing homes in accordance with § 154.059(B) of this chapter;
(12) Telecommunication facilities, telecommunication towers;
(13) Trucking/hauling services; and
(14) Utility substations in accordance with § 154.059(F) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-503)
(D) Area/bulk restrictions. The following area/bulk restrictions shall apply to all buildings or
structures in the C District.
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Lot area: 62,500 square feet;
(b) Lot width: 250 feet; and
(c) Lot depth: 250 feet.
(2) Minimum setbacks.
(a) From front lot line: 50 feet;
(b) From either side lot line: 20 feet; and
(c) From rear lot line: 50 feet.
196 Swansea - Land Usage
(3) Maximum building height. 35 feet; provided, however, that, there shall be no height
restriction on agriculture-related accessory structures.
(Prior Code, § 20-504)
(E) Parking regulations. Off-street parking shall be provided for every use in the C District in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 154.115 through 154.133 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-505)
(F) Sign regulations. Any sign erected in the C District shall conform to the provisions of §§
154.145 through 154.158 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-506)
(G) Supplemental regulations. Only one dwelling shall be situated on any lot in the C District.
(Prior Code, § 20-507) (Ord. 1411, passed 5-2-2005; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.071 “SR-1” - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
(A) General. The SR-1 Single-Family Residential District is designed to provide for larger
single-family residential development and is intended to create an environment of homes on larger
lots than might be typical for urbanized residential areas. The regulations for this district are intended
to stabilize and preserve existing single-family neighborhoods, and to promote similar residential
development in the future.
(Prior Code, § 20-601)
(B) Permitted uses. The following shall be considered permitted uses in the SR-1 District:
(1) Single-family dwellings;
(2) Government uses of the village;
(3) Temporary buildings or trailers for construction purposes and for a period not to exceed
the period of construction;
(4) Accessory uses, buildings and structures in accordance with § 154.056 of this chapter;
(5) Playgrounds, parks and recreational or community centers or grounds;
(6) Home occupations in accordance with § 154.059(G) or (H) of this chapter; and
(7) Schools, elementary and junior high.
(Prior Code, § 20-602)
Zoning 197
(C) Special uses. The following shall be considered special uses in the SR-1 District and allowed
only in accordance with § 154.213(A) of this chapter:
(1) Government uses other than those of the village;
(2) Utility substations in accordance with § 154.059(F) of this chapter;
(3) Home occupations in accordance with § 154.059(G) or (H) of this chapter; and
(4) Schools, high school.
(Prior Code, § 20-603)
(D) Area/bulk restrictions. The following area/bulk restrictions shall apply to all buildings or
structures in the SR-1 District.
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Lot area: 12,000 square feet;
(b) Lot width: 100 feet; and
(c) Lot depth: 120 feet; 100 feet for lots fronting on the radius of cul-de-sacs, or
fronting on a “partial cul-de-sac” as a “bump out” on the outside radius of a roadway curve.
(2) Minimum setbacks.
(a) From front lot line: 25 feet;
(b) From either side lot line: ten feet; and
(c) From rear lot line: 25 feet.
(3) Maximum building height. The lesser of 35 feet or two and one-half stories.
(Prior Code, § 20-604)
(E) Parking regulations. Off-street parking shall be provided for every use in the SR-1 District
in accordance with the provisions of §§ 154.115 through 154.133 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-605)
(F) Sign regulations. Any sign erected in the SR-1 District shall conform to the provisions of §§
154.145 through 154.158 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-606)
198 Swansea - Land Usage
(G) Supplemental regulations.
(1) One structure per lot. Only one principal structure shall be situated on any lot in the
SR-1 District.
(2) Mobile and manufactured homes restricted. Mobile and manufactured homes shall be
restricted in the SR-1 District in accordance with the following.
(a) No mobile or manufactured homes shall be brought into or placed anywhere in the
SR-1 District.
(b) No existing mobile or manufactured home in the SR-1 District shall be
immobilized.
(c) It shall be unlawful to replace any existing mobile or manufactured home located in
the SR-1 District.
(Prior Code, § 20-607)
(Ord. 1438, passed 2-8-2006; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.072 “SR-2” - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
(A) General. The SR-2 Single-Family Residential District is designed to provide for prime
single-family residential development and is intended to stabilize and preserve existing single-family
neighborhoods and to promote similar residential development in the future.
(Prior Code, § 20-608)
(B) Permitted uses. The following shall be considered permitted uses in the SR-2 District:
(1) Single-family dwellings;
(2) Playgrounds, parks and recreational or community centers or grounds;
(3) Government uses of the village;
(4) Temporary buildings or trailers for construction purposes and for a period not to exceed
the period of construction;
(5) Accessory uses, buildings and structures in accordance with § 154.056 of this chapter;
(6) Home occupations in accordance with § 154.059(G) or (H) of this chapter; and
(7) Schools, elementary and junior high.
(Prior Code, § 20-609)
Zoning 199
(C) Special uses. The following shall be considered special uses in the SR-2 District and allowed
only in accordance with § 154.213(A) of this chapter:
(1) Churches and related religious facilities;
(2) Government uses other than those of the village;
(3) Schools, high school;
(4) Home occupations in accordance with § 154.059(G) or (H) of this chapter;
(5) Utility substations in accordance with § 154.059(F) of this chapter; and
(6) Mobile classrooms, temporary.
(Prior Code, § 20-610) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
(D) Area/bulk restrictions. The following area/bulk restrictions shall apply to all buildings or
structures in the SR-2 District.
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Lot area: 9,600 square feet;
(b) Lot width: 80 feet; and
(c) Lot depth: 120 feet; 100 feet for lots fronting on the radius of cul-de-sacs, or
fronting on a “partial cul-de-sac” as a “bump out” on the outside radius of a roadway curve.
(2) Minimum setbacks.
(a) From front lot line: 25 feet;
(b) From either side lot line: ten feet; and
(c) From rear lot line: 25 feet.
(3) Maximum building height. The lesser of 35 feet or two and one-half stories.
(Prior Code, § 20-611)
(E) Parking regulations. Off-street parking shall be provided for every use in the SR-2 District
in accordance with the provisions of §§ 154.115 through 154.133 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-612)
200 Swansea - Land Usage
(F) Sign regulations. Any sign erected in the SR-2 District shall conform to the provisions of §§
154.145 through 154.158 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-613)
(G) Supplemental regulations.
(A) One structure per lot. Only one principal structure shall be situated on any lot in the
SR-2 District.
(2) Mobile and manufactured homes restricted. Mobile and manufactured homes shall be
restricted in the SR-2 District in accordance with the following.
(a) No mobile or manufactured homes shall be brought into or placed anywhere in the
SR-2 District.
(b) No existing mobile or manufactured home in the SR-2 District shall be
immobilized.
(c) It shall be unlawful to replace any existing mobile or manufactured home located in
the SR-2 District.
(Prior Code, § 20-614)
(Ord. 1438, passed 2-8-2006; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.073 “SR-3” - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
(A) General. The SR-3 Single-Family Residential District is designed to provide for singlefamily
residential development and is intended to stabilize and preserve existing single-family
neighborhoods, and to promote similar residential development in the future.
(Prior Code, § 20-615)
(B) Permitted uses. The following shall be considered permitted uses in the SR-3 District:
(1) Single-family dwellings;
(2) Playgrounds, parks and recreational or community centers or grounds;
(3) Government uses of the village;
(4) Temporary buildings or trailers for construction purposes and for a period not to exceed
the period of construction;
(5) Accessory uses, buildings and structures in accordance with § 154.056 of this chapter;
(6) Home occupations in accordance with § 154.059(G) or (H) of this chapter; and
Zoning 201
(7) Schools, elementary and junior high.
(Prior Code, § 20-616)
(8) Modular homes in accordance with SR-3 District.
(C) Special uses. The following shall be considered special uses in the SR-3 District and allowed
only in accordance with § 154.213(A) of this chapter:
(1) Churches and related religious facilities;
(2) Government uses other than those of the village;
(3) Schools, high school;
(4) Home occupations in accordance with § 154.059(G) or (H) of this chapter;
(5) Utility substations in accordance with § 154.059(F) of this chapter; and
(6) Mobile classrooms, temporary.
(Prior Code, § 20-617)
(D) Area/bulk restrictions. The following area/bulk restrictions shall apply to all buildings or
structures in the SR-3 District.
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Lot area: 8,400 square feet;
(b) Lot width: 70 feet; and
(c) Lot depth: 120 feet; 100 feet for lots fronting on the radius of cul-de-sacs, or
fronting on a “partial cul-de-sac” as a “bump out” on the outside radius of a roadway curve.
(2) Minimum setbacks.
(a) From front lot line: 25 feet;
(b) From either side lot line: ten feet; and
(c) From rear lot line: 25 feet.
(3) Maximum building height. The lesser of 35 feet or two and one-half stories.
(Prior Code, § 20-618)
202 Swansea - Land Usage
(E) Parking regulations. Off-street parking shall be provided for every use in the SR-3 District
in accordance with the provisions of §§ 154.115 through 154.133 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-619)
(F) Sign regulations. Any sign erected in the SR-3 District shall conform to the provisions of §§
154.145 through 154.158 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-620)
(G) Supplemental regulations; one structure per lot. Only one principal structure shall be
situated on any lot in the SR-3 District.
(Ord. 1438, passed 2-8-2006; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.074 “SR-4” - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
(A) General. The SR-4 Single-Family Residential District is designed to provide for singlefamily
residential development in neighborhoods of older homes on smaller lots, typical of residential
areas urbanized prior to zoning regulations. The regulations for this district are intended to stabilize
and preserve existing neighborhoods while promoting the development and rehabilitation of
affordable single-family dwellings.
(Prior Code, § 20-622)
(B) Permitted uses. The following shall be considered permitted uses in the SR-4 District:
(1) Single-family dwellings;
(2) Public libraries, playgrounds, parks and recreational or community centers or grounds;
(3) Government uses of the village;
(4) Temporary buildings or trailers for construction purposes and for a period not to exceed
the period of construction;
(5) Accessory uses, buildings and structures in accordance with § 154.056 of this chapter;
(6) Home occupations in accordance with § 154.059(G) or (H) of this chapter;
(7) Modular homes in accordance with division (G)(3) below; and
(8) Schools, elementary and junior high.
(Prior Code, § 20-623)
Zoning 203
(C) Special uses. The following shall be considered special uses in the SR-4 District and allowed
only in accordance with § 154.213(A) of this chapter:
(1) Churches and related religious facilities;
(2) Government uses other than those of the village;
(3) Schools, high school;
(4) Home occupations in accordance with § 154.059(G) or (H) of this chapter;
(5) Utility substations in accordance with § 154.059(F) of this chapter;
(6) Manufactured homes in accordance with division (G)(2) below; and
(7) Mobile classrooms, temporary.
(Prior Code, § 20-624)
(D) Area/bulk restrictions. The following area/bulk restrictions shall apply to all buildings or
structures in the SR-4 District.
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Lot area: 6,000 square feet;
(b) Lot width: 50 feet; and
(c) Lot depth: 120 feet; 100 feet, for lots fronting on the radius of cul-de-sacs, or
fronting on a “partial cul-de-sac” as a “bump out” on the outside radius of a roadway curve.
(2) Minimum setbacks.
(a) From front lot line: 25 feet;
(b) From either side lot line: ten feet; and
(c) From rear lot line: 25 feet.
(3) Maximum building height. The lesser of 35 feet or two and one-half stories.
(Prior Code, § 20-625)
(E) Parking regulations. Off-street parking shall be provided for every use in the SR-4 District
in accordance with the provisions of §§ 154.115 through 154.133 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-626)
204 Swansea - Land Usage
(F) Sign regulations. Any sign erected in the SR-4 District shall conform to the provisions of §§
154.145 through 154.158 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-627)
(G) Supplemental regulations.
(1) One structure per lot. Only one principal structure shall be situated on any lot in the
SR-4 District.
(2) Manufactured homes. Every manufactured home erected in the SR-4 District shall:
(a) Be comprised of two sections joined at the site and placed on a permanent
foundation;
(b) Be located on a single lot of record;
(c) Meet all applicable Department of Housing and Urban Development codes;
(d) Be eligible for long-term mortgage financing;
(e) Be taxed as real property; and
(f) Be visually compatible with other single-family residential dwellings.
(3) Modular homes. Every modular home erected in the SR-4 District shall:
(a) Be placed on a permanent foundation;
(b) Be located on a single lot of record;
(c) Meet all adopted building codes and comply with all building inspection
requirements;
(d) Be eligible for long-term mortgage financing;
(e) Be taxed as real property; and
(f) Be visually compatible with other single-family residential dwellings.
(4) Replacement. Replacement of any existing mobile or manufactured home located in the
SR-4 District shall only be allowed by special use permit, and only when the replacement home is
new.
(Prior Code, § 20-628)
(Ord. 1438, passed 2-8-2006; Ord. 1619, passed 7-5-2011; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
Zoning 205
§ 154.075 “MR-1” - TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
(A) General. The MR-1 Two-Family Residential District is designed to provide areas suitable
for single-family dwellings, duplexes and uniplexes, and to stabilize and preserve such areas for
similar residential development in the future.
(Prior Code, § 20-701)
(B) Permitted uses. The following shall be considered permitted uses in the MR-1 District:
(1) Two-family dwellings, as defined;
(2) Single-family dwellings;
(3) Playgrounds, parks and recreational or community centers or grounds;
(4) Government uses of the village;
(5) Temporary buildings or trailers for construction purposes and for a period not to exceed
the period of construction;
(6) Accessory uses, buildings and structures in accordance with § 154.056 of this chapter;
and
(7) Home occupations in accordance with § 154.059(G) or (H) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-702)
(C) Special uses. The following shall be considered special uses in the MR-1 District and
allowed only in accordance with § 154.213(A) of this chapter:
(1) Churches and related religious facilities;
(2) Government uses other than those of the village;
(3) Schools;
(4) Home occupations in accordance with § 154.059(G) or (H) of this chapter;
(5) Utility substations in accordance with § 154.059(F) of this chapter;
(6) Nursing homes in accordance with § 154.059(B) of this chapter; and
(7) Mobile classrooms, temporary.
(Prior Code, § 20-703)
206 Swansea - Land Usage
(D) Area/bulk restrictions. The following area/bulk restrictions shall apply to all buildings or
structures in the MR-1 District, except those defined as a uniplex.
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Lot area: 12,000 square feet;
(b) Lot width: 100 feet; and
(c) Lot depth: 120 feet.
(2) Minimum setbacks.
(a) From front lot line: 25 feet;
(b) From either side lot line: ten feet; and
(c) From rear lot line: 25 feet.
(3) Maximum building height. The lesser of 35 feet or two and one-half stories.
(Prior Code, § 20-704)
(E) Area/bulk restrictions for a uniplex. The following area/bulk restrictions, rather than those
stipulated above, shall apply to all uniplex structures, as defined, in the MR-1 District.
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Lot area: 6,000 square feet;
(b) Lot width: 50 feet; and
(c) Lot depth: 120 feet.
(2) Minimum setbacks.
(a) From front lot line: 25 feet;
(b) From either side lot line: ten feet;
(c) From party wall lot line: none; and
(d) From rear lot line: 25 feet.
Zoning 207
(3) Maximum building height. The lesser of 35 feet or two and one-half stories.
(Prior Code, § 20-705)
(F) Parking regulations. Off-street parking shall be provided for every use in the MR-1 District
in accordance with the provisions of §§ 154.115 through 154.133 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-706)
(G) Sign regulations. Any sign erected in the MR-1 District shall conform to the provisions of
§§ 154.145 through 154.158 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-707)
(H) Supplemental regulations.
(1) One building per lot. Only one principal building shall be situated on any lot in the MR-
1 District.
(2) Mobile and manufactured homes restricted. Mobile and manufactured homes shall be
restricted in the MR-1 District in accordance with the following.
(a) No mobile or manufactured homes shall be brought into or placed anywhere in the
MR-1 District.
(b) No existing mobile or manufactured home in the MR-1 District shall be
immobilized.
(c) It shall be unlawful to replace any existing mobile or manufactured home located in
the MR-1 District.
(Prior Code, § 20-708)
(Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.076 “MR-2” - MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
(A) General. The MR-2 Multi-Family Residential District is designed to provide areas suitable
the creation and maintenance of stable and enduring multiple-family housing by establishing
limitations on the use, character and density of such land development so as to avoid conflicts with
natural topography, existing development or the arrangement and location of existing or planned
community facilities and the social needs of the community.
(Prior Code, § 20-709)
(B) Permitted uses. The following shall be considered permitted uses in the MR-2 District:
(1) Multiple-family dwellings, as defined;
(2) Condominiums;
208 Swansea - Land Usage
(3) Townhouses;
(4) Single-family dwellings;
(5) Playgrounds, parks and recreational or community centers or grounds;
(6) Government uses of the village;
(7) Specialized living accommodations, as defined;
(8) Temporary buildings or trailers for construction purposes and for a period not to exceed
the period of construction;
(9) Accessory uses, buildings and structures in accordance with § 154.056 of this chapter;
and
(10) Home occupations in accordance with § 154.059(G) or (H) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-710)
(C) Special uses. The following shall be considered special uses in the MR-2 District and
allowed only in accordance with § 154.213(A) of this chapter:
(1) Two-family dwellings, as defined;
(2) Churches and related religious facilities;
(3) Government uses other than those of the village;
(4) Schools;
(5) Home occupations in accordance with § 154.059(G) or (H) of this chapter;
(6) Utility substations in accordance with § 154.059(F) of this chapter;
(7) Nursing homes in accordance with § 154.059(B) of this chapter; and
(8) Mobile classrooms, temporary.
(Prior Code, § 20-711)
(D) Area/bulk restrictions. The following area/bulk restrictions shall apply to all buildings or
structures in the MR-2 District.
(1) Minimum lot area. The greater of 12,000 square feet, or 2,000 square feet per dwelling
unit.
Zoning 209
(2) Minimum lot width. The greater of 100 feet, or ten feet per dwelling unit, whichever is
greater.
(3) Minimum lot depth. 120 feet.
(4) Minimum setbacks.
(a) From front lot line: 25 feet;
(b) From either side lot line: ten feet; and
(c) From rear lot line: 25 feet.
(5) Maximum building height. The lesser of 35 feet or two and one-half stories.
(Prior Code, § 20-712)
(E) Parking regulations. Off-street parking shall be provided for every use in the MR-2 District
in accordance with the provisions of §§ 154.115 through 154.133 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-713)
(F) Sign regulations. Any sign erected in the MR-2 District shall conform to the provisions of
§§ 154.145 through 154.158 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-714)
(G) Supplemental regulations.
(1) Refuse containers. All refuse containers jointly serving residents of multi-family
dwellings within this district shall be tightly-covered and placed in visually-screened areas in
accordance with the following provisions.
(a) The owner of every building, structure or premises shall provide and maintain in
good condition and repair, a sufficient number of refuse containers for the temporary storage of all
refuse accumulating between collections.
(b) It shall be the duty of the owner of every building, structure or premises, to cause
to be removed, at his or her own cost and expense, at least once each week, all refuse deposited in
such containers.
(2) Mobile and manufactured homes restricted. Mobile and manufactured homes shall be
restricted in the MR-2 District in accordance with the following.
(a) No mobile or manufactured homes shall be brought into or placed anywhere in the
MR-2 District.
210 Swansea - Land Usage
(b) No existing mobile or manufactured home in the MR-2 District shall be
immobilized.
(c) It shall be unlawful to replace any existing mobile or manufactured home located in
the MR-2 District.
(Prior Code, § 20-715)
(Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.077 “MH-1” - MOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
(A) General. The MH-1 Mobile Home District is primarily intended to provide areas suitable
for the placement of mobile homes on individual and privately-owned lots.
(Prior Code, § 20-801)
(B) Permitted uses. The following shall be considered permitted uses in the MH-1 District:
(1) Mobile homes or manufactured homes, in accordance with all applicable requirements
of this section and this chapter;
(2) Playgrounds, parks and recreational or community centers or grounds;
(3) Government uses of the village;
(4) Temporary buildings or trailers for construction purposes and for a period not to exceed
the period of construction;
(5) Accessory uses, buildings and structures in accordance with § 154.056 of this chapter;
and
(6) Home occupations in accordance with § 154.059(G) or (H) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-802)
(C) Special uses. The following shall be considered special uses in the MH-1 District and
allowed only in accordance with § 154.213(A) of this chapter:
(1) Mobile home parks, in accordance with all applicable regulations of this section and this
chapter;
(2) Multiple-family dwellings, as defined;
(3) Churches and related religious facilities;
(4) Government uses other than those of the village;
(5) Schools;
Zoning 211
(6) Home occupations in accordance with § 154.059(G) or (H) of this chapter;
(7) Utility substations in accordance with § 154.059(F) of this chapter;
(8) Nursing homes in accordance with § 154.059(B) of this chapter; and
(9) Mobile classrooms, temporary.
(Prior Code, § 20-803)
(D) Area/bulk restrictions. The following area/bulk restrictions shall apply to all buildings or
structures in the MH-1 District.
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Lot area: 6,000 square feet;
(b) Lot width: 50 feet; and
(c) Lot depth: 120 feet.
(2) Minimum setbacks.
(a) From front lot line: 25 feet;
(b) From either side lot line: ten feet; and
(c) From rear lot line: 25 feet.
(3) Maximum building height. The lesser of 35 feet or two and one-half stories.
(Prior Code, § 20-804)
(E) Parking regulations. Off-street parking shall be provided for every use in the MH-1 District
in accordance with the provisions of §§ 154.115 through 154.133 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-805)
(F) Sign regulations. Any sign erected in the MH-1 District shall conform to the provisions of
§§ 154.145 through 154.158 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-806)
(G) Supplemental regulations.
(1) One building per lot. Only one principal building or structure shall be situated on any
lot in the MH-1 District, and no mobile home or manufactured home shall be placed on a lot upon
which another principal building exists.
212 Swansea - Land Usage
(2) Compliance with Manufactured Home Code. Every mobile home or manufactured home
in the MH-1 District shall conform to the provisions of Ch. 151 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 20-807)
(Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.078 “MH-2” - MOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
(A) General. The MH-2 Mobile Home Residential District is designed to provide areas suitable
the creation and maintenance of mobile home parks. Although “lots” in a mobile home park may not
be classified as “lots of record”, for the purpose of establishing bulk/area regulations, all mobile
home parks shall be developed in a manner so that zoning lots are designated for each manufactured
or mobile home. For the purpose of enforcement, the restrictions in division (D) below shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 20-808)
(B) Permitted uses. The following shall be considered permitted uses in the MH-2 District:
(1) Mobile homes or manufactured homes, in accordance with all applicable requirements
of this section and this chapter;
(2) Playgrounds, parks and recreational or community centers or grounds;
(3) Government uses of the village;
(4) Temporary buildings or trailers for construction purposes and for a period not to exceed
the period of construction;
(5) Accessory uses, buildings and structures in accordance with § 154.056 of this chapter;
and
(6) Home occupations in accordance with § 154.059(G) or (H) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-809)
(C) Special uses. The following shall be considered special uses in the MH-2 District and
allowed only in accordance with § 154.213(A) of this chapter:
(1) Home occupations in accordance with § 154.059(G) or (H) of this chapter; and
(2) Manufactured offices, as defined, and the uses therein, but only when new.
(Prior Code, § 20-810)
Zoning 213
(D) Area/bulk restrictions. The following area/bulk restrictions shall apply to all buildings or
structures in the MH-2 District.
(1) Minimum lot area.
(a) For those parks established and approved prior to 1-1-1980, the minimum lot area
shall be 2,100 square feet.
(b) For those parks established and approved after 1-1-1980, the minimum lot area
shall be 4,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot frontage.
(a) Lots on a cul-de-sac: 30 feet, at the pavement; and
(b) All other lots: 50 feet, at the pavement.
(3) Minimum setbacks, parks established and approved before 1-1-1980.
(a) From any park property line: as established;
(b) From any park street: five feet;
(c) Open space between sides of mobile homes: ten feet;
(d) Open space between ends of mobile homes: five feet; and
(e) From any detached accessory building or structure: ten feet.
(4) Minimum setbacks, parks established and approved after 1-1-1980.
(a) From any park property line: 25 feet;
(b) From any park street: 15 feet;
(c) From another mobile home: 20 feet; and
(d) From any detached accessory building or structure: ten feet.
(5) Maximum building height. The lesser of 35 feet or two and one-half stories.
(Prior Code, § 20-811)
214 Swansea - Land Usage
(E) Parking regulations. Off-street parking shall be provided for every use in the MH-2 District
in accordance with the provisions of §§ 154.115 through 154.133 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-812)
(F) Sign regulations. Any sign erected in the MH-2 District shall conform to the provisions of
§§ 154.145 through 154.158 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-813)
(G) Supplemental regulations.
(1) One building per lot. Only one principal building or structure shall be situated on any
lot in the MH-2 District, and no mobile home or manufactured home shall be placed on a lot upon
which another principal building exists.
(2) Compliance with Manufactured Home Code. Every mobile home or manufactured home
in the MH-2 District shall conform to the provisions of Ch. 151 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 20-814)
(Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.079 “HB” - HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT.
(A) General. The HB Highway Business District is intended to accommodate and regulate strip
commercial developments and compatible uses, both retail and wholesale, which draw their patrons
primarily from the motoring public. Such uses typically require direct access to major streets and
large off-street parking and loading facilities.
(Prior Code, § 20-901)
(B) Permitted uses. Provided all the use restrictions of this district are observed, the following
shall be considered permitted uses in the HB District:
(1) Accounting, bookkeeping and auditing services;
(2) Agricultural implements; sales and service;
(3) Ambulance and paramedic services;
(4) Animal hospitals and clinics;
(5) Antique stores;
(6) Apparel stores;
(7) Appliance stores;
Zoning 215
(8) Architectural and planning services;
(9) Art galleries, commercial;
(10) Art and school supply stores;
(11) Auction rooms or barns;
(12) Auto accessory stores;
(13) Auto dealers, new or used;
(14) Auto driving instruction;
(15) Auto washing, including the use of mechanical conveyers, blowers and steam cleaning;
(16) Auto renting facilities;
(17) Auto service stations;
(18) Auto undercoating and rustproofing services;
(19) Bakeries, wholesale;
(20) Banks, Savings and Loans, and other financial institutions;
(21) Bars, taverns, and lounges;
(22) Barber and hairstyling shops;
(23) Beauty parlors;
(24) Beverages, nonalcoholic, bottling and distributing;
(25) Bicycle stores; sales, rental and repair;
(26) Boat sales, repair and services;
(27) Book and stationery stores;
(28) Bowling alleys;
(29) Building materials and products; sales and storage;
216 Swansea - Land Usage
(30) Building trades showrooms and shops;
(31) Business and office machine sales and services;
(32) Business Condominiums, requirements of § 154.079 need to be met;
(33) Bus passenger stations;
(34) Camera stores;
(35) Camper sales;
(36) Candy and confectionery stores;
(37) Catering establishments;
(38) China and glassware stores;
(39) Churches, chapels, temples and synagogues;
(40) Clothing and costume rental;
(41) Clubs and lodges;
(42) Contractors; offices and shops;
(43) Convenience stores;
(44) Cosmetics;
(45) Dairy products stores;
(46) Dance/performing arts studios;
(47) Department stores;
(48) Detective agencies;
(49) Drapery stores;
(50) Dressmaking;
(51) Dry cleaners and laundromats;
Zoning 217
(52) Dry goods stores;
(53) Drug stores;
(54) Dwelling, single-family;
(55) Electrical repair services;
(56) Employment agencies;
(57) Engineering and surveying services;
(58) Equipment rental and leasing services;
(59) Extermination services;
(60) Fast-food or drive-in restaurants;
(61) Farmers co-ops;
(62) Floor covering stores;
(63) Floral shops;
(64) Funeral parlors;
(65) Furniture stores;
(66) Garages, public;;
(67) Gift shops;
(68) Glass cutting and glazing establishments;
(69) Governmental uses of the village;
(70) Grocery stores;
(71) Gymnasiums, health clubs, and spas;
(72) Hardware stores;
(73) Hobby shops;
218 Swansea - Land Usage
(74) Home appliance stores, repair shops;
(75) Ice cream stores;
(76) Indoor movie theaters;
(77) Indoor tennis or racquetball clubs;
(78) Insurance agencies;
(79) Jewelry stores;
(80) Laboratories; medical, dental, or optical;
(81) Landscaping services;
(82) Lithographers;
(83) Leather goods and luggage stores;
(84) Locksmiths;
(85) Machinery sales and services;
(86) Mail order houses;
(87) Martial arts studios;
(88) Meat markets;
(89) Medical and dental clinics, supplies;
(90) Messenger and telegraph services;
(91) Mobile and manufactured home sales;
(92) Model homes and garage displays;
(93) Monument sales;
(94) Motels;
(95) Motor vehicle repair and servicing facilities;
Zoning 219
(96) Motorcycle sales;
(97) Music stores;
(98) Newspaper and periodical publishers;
(99) Notions stores;
(100) Nurseries and greenhouses;
(101) Office supply and stationery stores;
(102) Offices including medical, dental, legal, optical philanthropic, charitable, fraternal, notfor-
profit, and other such services;
(103) Package liquor stores;
(104) Paint and wallpaper stores;
(104) Painting and decorating businesses;
(106) Parking lots and garages;
(107) Parks and playgrounds;
(108) Payday loan establishments:
(109) Pet shops or animal hospitals in an enclosed building;
(110) Photography, commercial studio;
(111) Police or fire stations;
(112) Post offices;
(113) Public libraries, art galleries, and museums;
(114) Radio and television stations;
(115) Radio, television, and stereo sales;
(116) Real estate agencies;
(117) Record stores;
220 Swansea - Land Usage
(118) Recording or sound studios;
(119) Recreational and community centers;
(120) Recreational vehicle sales;
(121) Rectories, parsonages, and parish houses;
(122) Repair shops; shoes and clothing;
(123) Restaurants;
(124) Sharpening and grinding businesses;
(125) Shoe stores;
(126) Sporting goods stores;
(127) Swimming pools, public or private;
(128) Tailors;
(129) Taxicab garages;
(130) Telephone exchange and equipment buildings;
(131) Temporary buildings or trailers for construction purposes and for a period not to exceed
the period of construction;
(132) Tennis clubs and courts, outdoors;
(133) Tire, battery, and other motor vehicle accessory services;
(134) Tobacco shops;
(135) Toy stores;
(136) Trailer sales and rentals (house trailers);
(137) Travel agencies;
(138) Variety stores;
(139) Veterinary clinics;
Zoning 221
(140) Video Stores, rental and sales;
(141) Accessory uses, buildings, and structures in accordance with § 154.056.
(C) Special uses. Provided, all the use restrictions of this district are observed, the following
shall be considered special uses in the HB District and allowed only in accordance with § 154.213(A)
of this chapter:
(1) Amusement establishments;
(2) Athletic fields;
(3) Arboretums or botanical gardens;
(4) Arcades or amusement halls;
(5) Archery ranges;
(6) Billiard and pool halls;
(7) Business, art, dance or commercial schools;
(8) Colleges, junior colleges, and universities;
(9) Convalescent homes, nursing homes, homes for the aged, homes for the ill or
physically infirm, intermediate care facilities, sheltered care facilities, skilled nursing homes, and
specialized living accommodations;
(10) Day care centers, nursery schools, and pre-schools;
(11) Development less than 175 feet from any public school;
(12) Dormitories;
(13) Dwelling, multiple-family;
(14) Elementary and Jr. high schools;
(15) Fairgrounds and exhibition grounds;
(16) Federal, state, county or municipal garages;
(17) Forest preserves;
222 Swansea - Land Usage
(18) Gaming establishments;
(19) Golf courses; public and private;
(20) Golf driving ranges;
(21) Governmental uses other than those of the village;
(22) Greenhouses;
(23) High schools;
(24) Historic sites;
(25) Hookah lounges;
(26) Hospitals;
(27) Hotels;
(28) Indoor skating rinks;
(29) Independent living facility;
(30) Kennels;
(31) Kiddie parks;
(32) Meeting halls;
(33) Massage establishments (as defined), in accordance with this chapter;
(34) Miniature golf courses;
(35) Mobile classrooms, temporary;
(36) Motels;
(37) Racetracks;
(38) Seminaries, monasteries, convents, and retreat houses;
(39) Shooting ranges;
(40) Stadiums and auditoriums;
Zoning 223
(41) Telecommunication facilities;
(42) Towing services;
(43) Transit or transportation facilities;
(44) Utility substations in accordance with Section 20-416;
(45) Vocational schools;
(46) Warehousing and storage;
(47) Wholesale business's.
(D) Area/bulk restrictions. The following area/bulk restrictions shall apply to all buildings or
structures in the HB District.
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Lot area: 18,000 square feet;
(b) Lot width: 120 feet; and
(c) Lot depth: 150 feet.
(2) Minimum setbacks.
(a) From front lot line: 30 feet;
(b) From either side lot line: 20 feet; and
(c) From rear lot line: 25 feet.
(3) Maximum building height. Three stories, with a maximum height of 50 feet.
(Prior Code, § 20-904)
(E) Parking regulations. Off-street parking shall be provided for every use in the HB District in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 154.115 through 154.133 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-905)
(F) Sign regulations. Any sign erected in the HB District shall conform to the provisions of §§
154.145 through 154.158 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-906)
224 Swansea - Land Usage
(G) Supplemental regulations. The purpose of this section is to provide visual buffers and reduce
the negative effects associated with accessory functions of business establishments, which may be
detrimental to other property values in the immediate area. Accessory functions can include, but not
be limited to, outside storage, outside repairs and outside displays of merchandise. Proper screening
of refuse containers and outside storage areas can reduce the unsightliness associated with these
areas. Also, visual screening between commercial and residential districts helps ease the transition
from one district to the next. Overall, these regulations are intended to make commercial properties
more aesthetically pleasing to all adjacent properties and the motoring public.
(1) Repairs indoors. All repair and maintenance services shall be conducted completely
within enclosed structures.
(2) Outside storage. Outside storage areas may be open to the sky, but shall be enclosed by
a wall or solid fence at least eight feet high.
(3) Outside display of merchandise. Merchandise displayed outside of any structure within
any business district, whether placed on the ground, on a platform or on or in a vehicle, shall be
displayed no less that 30 feet from the front property line. Exceptions:
(a) Automobile, truck, motorcycle, RV and boat dealerships;
(b) Merchandise displayed between gasoline dispenser pumps at auto service stations;
(c) Lumber yards; and
(d) Rental equipment
(4) Refuse containers. All refuse generated by facilities located within this district shall be
stored in tightly-covered containers placed in visually-screened areas and in accordance with the
following provisions Exception: containers used for paper recycling are not required to be placed
within visually screened areas.
(a) The standard refuse container required by this chapter shall be a receptacle of
impervious material and sturdy construction, with a tight-fitting cover and equipped with handles
properly placed to facilitate handling.
(b) The occupant of every building, structure or premises used or maintained in
connection with any business or occupation, shall provide and maintain in good condition and repair
a sufficient number of refuse containers for the temporary storage of all refuse accumulating between
collections.
(c) It shall be the duty of the occupant of every building, structure or premises used or
maintained in connection with any business or occupation, to cause to be removed, at his or her own
cost and expense, at least once each week, all refuse produced therein.
Zoning 225
(d) Every person owning or controlling any hotel, restaurant, café or retail food
establishment where more than 32 gallons of refuse is normally produced each week shall cause all
garbage to be placed in sanitary refuse containers and shall cause all substances deposited in such
containers to be removed daily from his or her premises and to be disposed of at his or her own
expense.
(5) Screening. Along the side and rear lot lines of any business use which abut a residential
district, screening shall be installed in the form of a wall, solid fence or closely-planted shrubbery,
which is at least six feet high and which completely blocks the view from the adjacent residential
property.
(Prior Code, § 20-907)
(H) Special regulations, business condominiums.
(1) Business condominiums shall be required to conform to all of the area bulk restrictions
contained in division (D) above. The minimum lot size shall be determined by measurements of the
lot upon which the structure shall be situated. Minimum setbacks shall be determined from the
location of the building structure upon the building lot. Private ownership of individual portions of a
building shall in no way effect minimum setback requirements for that lot.
(2) All uses which occupy a building condominium unit must be in conformity with division
(B) above, reflecting permitted uses in a Highway Business District or may be special uses permitted
under division (C) above; provided, however, that, all procedures and requirements of the Land
Development Code with regard to special uses have been complied with.
(3) The developer of a business condominium unit shall submit a maintenance agreement,
which shall be signed by each individual owner of any unit within the condominium complex. Said
maintenance agreement shall provide for cooperative maintenance of all common areas including
parking areas so as to ensure for the future maintenance of the business condominium.
(Prior Code, § 20-908)
(Ord. 1464, passed 8-7-2006; Ord. 1473, passed 11-6-2006; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.080 “PB” - PLANNED BUSINESS DISTRICT.
(A) General.
(1) The PB Planned Business District is intended to provide for maximum commercial site
design and utilization in areas favorable for commercial growth, but which may experience a variety
of developmental problems. These problems may relate to existing or future traffic patterns, land
acquisition, topography, utilities and related areas. The PB District provides maximum flexibility for
the developer to create an attractive, profitable, commercial enterprise while allowing the village to
maximize vehicular and pedestrian safety, reduce potential capital expenditures for public
improvements and create a more attractive community.
226 Swansea - Land Usage
(2) Although the primary intent of the PB District is to provide for commercial
development, the district also provides for the combination of different types of uses into a planned
unit development. As an example, a parcel of property could be utilized as a planned unit
development and contain a restaurant, retail shops, offices and multiple-family housing, all coexisting
as an integrated complex.
(Prior Code, § 20-909)
(B) Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the PB District; provided, they are
approved by the Board of Trustees and conform to such conditions and restrictions as the Board of
Trustees may deem reasonably necessary or appropriate for the health, safety and welfare of the
public:
(1) Accounting, bookkeeping and auditing services;
(2) Agricultural implements; sales and service;
(3) Ambulance and paramedic services
(4) Amusement establishments;
(5) Animal hospitals and clinics;
(6) Antique stores;
(7) Apparel stores;
(8) Appliance stores;
(9) Arcades or amusement halls;
(10) Architectural and planning services;
(11) Art galleries, commercial;
(12) Art and school supply stores;
(13) Auction rooms or barns;
(14) Auto accessory stores;
(15) Auto dealers, new or used;
(16) Auto driving instruction;
(17) Auto laundries and car washing facilities
Zoning 227
(18) Auto renting facilities;
(19) Auto repair, major’;
(20) Auto repair, minor;
(21) Auto service stations;
(22) Auto undercoating and rustproofing services;
(23) Bakeries;
(24) Banks, savings and loans, and other financial institutions;
(25) Bars, taverns, and lounges;
(26) Barber and hairstyling shops;
(27) Beauty parlors;
(28) Bicycle stores; sales, rental and repair;
(29) Boat sales;
(30) Book and stationery stores;
(31) Bowling alleys;
(32) Building materials and products; sales and storage;
(33) Building trades showrooms and shops;
(34) Business and office machine sales and services;
(35) Bus passenger stations;
(36) Camera stores;
(37) Camper sales;
(38) Candy and confectionery stores;
(39) Catering establishments;
228 Swansea - Land Usage
(40) Child care centers;
(41) China and glassware stores;
(42) Churches, chapels, temples and synagogues;
(43) Clothing and costume rental;
(44) Clubs and lodges;
(45) Condominiums;
(46) Convalescent homes, nursing homes, homes for the aged, homes for the ill or
physically infirm, intermediate care facilities, skilled nursing homes, and specialized living
accommodations;
(47) Convenience stores;
(47A) Cosmetic tattooing;
(48) Dairy products stores;
(49) Dance/performing arts studios;
(50) Department stores;
(51) Detective agencies;
(52) Drapery stores;
(53) Dressmaking;
(54) Dry cleaners and laundromats;
(55) Dry goods store;
(56) Drug stores;
(57) Dwelling, multiple-family, conventionally constructed;
(58) Dwelling, single-family, conventionally constructed;
(59) Dwelling, two-family, conventionally constructed;
(60) Electrical repair services;
2018 S-1
Zoning 229
(61) Employment agencies;
(62) Engineering and surveying services;
(63) Equipment rental and leasing services;
(64) Extermination services;
(65) Fast-food or drive-in restaurants;
(66) Floor covering stores;
(67) Floral shops;
(68) Funeral parlors;
(69) Furniture stores;
(70) Gift shops;
(71) Governmental uses of the village;
(72) Grocery stores;
(73) Gymnasiums, health clubs, and spas;
(74) Hardware stoics;
(75) Hobby shops;
(76) Home appliance stores;
(77) Ice cream stores;
(78) Independent/supportive living facilities;
(79) Indoor movie theater;
(80) Indoor tennis or racquetball clubs;
(81) Insurance agencies;
(82) Jewelry stores;
(83) Kennels;
2018 S-1
230 Swansea - Land Usage
(84) Laboratories; medical, dental, or optical;
(85) Landscaping services;
(86) Libraries;
(87) Lithographers;
(88) Leather goods and luggage stores;
(89) Locksmiths;
(90) Martial arts studios;
(91) Machinery sales and services;
(92) Mail order houses;
(93) Meat markets;
(94) Medical and dental clinics;
(95) Messenger and telegraph services;
(96) Massage establishments (as defined), in accordance with this chapter;
(97) Miniature golf courses;
(98) Mobile and manufactured home sales;
(99) Mobile classrooms, temporary;
(100) Model homes and garage displays;
(101) Monument sales;
(102) Motor vehicle repair and servicing facilities;
(103) Motorcycle sales;
(104) Music stores;
(105) Newspaper and periodical publishers;
(106) Notions stores;
2018 S-1
Zoning 231
(107) Nurseries and greenhouses;
(108) Office supply and stationery stores;
(109) Offices including medical, dental, legal, philanthropic, charitable, fraternal, not-forprofit,
and other such services;
(110) Package liquor stores;
(111) Paint and wallpaper stores;
(112) Painting and decorating businesses;
(113) Parking lots and garages;
(114) Parks and playgrounds;
(115) Payday loan establishments;
(116) Pet shops;
(117) Photography, commercial studio;
(118) Planned unit developments;
(119) Post offices;
(120) Public libraries, art galleries, and museums;
(121) Radio and television stations;
(122) Radio, television, and stereo sales;
(123) Real estate agencies;
(124) Record stores;
(125) Recording or sound studios;
(126) Recreational and community centers;
(127) Recreational vehicle sales;
(128) Rectories, parsonages, and parish houses;
2018 S-1
232 Swansea - Land Usage
(129) Repair shops; shoes and clothing;
(130) Restaurants;
(130A) Retail ice and water vending;
(131) Sharpening and grinding businesses;
(132) Shoe stores;
(133) Sporting goods stores;
(134) Swimming pools, public or private;
(135) Tailors;
(136) Taxi cab garages;
(137) Telephone exchange and equipment buildings;
(138) Telecommunication facilities;
(139) Tennis clubs and courts, outdoors;
(140) Tire, battery, and other motor vehicle accessory services;
(141) Tobacco shops;
(142) Townhouses;
(143) Toy stores;
(144) Travel agencies;
(145) Variety stores;
(146) Video Stores, rentals and sales; and
(147) Temporary buildings or trailers for construction purposes and for a period not to exceed
the period of construction.
(C) Sign regulations. Any sign erected in the PB District shall conform to the provisions of §§
154.115 through 154.133 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-911)
2018 S-1
Zoning 233
(D) Special procedures for the PB District. The provisions of this section shall apply to new
construction and to those additions, alterations and accessory uses exceeding 15% of the area of any
existing structure.
(1) Required site plan submissions. The developer shall submit a site plan containing the
following pertinent information to the Zoning Administrator:
(a) The existing natural topographic features of the project area and its immediate
surroundings;
(b) The number of any proposed dwelling units by type and gross density per acre;
(c) The location, size, character and number of all proposed buildings, structures and
uses;
(d) The location and size of proposed off-street parking, loading and pedestrian and
vehicular traffic circulation; and its relationship to the adjacent circulation system;
(e) Landscaping, erosion and sedimentation control features;
(f) Location of public and/or private utilities and facilities proposed to serve the
subject area, including water supply, sewage and drainage facilities;
(g) Proposed finished grade of the site; and
(h) Perspective or such other drawings as are necessary to indicate the relative
character and compatibility of the different land uses of the proposed development with the
immediate area as well as within the project area.
(2) Required narrative submissions. The developer shall submit a written narrative
containing at least the following pertinent information to the Zoning Administrator:
(a) A development schedule providing guidelines and sequence for the completion of
the proposed development;
(b) A description of the economic viability of the development may be required to
include a market analysis, cash flow projections and expected types of funding;
(c) The nature and extent of clearing and grading; and
(d) A statement of the present ownership of all land within the subject area. Unified
control after construction shall include homeowner associations, trust indentures, deed restrictions
and other building agreements for assuring operation and maintenance of common land and
improvements.
234 Swansea - Land Usage
(3) Required impact statement. Unless specifically exempted, the developer shall submit an
impact statement containing at least the following pertinent information to the Zoning Administrator:
(a) Anticipated kinds of commercial and industrial development and the projected
employment;
(b) Volume and nature of projected traffic;
(c) Sewage generation and treatment; and
(d) Drainage facility and system requirements.
(Prior Code, § 20-912)
(E) Issuance of permits.
(1) General. The Zoning Administrator shall not issue any permit for any proposed
development restricted by the special procedures listed under division (D) above until:
(a) The developer has submitted all pertinent information listed in division (D) above;
(b) The Planning Commission has reviewed the proposed development and has found
that said proposed development complies with the provisions of division (D) above;
(c) The Village Board of Trustees has acted on the Planning Commission’s
recommendation, and has imposed any necessary conditions on a development proposal in order to
assure compliance with the provisions of division (D) above; and
(d) The developer has revised his or her proposal as necessary to conform to the
conditions imposed by the Board of Trustees.
(2) Issuance of certificate of occupancy. The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a
certificate of occupancy for a development in the PB District until such development has been
substantially completed in accordance with the approved development plan.
(3) Minor changes to approved plans. Minor changes in approved development plans may
be made provided that said plans are reviewed by the Planning Commission to assure compliance
with the terms of division (D) above.
(4) Duration of approval. The approval of any proposed development within the Planned
Business District shall be invalid one year after approval by the Board of Trustees unless the
development, as submitted and approved, has been substantially implemented by the developer.
(Prior Code, § 20-913)
Zoning 235
(F) Outside display of merchandise.
(1) Merchandise displayed outside of any structure within any business district, whether
placed on the ground, on a platform or on or in a truck, shall be displayed no less that 30 feet from
the front property line.
(2) Exceptions:
(a) Automobile, truck, motorcycle, RV and boat dealerships;
(b) Merchandise displayed between gasoline dispenser pumps at auto service stations;
(c) Lumber yards; and
(d) Rental equipment.
(Prior Code, § 20-914)
(Ord. 1455, passed 6-5-2006; Ord. 1473, passed 11-6-2006; Ord. 1475, passed 11-6-2006; Ord.
1545, passed 4-20-2009; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014; Ord. 1749, passed 4-25-2016; Ord. 1812,
passed 3-5-2018; Ord. 1817, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 154.081 “LI” - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
(A) General. The LI Light Industrial District is intended to provide for areas where light
industry, research facilities, warehouses and wholesale businesses may locate without detriment to
the remainder of the community. In these areas, a satisfactory correlation of factors required by such
uses exists or can be readily achieved.
(Prior Code, § 20-1001)
(B) Permitted uses. Provided all the use restrictions of this district are observed, the following
shall be considered permitted uses in the LI District:
(1) Assembly of semi-finished materials;
(2) Auto repair, major;
(3) Auto repair, minor;
(4) Auto service stations;
(5) Auto undercoating and rust-proofing services;
(6) Auto laundries and car washing facilities;
2018 S-1
236 Swansea - Land Usage
(7) Building materials and products, sales and storage;
(8) Building trades showrooms and shops;
(9) Bus passenger stations;
(10) Concrete mixing plants;
(11) Contractor or construction yards;
(12) Equipment rental and leasing services;
(13) Federal, state, county or municipal garages;
(14) Governmental uses;
(15) Laboratories, research and testing;
(16) Landscaping services;
(17) Microwave and radar tower installations;
(18) Monument manufacturing and sales;
(19) Motor vehicle repair and servicing facilities;
(20) Printing, publishing and lithography establishments;
(21) Public utility companies;
(22) Sharpening and grinding businesses;
(23) Telecommunication facilities, telecommunication towers;
(24) Towing services;
(25) Transit or transportation facilities;
(26) Warehousing and wholesaling establishments; and
(27) Utility substations.
(Prior Code, § 20-1002)
2018 S-1
Zoning 237
(C) Special uses. Provided all the use restrictions of this district are observed, the following
shall be considered special uses in the LI District and allowed only in accordance with the §
154.213(A) of this chapter:
(1) Junk yards;
(2) Towing and storage companies; and
(3) Tow storage lots.
(Prior Code, § 20-1003)
(D) Area/bulk restrictions. The following area/bulk restrictions shall apply to all buildings or
structures in the LI District.
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Lot area: 18,000 square feet;
(b) Lot width: 120 feet; and
(c) Lot depth: 150 feet.
(2) Minimum setbacks.
(a) From front lot line: 30 feet;
(b) From either side lot line: 20 feet; and
(c) From rear lot line: 25 feet.
(3) Maximum building height. 60 feet.
(Prior Code, § 20-1004)
(E) Parking regulations. Off-street parking shall be provided for every use in the LI District in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 154.115 through 154.133 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1005)
(F) Sign regulations. Any sign erected in the LI District shall conform to the provisions of §§
154.145 through 154.158 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1006)
238 Swansea - Land Usage
(G) Supplemental regulations.
(1) No nuisances. No production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair, sale or
storage of goods, materials or equipment shall unreasonably interfere with the use, occupancy or
enjoyment of neighboring properties or the community as a whole. Unreasonable interferences shall
include, but are not limited to, excessive traffic congestion, loud or shrill noises, excessive emission
of smoke, emission of toxic gases, excessive glare and noxious odors.
(2) Activities enclosed. All production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair
activities shall be conducted completely within enclosed buildings.
(3) Outside storage. Outside storage areas may be open to the sky, but shall be enclosed by
a solid wall or fence, at least eight feet high.
(4) Buffer strips. Wherever any industrial use located in this district abuts any residential or
conservation district, the owner shall install a 20-foot wide buffer strip consisting of densely planted
shrubbery that is at least five feet high when planted and that can be expected to reach a height of ten
feet when full grown.
(5) Dangerous materials. No building, structure or use within the LI District shall contain
or utilize explosives, flammable gases or liquids, or live animals, without prior approval from the
Zoning Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 20-1007)
(Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.082 “HI” - HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
(A) General. The HI Heavy Industrial District is intended to provide for areas where heavy
industries may locate without detriment to the remainder of the community. In these areas, a
satisfactory correlation of factors required by such uses exists or can be readily achieved.
(Prior Code, § 20-1008)
(B) Permitted uses.
(1) Manufacturing and industrial activities, including fabrication, processing, assembly,
disassembly, repairing, cleaning, servicing, testing, packaging and storage of materials, products and
goods that can be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings;
(2) Assembly of semi-finished materials;
(3) Auto repair, major;
(4) Auto repair, minor;
Zoning 239
(5) Auto service stations;
(6) Auto undercoating and rust-proofing services;
(7) Auto laundries and car washing facilities;
(8) Building materials and products, sales and storage;
(9) Building trades showrooms and shops;
(10) Concrete mixing plants;
(11) Contractor or construction yards;
(12) Equipment rental and leasing services;
(13) Federal, state, county or municipal garages;
(14) Governmental uses;
(15) Laboratories, research and testing;
(16) Landscaping services;
(17) Microwave and radar tower installations;
(18) Monument manufacturing and sales;
(19) Motor vehicle repair and servicing facilities;
(20) Printing, publishing and lithography establishments;
(21) Public utility companies;
(22) Sharpening and grinding businesses;
(23) Telecommunication facilities, telecommunication towers;
(24) Towing services;
(25) Transit or transportation facilities;
(26) Warehousing and wholesaling establishments; and
240 Swansea - Land Usage
(27) Utility substations.
(Prior Code, § 20-1009)
(C) Special uses.
(1) Junk yards;
(2) Towing and storage companies; and
(3) Tow storage lots.
(Prior Code, § 20-1010)
(D) Area/bulk restrictions. The following area/bulk restrictions shall apply to all buildings or
structures in the HI District.
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Lot area: 62,500 square feet;
(b) Lot width: 250 feet; and
(c) Lot depth: 250 feet.
(2) Minimum setbacks.
(a) From front lot line: 50 feet;
(b) From either side lot line: 20 feet; and
(c) From rear lot line: 50 feet.
(3) Maximum building height. 60 feet.
(Prior Code, § 20-1011)
(E) Parking regulations. Off-street parking shall be provided for every use in the HI District in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 154.115 through 154.133 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1012)
(F) Sign regulations. Any sign erected in the HI District shall conform to the provisions of §§
154.145 through 154.158 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1013)
Zoning 241
(G) Supplemental regulations.
(1) No nuisances. No production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair, sale or
storage of goods, materials or equipment shall unreasonably interfere with the use, occupancy or
enjoyment of neighboring properties or the community as a whole. Unreasonable interferences shall
include, but are not limited to, excessive traffic congestion, loud or shrill noises, excessive emission
of smoke, emission of toxic gases, excessive glare and noxious odors.
(2) Activities enclosed. All production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair
activities shall be conducted completely within enclosed buildings.
(3) Outside storage. Outside storage areas may be open to the sky, but shall be enclosed by
a solid wall or fence, at least eight feet high.
(4) Buffer strips. Wherever any industrial use located in this district abuts any residential or
conservation district, the owner shall install a 20-foot wide buffer strip consisting of densely planted
shrubbery that is at least five feet high when planted and that can be expected to reach a height of ten
feet when full grown.
(5) Dangerous materials. No building, structure or use within the HI District shall contain
or utilize explosives, flammable gases or liquids, or live animals, without prior approval from the
Zoning Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 20-1014)
(Ord. 1525, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.083 “FPO” - FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT.
(A) General. The FPO Floodplain Overlay District delineates areas that, in the absence of flood
protection measures, are subject to periodic flooding which may result in injury to or loss of life and
property, disruption of private and governmental services, impairment of the village tax base and the
need for extraordinary relief measures. The regulations of this section are intended to restrict
permitted development in floodplains to uses which have inherently low flood damage potential, and
to other uses whose flood damage potential can be lessened by appropriate protective measures.
(Prior Code, § 20-1101)
(B) Permitted and special uses. The FPO, as a secondary overlay district, has no affect on
permitted, special or prohibited uses in a primary zoning district, but rather imposes additional
restrictions on any development in any zoning district which also falls within the boundaries of the
floodplain.
(Prior Code, § 20-1102)
242 Swansea - Land Usage
(C) Supplemental regulations.
(1) All uses, whether permitted or special, that are located within the boundaries of the
FPO District shall not only meet all the requirements of the primary zoning district, but shall also be
adequately protected against flood damage.
(2) To assure such protection, the Zoning Administrator, after consultation with the Village
Engineer and other technically qualified persons, may require the developer to:
(a) Provide anchorage or additional weight to structures to resist flotation;
(b) Install water-tight doors and bulkheads;
(c) Use special paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage through walls;
(d) Install pumps to lower water levels in structures or to relieve external foundation
wall flood pressure;
(e) Reinforce walls to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or floating
debris;
(f) Install valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains so that the drains can be
closed to prevent backup of sewerage or storm runoff into structures;
(g) Locate electrical equipment and appliances above the level of the regulatory flood
elevation;
(h) Locate storage facilities for materials such as chemicals, explosives, flammable
liquids and toxic substances above the regulatory flood level;
(i) Fill and grade property in order to raise the level of the proposed building site
above the regulatory flood elevation; and/or
(j) Any other reasonable flood protection measures.
(3) All development in a floodplain or floodway shall conform to the provisions of Ch. 152
of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 20-1103)
(Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
Zoning243
NON-CONFORMITIES
§ 154.095 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
(A) The requirements imposed by this chapter are designed to secure adequate light, pure
air and safety from fire and other damages, to guarantee that the taxable value of land and building
throughout the village may be conserved, to prevent or lessen hazards to persons and damage to
property resulting from the accumulation of runoff storm or flood water, to preserve the sights, areas
and structures of historical, architectural and aesthetic importance and that the public health, safety,
comfort, morals and welfare may otherwise be promoted.
(B) Lots, structures and uses of land are structures that do not conform to the
requirements of the district in which they are located tend to impede appropriate development.
(C) The regulations of this subchapter are intended to alleviate such existing or potential
problems by encouraging the gradual elimination of non-conformities.
(Prior Code, § 20-1201) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.096 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
Any otherwise lawful non-conforming building or structure which exists on the effective date
of this chapter may lawfully remain, subject to the following provisions.
(A) Maintenance. A non-conforming structure may be maintained by ordinary repairs.
(B) Enlargement, alterations. A non-conforming building or structure shall not be altered
or enlarged in any way which would increase its non-conformity by:
(1) Adding an addition to an existing building or adding a separate building;
(2) Increasing in the area of lot used; or
(3) Changing business methods or the provision of new accessory facilities.
(C) Relocation. A non-conforming building or structure shall not be moved unless, after
relocation, it will conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it will be situated.
244 Swansea - Land Usage
(D) Reconstruction.
(1) A non-conforming building or structure which is destroyed by any means shall not be
reconstructed if the Zoning Administrator determines that the cost of such reconstruction exceeds
100% of the structure’s replacement value at the time of loss, unless, after reconstruction, the
structure will conform to all applicable regulations of the district in which it is located.
(2) In the event the Zoning Administrator determines the estimated cost of reconstruction is
equal to or less than 100% of the structure’s replacement value at the time of loss, repairs or
reconstruction shall be permitted; provided, such work begins within six months from the date the
damage occurred and is completed within one year after construction begins.
(3) The Zoning Administrator may require that the reconstruction cost estimate be made by
a bona fide construction contractor, and that the structure’s market value at the time of loss be
determined by a licensed real estate appraiser.
(4) The owner of the damaged structure shall be responsible for obtaining these estimates
on behalf of the Zoning Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 20-1202) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.097 NON-CONFORMING USES.
Any non-conforming use, otherwise lawfully existing on the effective date of this chapter, may
lawfully continue, subject to the following provisions.
(A) No non-conforming business use shall be extended or intensified so that the character of the
commercial activity changes and creates a greater adverse impact on the zoning district in which it is
located.
(B) A non-conforming use shall not be changed, except to a use that is permitted or special
under the applicable zoning regulations.
(C) When a non-conforming use is discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months, it shall
not thereafter be resumed, and any subsequent use of the land shall conform to the applicable district
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 20-1203) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
Zoning 245
§ 154.098 NON-CONFORMING VACANT LOT OF RECORD.
Any non-conforming vacant lot of record may, nonetheless, be developed for any use permitted
in that district if such vacant lot:
(A) Was recorded in the County Recorder of Deeds’ office prior to the effective date of this
chapter or any pertinent amendment thereto; and
(B) Is at least 30 feet wide.
(Prior Code, § 20-1204) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.099 TWO OR MORE LOTS IN COMMON OWNERSHIP.
(A) If two or more lots, or combination of lots and portions of lots, with continuous frontage,
were of record and in common ownership on the effective date of this chapter and, if one or more of
those lots does not meet the minimum width, depth or area requirements of the district in which it is
located, the land involved shall be considered an undivided parcel.
(B) No portion of any such parcel shall be developed, except in compliance with this chapter,
nor shall any such parcel be divided so as to create a lot that does not meet the requirements of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1205) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.100 NON-CONFORMITIES UNDER PERMIT AUTHORITY.
The regulations of this subchapter shall not effect the terms of any permit issued prior to the
effective date of this chapter, or any pertinent amendment thereto; provided that, the work authorized
by such permit is completed within a reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 20-1206) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.101 CERTIFICATES OF NON-CONFORMANCE.
At the request of the applicant, and following a thorough review of the specific building,
structure, lot or use, the Zoning Administrator, upon determining that said building, structure, lot or
use is legally non-conforming, shall issue a certificate of non-conformance in accordance with the
provisions of § 154.209 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1207) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
246Swansea - Land Usage
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
§ 154.115 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
In order to reduce congestion in public streets, off-street parking and loading facilities shall
be provided in accordance with this subchapter for all buildings, structures and uses erected or
established after 5-1-1988.
(Prior Code, § 20-1301) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.116 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(A) The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all zoning districts.
(B) The duty to provide and maintain off-street parking and loading facilities shall be the
joint and shared responsibility of the operator and the owner of the use or uses for which the offstreet
parking is required.
(C) The parking spaces in any off-street parking or loading facility which already existed
on 5-1-1988, shall not be reduced below the requirements and standards for the use or uses for which
the off-street parking is required.
(D) If the parking spaces in an off-street parking or loading facility which already exists on
the effective date of this chapter do not conform to the requirements of this subchapter, the existing
facilities shall not be further reduced below the requirements and standards for the use or uses for
which the off-street parking is required.
(E) If an existing building, structure or use is damaged or destroyed and subsequently
repaired or rebuilt, off-street parking and loading facilities equivalent to those maintained at the time
of such damage or destruction shall be restored, but additional spaces need not be provided.
(F) If any building, structure or use is enlarged or expanded, the owner of such use shall
provide additional off-street parking and loading facilities, as required by the provisions of this
section; provided, however, that, if the Zoning Administrator determines that such compliance is
clearly not possible, the owner shall be required to provide only the amount of additional parking
such enlargement or expansion would require as a separate use.
(G) If the existing use of a lot, building or structure is changed to a different use, the
owner of such use shall provide off-street parking and loading facilities as required by the provisions
of this section.
Zoning 247
(H) All off-street parking and loading facilities, whether provided in accordance with this
chapter, or in accordance with the provisions of any previous ordinance, shall be maintained as
required by this section.
(Prior Code, § 20-1302) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.117 PARKING LOT DESIGN STANDARDS.
(A) With the exception of parking spaces required for single-family and two-family residences,
every off-street parking lot hereafter established, shall be designed in accordance with the standards
listed herein.
(B) Typical parking configurations are depicted in App. A of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1303) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.118 REQUIREMENTS FOR PARKING SPACES.
Every parking space, designed for one vehicle, shall conform to the requirements below and
shall be designated by markings which clearly delineate each space, and which are laid and restored
as often as necessary to maintain such delineation.
(A) Minimum parking space width.
(1) Ninety-degree parking: ten feet;
(2) Sixty-degree parking: nine feet;
(3) Parallel parking: eight feet; and
(4) Handicapped parking: 16 feet.
(B) Minimum parking space length.
(1) Ninety-degree parking: 20 feet;
(2) Sixty-degree parking: 20 feet;
(3) Parallel parking: 22 feet; and
(4) Handicapped parking: 20 feet.
(C) Minimum parking space vertical clearance. All types: seven feet.
248 Swansea - Land Usage
(D) Accessible parking.
(1) Minimum number of accessible parking spaces. The minimum number of accessible
parking spaces shall be in accordance with the following table. Accessible parking spaces shall be
located on the shortest accessible route of travel to an accessible building entrance.
(2) Accessible parking spaces.
Total Parking Spaces Provided Required Minimum Number of
Accessible Space
1 to 5 1 (See Note A)
6 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
More than 1,000 20, plus one for each 100 over 1,000
NOTES TO TABLE:
Note A: The accessible space shall be provided, but is not required to be
designated as reserved for physically disabled.
(Prior Code, § 20-1304) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.119 REQUIREMENTS FOR PARKING LOT AISLES.
(A) The aisles of every parking lot hereafter established shall conform to the requirements
below:
(1) Ninety-degree parking: 22 feet;
(2) Sixty-degree parking: 18 feet; and
(3) Parallel parking: 22 feet.
Zoning 249
(B) Aisles between two rows of 60-degree parking shall be limited to one-way traffic.
(C) Aisles between other types of parking, or between rows of mixed types, may allow two-way
traffic, but shall conform to the more restrictive minimum aisle width.
(Prior Code, § 20-1305) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.120 REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESS.
(A) Every accessway in any residential or conservation zoning district, which is less than 100
feet in length and serves a parking lot containing eight or fewer parking spaces, shall be at least ten
feet wide.
(B) Every accessway in any residential or conservation zoning district, which is more than 100
feet in length or serves a parking lot containing more than eight parking spaces, shall be at least 20
feet wide; provided, however, that, when separate drives, each one-way, are designed for ingress
and egress, the minimum required width for each drive shall be reduced to ten feet.
(C) Every accessway for a parking lot located in any business or industrial zoning district, shall
be at least 24 feet wide; provided, however, that, when separate drives, each one-way, are designed
for ingress and egress, the minimum required width for each drive shall be reduced to 12 feet.
(D) Every parking lot shall be designed so that ingress to or egress from any parking space is by
way of an aisle or driveway, and not directly from a street or public right-of-way.
(E) No accessway to any parking lot shall be located within 30 feet of any corner formed by the
intersection of the right-of-way of two or more streets; provided, however, that, when an intersection
is regulated by traffic-control devices, the Zoning Administrator may increase this requirement in
order to reduce traffic hazards.
(F) Every parking lot ingress and egress shall be aligned so that it forms, as closely as is
possible, a right angle with the intersecting street.
(G) Curb cuts for the purpose of providing ingress or egress are subject to all relevant state,
county and village requirements and approvals.
(Prior Code, § 20-1306) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.121 REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION.
Every off-street parking area, including accessways and aisles, shall be graded and improved
with a compacted gravel base at least four inches thick, surfaced with at least two inches of asphalt
or similar impermeable, all-weather, dustless surface.
(Prior Code, § 20-1307) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
250 Swansea - Land Usage
§ 154.122 LIGHTING.
(A) Every off-street parking lot regularly used during nighttime hours shall be lighted to enable
safe access to parked vehicles.
(B) Lighting used to illuminate any parking lot shall be arranged or shielded so as to confine
direct light rays, to the greatest extent practicable, within the lot lines of the parking lot.
(Prior Code, § 20-1308) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.123 LANDSCAPING.
In order to reduce heat and glare and minimize the loss of natural vegetation common to the
construction of parking facilities, landscaping shall be provided and maintained in accordance with
the following provisions, for every property that contains ten or more parking spaces.
(A) A landscaping plan, either as a separate document or as an element of a more inclusive
development plan, shall accompany every application for an initial certificate of zoning compliance,
in which the applicant would be required to provide ten or more spaces.
(B) Every landscaping plan shall at least include the following information:
(1) The proposed type, amount, size and spacing of all plantings, including trees, shrubbery
and ground cover;
(2) The proposed size, construction materials and drainage of landscaped islands; and
(3) A sketch indicating the proposed spatial relationships of landscaped areas, parking
spaces, automobile circulation and pedestrian movement.
(C) (1) Any portion of every parking space is required to be located within 55 feet of a
landscaped island containing a minimum of one shade tree. Shade trees must be a canopy type and be
no less than three-inch caliper size at the time of installation. Shade trees located within ten feet of
perimeter area parking spaces may define the perimeter edge of the parking space nearest the
perimeter shade tree as a landscaped island. Existing significant shade trees on said property may be
used to satisfy the requirement of a shade tree.
(2) Exceptions:
(a) Accessible parking spaces are not required to be located within 55 feet of a
landscaped island containing a minimum of one shade tree; and
(b) Interior parking rows of properly-maintained existing parking lots are not required
to be located within 55 feet of a landscaped island containing a minimum of one shade tree.
Zoning 251
(D) All plant materials specified in landscape plans required under this section that are dead or
diseased shall be replaced in conformity with the approved plan with identical or like species in the
size required by the plan.
(Prior Code, § 20-1309) (Ord. 1552, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 1555, passed 10-5-2009; Ord. 1555,
passed 10-5-2009; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.124 LOCATION OF REQUIRED PARKING.
Every off-street parking lot shall be located in conformity with the following requirements.
(A) Single-family and two-family dwellings. Parking spaces accessory to any single-family or
two-family dwelling shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling and, with the exception of a
driveway, shall not be in the front yard.
(B) Multiple-family dwellings. Parking spaces accessory to any multiple-family dwelling shall be
located on the same lot as the dwelling, or on a commonly owned lot of the multiple-family buildings
such parking spaces are accessory to, and constructed so that no vehicle shall be required to be
moved in order to allow another vehicle to enter or exit the parking area.
(C) Business and industrial uses.
(1) Every off-street parking space accessory to any business or industrial use shall be
located within 500 feet of the use served; provided, however, that, no portion of any parking lot for
a non-residential use shall extend into any residential or conservation district, except by written
permission of the Zoning Administrator.
(2) In any business or industrial district, off-street parking facilities for different buildings
or uses may be provided collectively, if the total number of spaces collected together is not less than
the sum of the separate requirements for each use, and if all other pertinent regulations are observed.
(Prior Code, § 20-1310) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.125 LOADING AREA DESIGN STANDARDS.
Every off-street loading space hereafter established shall be designed in accordance with the
following standards.
(Prior Code, § 20-1311) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
252 Swansea - Land Usage
§ 154.126 REQUIREMENTS FOR LOADING SPACES.
Every loading space, designed for one vehicle, shall conform to the requirements below,
exclusive of any aisle or maneuvering area that may be required, and shall be designated by markings
which clearly delineate each space, and which are laid and restored as often as necessary to maintain
such delineation:
(A) Minimum loading space width: 12 feet;
(B) Minimum loading space length: 50 feet; and
(C) Minimum vertical clearance: 14 feet.
(Prior Code, § 20-1312) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.127 REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESS.
Every accessway between an off-street loading space and a street or alley shall be at least 12 feet
wide.
(Prior Code, § 20-1313) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.128 REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION.
Every off-street loading area shall be graded and improved with a compacted gravel base at least
seven inches thick, surfaced with at least two inches of asphalt or similar impermeable, all-weather,
dustless surface.
(Prior Code, § 20-1314) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.129 REQUIREMENTS FOR BUFFER STRIPS.
No loading space designed for vehicles exceeding a two-ton cargo capacity shall be developed
closer than 50 feet from the lot line of any lot located in a residential or conservation district, unless
such loading space is completely enclosed by a wall, a solid fence or closely-planted shrubbery, at
least ten feet in height and of sufficient density to block the view from residential property.
(Prior Code, § 20-1315) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.130 LOCATION OF REQUIRED LOADING SPACES.
Every off-street loading space shall be located on the same parcel of land as the use served, and
not closer than 50 feet to the intersection of the rights-of-way of two or more streets.
(Prior Code, § 20-1316) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
Zoning 253
§ 154.131 COMPUTATION OF REQUIRED SPACES.
In computing the number of parking and loading spaces required by this chapter, the Zoning
Administrator shall apply the following rules.
(A) (1) In computing the parking spaces required for a building or structure containing mixed
uses, the Zoning Administrator shall calculate the required number of parking spaces for each use,
and add the sums of those calculations in order to determine the total number of spaces required for
the building.
(2) For example, a lodge with a dance hall would require parking spaces for each use.
(B) If, in computing the number of parking or loading spaces required by this section, the
calculation results in the requirement of a fractional space, a fraction of less than one-half may be
disregarded, while a fraction of one-half or more shall be counted as one space.
(C) If, in computing the number of parking spaces required by this section, the gross floor area
for a specific use is less than that identified in the calculation formula, the Zoning Administrator
shall divide the gross floor area by the area indicated in the calculation formula and multiply the
result by the required number of spaces. For example, if a fast-food restaurant has a gross floor area
of 800 square feet, the Zoning Administrator shall divide 800 by 1,000 and multiple the resulting
0.80 by 30, thereby requiring 24 parking spaces for this specific use.
(D) If, in reviewing the classifications below, a particular use is not found, the Zoning
Administrator shall classify the use with other similar uses and calculate parking space requirements
according to the provisions for that classification.
(Prior Code, § 20-1317) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.132 TABLE OF PARKING SPACES, BY CLASSIFICATION.
(A) General.
(1) This section divides specific uses of property into classification groups.
(2) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for each use of a specific
parcel of property, shall be determined by identifying the classification group to which each use
belongs, and performing the calculation identified for that specific group.
(B) Class 1. The following uses shall be required to provide two parking spaces per dwelling
unit:
(1) Dwelling, single-family;
(2) Dwelling, two-family;
254 Swansea - Land Usage
(3) Dwelling, multiple-family, two or more bedrooms; and
(4) Mobile and manufactured homes.
(C) Class 2. The following uses shall be required to provide one and one-half parking spaces per
dwelling unit:
(1) Dwelling, multiple-family, one bedroom; and
(2) Dwelling, multiple-family, efficiency units.
(D) Class 3. The following uses shall be required to provide one parking space per dwelling
unit, lodging room or room for rent:
(1) Hotels;
(2) Motels;
(3) Dormitories;
(4) Private clubs and lodges with sleeping facilities; and
(5) Apartments for the elderly.
(E) Class 4. The following uses shall be required to provide one parking space per 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area, as defined:
(1) Convalescent homes, nursing homes, homes for the aged, homes for the ill or
physically infirm, intermediate care facilities, sheltered care facilities, skilled nursing homes and
specialized living accommodations;
(2) Independent/supportive living facilities;
(3) Seminaries, monasteries, convents and retreat houses; and
(4) Rectories, parsonages and parish houses.
(F) Class 5. The following uses shall be required to provide two parking spaces per 1,000
square feet of gross floor area:
(1) Day care centers, nursery schools and pre-schools;
(2) Extermination services;
Zoning 255
(3) Federal, state, county or municipal garages;
(4) Historic sites;
(5) Hospitals;
(6) Machinery sales and services;
(7) Mail order houses;
(8) Philanthropic and charitable institutions;
(9) Public libraries, art galleries and museums; and
(10) Radio and television stations.
(G) Class 6. The following uses shall be required to provide four parking spaces per 1,000
square feet of gross floor area:
(1) All professional, commercial, organizational and government offices not specifically
listed herein;
(2) Animal hospitals and clinics;
(3) Art galleries, commercial;
(4) Auto driving instruction, excluding storage of vehicles;
(5) Auto renting facilities, excluding storage of vehicles;
(6) Banks or savings and loans, without drive-in facilities;
(7) Business and office machine sales and services;
(8) Bus passenger stations;
(9) Catering establishments;
(10) Clothing and costume rental;
(11) Clubs and lodges, without sleeping facilities;
(12) Detective agencies;
256 Swansea - Land Usage
(13) Dressmaking;
(14) Employment agencies;
(15) Financial institutions and uses;
(16) Governmental administration buildings, without garages;
(17) Gymnasiums, health clubs and spas;
(18) Indoor tennis or racquetball clubs;
(19) Laboratories, medical, dental or optical;
(20) Laboratories, research and testing;
(21) Lithographers;
(22) Loan companies;
(23) Locksmiths;
(24) Medical and dental clinics;
(25) Not-for-profit corporations, service organizations or fraternal organizations;
(26) Painting and decorating businesses;
(27) Police or fire stations;
(28) Post offices;
(29) Recording or sound studios;
(30) Recreational and community centers;
(31) Repair shops, shoes and clothing;
(32) Sharpening and grinding businesses;
(33) Tailors;
(34) Taxicab garages, excluding storage of vehicles;
Zoning 257
(35) Telephone exchange and equipment buildings;
(36) Towing services, excluding storage of vehicles;
(37) Transit or transportation facilities; and
(38) Travel agencies.
(H) Class 7. The following uses shall be required to provide five parking spaces per 1,000
square feet of gross floor area:
(1) Auto service stations;
(2) Auto undercoating and rust-proofing services;
(3) Bowling alleys;
(4) Furniture stores;
(5) Leather goods and luggage stores; and
(6) Photography, commercial studio.
(I) Class 8. The following uses shall be required to provide six parking spaces per 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area:
(1) Antique stores;
(2) Apparel stores;
(3) Appliance stores;
(4) Art and school supply stores;
(5) Auto accessory stores;
(6) Bakeries;
(7) Barber and hairstyling shops;
(8) Beauty parlors;
(9) Bicycle stores, sales, rental and repair;
258 Swansea - Land Usage
(10) Book and stationery stores;
(11) Camera stores;
(12) Candy and confectionery stores;
(13) China and glassware stores;
(14) Department stores;
(15) Drapery stores;
(16) Dry cleaners and laundromats;
(17) Dry goods stores;
(18) Drug stores;
(19) Floor covering stores;
(20) Floral shops;
(21) Funeral parlors;
(22) Gift shops;
(23) Grocery stores;
(24) Hardware stores;
(25) Hobby shops;
(26) Home appliance stores;
(27) Ice cream stores;
(28) Jewelry stores;
(29) Meat markets;
(30) Music stores;
(31) Notions stores;
Zoning 259
(32) Office supply and stationery stores;
(33) Package liquor stores;
(34) Paint and wallpaper stores;
(35) Pet shops;
(36) Radio, television and stereo sales;
(37) Record stores;
(38) Shoe stores;
(39) Sporting goods stores;
(40) Tobacco shops;
(41) Toy stores; and
(42) Variety stores.
(J) Class 9. The following uses shall be required to provide ten parking spaces per 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area:
(1) Auction rooms or barns;
(2) Arcades or amusement halls;
(3) Billiard and pool halls;
(4) Bars, taverns and lounges;
(5) Convention and exhibition halls;
(6) Dance halls;
(7) Meeting halls;
(8) Restaurants, excluding fast-food or drive-in; and
(9) Indoor skating rinks.
260 Swansea - Land Usage
(K) Class 10. The following uses shall be required to provide 30 parking spaces per 1,000
square feet of gross floor area, plus six car holding spaces for every drive-in bay: fast-food or drivein
restaurants.
(L) Class 11. The following uses shall be required to provide one parking space per 1,000
square feet of gross floor area, plus one parking space per every 2,000 square feet of occupied land
area:
(1) Agricultural implements, sales and service;
(2) Archery ranges;
(3) Golf driving ranges; and
(4) Nurseries and greenhouses.
(M) Class 12. The following uses shall be required to provide three parking spaces per 1,000
square feet of gross floor area, plus one parking space per every 3,000 square feet of occupied land
area:
(1) Amusement establishments;
(2) Boat sales;
(3) Camper sales;
(4) Equipment rental and leasing services;
(5) Kiddie parks;
(6) Miniature golf courses;
(7) Mobile and manufactured home sales;
(8) Model homes and garage displays;
(9) Monument sales;
(10) Motor vehicle repair and servicing facilities;
(11) Motorcycle sales;
(12) New or used car dealers;
(13) Recreational vehicle sales;
Zoning 261
(14) Shooting ranges; and
(15) Tire, battery and other motor vehicle accessory services.
(N) Class 13. The following uses shall be required to provide one parking space per 5,000
square feet of occupied land area:
(1) Athletic fields;
(2) Arboretums or botanical gardens;
(3) Forest preserves;
(4) Grounds of non-commercial recreational clubs;
(5) Public parks and playgrounds;
(6) Swimming pools; provided, however, that, when a swimming pool is an isolated use,
parking shall be computed at a rate of one space per 75 square feet of water area; and
(7) Tennis clubs and courts, outdoors.
(O) Class 14. The following uses shall be required to provide five parking spaces per every
washing bay: auto laundries and car washing facilities.
(P) Class 15. The following uses shall be required to provide five-car handling spaces per every
drive-up teller window, plus four parking spaces per every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area:
drive-in banks, savings and loans and financial services.
(Q) Class 16. The following uses shall be required to provide one parking space per every five
students based on design capacity: elementary and junior high schools.
(R) Class 17. The following uses shall be required to provide one parking space per every three
students based on design capacity:
(1) Colleges, junior colleges and universities;
(2) Business, art, dance or commercial schools;
(3) High schools; and
(4) Vocational schools.
262 Swansea - Land Usage
(S) Class 13. The following uses shall be required to provide one parking space per every four
seats provided:
(1) Churches, chapels, temples and synagogues;
(2) Fairgrounds and exhibition grounds;
(3) Racetracks; and
(4) Stadiums and auditoriums.
(T) Class 19. The following uses shall be required to provide one parking space per every two
and one-half seats provided: indoor movie theaters.
(U) Class 20. The following uses shall be required to provide two parking spaces per every one
employee:
(1) Building materials and products, sales and storage;
(2) Building trades showrooms and shops;
(3) Concrete mixing plants;
(4) Contractor or construction yards;
(5) Landscaping services; and
(6) Microwave and radar tower installations.
(V) Class 21. The following uses shall be required to provide two parking spaces per every
three employees:
(1) All industrial uses not specifically mentioned otherwise;
(2) All essential services and public services not specifically mentioned otherwise; and
(3) Warehousing and wholesaling establishments.
(W) Class 22. The following uses shall be required to provide 100 parking spaces per nine holes:
golf courses, public and private.
(Prior Code, § 20-1318) (Ord. 1455, passed 6-5-2006; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
Zoning 263
§ 154.133 TABLE OF LOADING SPACES, BY CLASSIFICATION.
(A) General. The minimum number of off-street loading spaces required for each use of a
specific parcel of property shall be determined by reviewing the table below, identifying the
classification group to which each use belongs, and performing the calculation identified for that
specific group.
(B) Class 1. The following uses shall be required to provide one loading space for every
building containing between 10,000 and 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional
loading space per each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof:
(1) Amusement and recreational facilities;
(2) Banks and other financial institutions;
(3) Business and other professional offices;
(4) Convention and exhibition halls;
(5) Health and medical institutions;
(6) Hotels and motels containing retail shops, business or professional offices, convention
or exhibition halls or auditoriums;
(7) Public and administrative buildings;
(8) Radio and television studios;
(9) Recording studios;
(10) Heaters, indoor; and
(11) Funeral parlors and mortuaries.
(C) Class 2. The following uses shall be required to provide one loading space for every
building containing between 10,000 and 20,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional
loading space per each additional 200,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof:
(1) Apartment hotels;
(2) Auditoriums;
(3) Charitable institutions;
(4) Clubs and lodges;
264 Swansea - Land Usage
(5) Hotels and motels containing no retail shops, business or professional offices,
convention or exhibition halls or auditoriums;
(6) Meeting halls;
(7) Religious institutions;
(8) Multiple-family dwellings;
(9) Research and testing institutions; and
(10) Schools and educational facilities.
(D) Class 3. The following uses shall be required to provide one loading space for every
building containing between 5,000 and 40,000 square feet of gross floor area, and two loading spaces
for every building containing between 40,000 square feet and 100,000 square feet of gross floor
area, plus one additional loading space per each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or
fraction thereof:
(1) Assembly, manufacturing and fabricating establishments;
(2) Cartage, express and motor freight facilities;
(3) Cleaning, repairing, servicing and testing facilities;
(4) Laundries and dry cleaning facilities;
(5) Mail order businesses;
(6) Printing and publishing establishments; and
(7) Warehousing, storage and wholesaling establishments.
(E) Class 4. For all other uses, including, but not limited to, retail stores and restaurants and
other establishments handling the sale or consumption of food or beverages on the premises, loading
spaces shall be provided in accordance with the gross floor areas.
5,000 - 20,000 square feet 1 space
20,000-60,000 square feet 2 spaces
60,000- 100,000 square feet 3 spaces
For every additional 100,000 square feet or fraction thereof 1 space
(Prior Code, § 20-1319) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
Zoning265
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 154.145 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
(A) Attractive and integrated urban design features tend to improve the image of the
community, raise property values within the community, attract new business and residents to the
community and improve the overall quality of life of the community. Attention to urban design
features, therefore, is determined by the Board of Trustees of the village to be in the best economic
interest of the citizens and business owners of the village.
(B) (1) Signs, due to their inherent visibility and incursion upon the urban landscape,
represent a prominent urban design feature.
(2) The regulations contained in this subchapter were prepared in recognition of
the impact of signs as a prominent urban design feature and are intended to regulate type, area,
height, number, location, illumination, design and construction of signs permitted in the various
zoning districts throughout the village.
(3) The intent of this subchapter is, in part: to encourage the effective use of signs
as a means of communication in the village; to create a more attractive economic and business
climate; to minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public and private property; to
foster and improve the economic vitality of the community by enhancing and protecting the physical
appearance of the community; and to preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of the community.
(Prior Code, § 20-1401) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.146 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
Any sign not expressly permitted in this subchapter shall be deemed prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 20-1402) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.147 STRICTLY PROHIBITED SIGNS.
Except as specifically noted otherwise, the following signs and street graphics are strictly
prohibited throughout the village:
(A) Billboards. Any single or double-faced sign displaying messages or advertising not
associated with the premises on which said sign is located or to which it is fixed, subject to the
exceptions of § 154.152 of this chapter;
266 Swansea - Land Usage
(B) Signs in the public right-of-way. Temporary or permanent signs located in the public rightof-
way, except those listed in § 154.148(B)(7) and (B)(8) of this chapter;
(C) Mobile marquee signs. Freestanding signs, with permanent or changeable copy, illuminated
or non-illuminated, which are portable, with or without wheels, either continuously placed at a
specific location or periodically moved in or on a vehicle or trailer;
(D) Roof-mounted signs. Any sign erected or maintained on the roof of any building; and
(E) Signs attached to trees. Signs attached to trees, fences or public utility poles, other than
warning signs posted by government officials or public utilities, and pole banners as specified in §
154.148(B)(6) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1403) (Ord. 1637, passed 3-5-2012; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.148 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ANY ZONING DISTRICT.
(A) Notwithstanding § 154.150 of this chapter and its divisions, any sign or other street graphic
enumerated below that complies with the indicated requirements is permitted in any district of the
village.
(B) Such signs or street graphics shall not be debited against the displaying establishment’s sign
area allowance:
(1) Construction signs. Construction signs identifying the architects, engineers, contractors
and other individuals or firms involved with the construction, and/or announcing the character or
purpose of the building, but not advertising any product. Such signs shall not exceed five square feet
in any conservation or residential district, or 32 square feet in other districts, shall be confined to the
site of the construction, and shall be removed within 14 days after the issuance of the final occupancy
permit for the project;
(2) Real estate signs. Real estate signs indicating the sale, rental or lease of the premises on
which they are located. Such signs in residential districts shall not exceed five square feet. In other
districts, such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet; except that, when a parcel of property exceeds
ten acres, a sign as large as 32 square feet shall be allowed. Not more than one real estate sign per
street front shall be erected on any lot. Such signs shall be removed within seven days of the sale,
rental or lease;
(3) Real estate directional signs. Real estate directional signs indicating an open house or
the sale, rental or lease of property under development. Such signs shall be located on private
property, with permission from the owner of said property, and shall not exceed four square feet.
Open house signs shall not be erected more than five days prior to the scheduled showing and shall
be removed within 24 hours following;
Zoning 267
(4) Temporary signs. Temporary signs are signs erected on private property for a limited
period of time. Except for signs further regulated under division (B)(6) below, temporary signs shall
not exceed four square feet, shall be limited to not more than three such signs on any lot or premises.
Temporary signs shall be permitted only for 14 days before and three days after the specified event;
(5) Garage sale signs. Garage sale signs advertising a garage or yard sale to be held on
private residential property. Such signs shall not exceed four square feet, shall not be erected more
than two days prior to the scheduled sale and shall be removed immediately following;
(6) Public interest signs, commercial banners, street banners and pole banners.
(a) Public interest signs are temporary signs erected on private property which
publicize an event of general public interest that is to be held in the near future. Freestanding public
interest signs shall not exceed 32 square feet. Freestanding public interest signs and street banners
shall be permitted only for 14 days before and three days after the specified event.
(b) Commercial banners, which are erected on a wall or roof edge of any building to
advertise a store opening, sales event or similar activity, shall not exceed 32 square feet. Commercial
banners shall be displayed no more than 14 days before and three days after the specified event.
(c) Street banners are temporary signs spanning over the width of a public street,
which publicize an event of general public interest that is to be held in the near future. Street banners
shall not exceed 30 feet in length and four feet in height. Private advertising shall be limited to a
maximum of 20% of the gross area of the sign.
(d) Pole banners are signs attached to a utility pole that commemorate an event or a
matter of significant public interest. Pole banners mounted on public utility poles shall not exceed 30
inches wide by 66 inches tall. No more than two banners may be attached to any utility pole at a
given time. Pole banners shall be permitted for a time period as approved by the Board of Trustees.
(e) All public interest signs, commercial banners, street banners and pole banners
require a certificate of sign compliance in accordance with the provisions of § 154.210(A) of this
chapter.
(7) Governmental, public and directional signs. Governmental, public and directional signs
such as traffic-control signs, railroad crossing signs, legal notices, signs indicating the location of
underground cables, no trespassing signs, no parking signs, signs indicating the entrances and exits
of parking lots, signs welcoming visitors to the village and signs indicating the location of public
telephones and restrooms;
(8) Institutional signs. Institutional signs identifying a public, charitable, or religious
institution. Such signs located on the premises of such institutions shall adhere to the size restrictions
in § 154.149(A) of this chapter. Such signs located off premises require a certificate of sign
compliance in accordance with the provisions of § 154.210(A) of this chapter and shall conform to
State Department of Transportation regulations;
268 Swansea - Land Usage
(9) Integral signs. Integral signs carved into stone or inlaid so as to become part of the
building and containing such information as date of erection, name of building and memorial tributes;
(10) Subdivision entrance signs. Subdivision entrance signs are permanent signs identifying a
residential subdivision, office park or apartment complex. Such signs shall be located on private
property, contain no commercial advertising and shall not exceed 40 square feet;
(11) House numbers and/or name of occupant signs. House numbers and/or name of
occupant signs located on the lot to which the sign applies. Such signs shall contain no commercial
advertising, and shall not exceed four square feet;
(12) Interior signs. Signs located in the interior of any building or within an enclosed lobby
or court of any building or group of buildings; provided, such signs are designed and located to be
viewed exclusively by the patrons or residents of such buildings;
(13) Human signs. Temporary signs or placards carried or supported by individuals. Such
signs promoting a commercial activity or business shall be considered peddling or hawking and shall
meet the requirements of Ch. 111 of this code of ordinances; and
(14) Political signs. Political signs announcing candidates seeking public/political office
and/or political issues and other pertinent information. Political signs are permitted under this
subchapter as such signs are permitted under the laws of the state and the United States.
(Prior Code, § 20-1404) (Ord. 1637, passed 3-5-2012; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.149 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS.
In order to accomplish the purpose of this subchapter, the following general restrictions apply:
(A) Allowable sign area.
(1) Calculation. Sign area shall be calculated as the area within an imaginary rectangle
which, when drawn, would completely enclose all the letters, parts or symbols of the sign.
(2) Freestanding and projecting signs. Within the limitations and restrictions as further
provided in this subchapter, the total sign area of any freestanding and/or projecting signs which any
establishment is permitted to display, shall be computed in accordance with the following formula:
(a) One and one-half square feet of sign area per every one foot of street frontage for
the first 100 feet of such frontage; plus one square foot of sign area per each additional one foot of
such frontage in excess of 100 feet; provided, however, that, no establishment in any district shall
display more than 250 square feet of sign area on any street front with the exception of those listed in
division (A)(2)(b) below.
2018 S-1
Zoning 269
(b) Properties on which particularly large buildings are constructed shall be allowed a
maximum sign area subject to the following:
1. Buildings that are 50,000 to 100,000 square feet in size shall be allowed a
maximum sign area of 250 square feet, plus 10% or 275 square feet.
2. Buildings that are 100,000 to 150,000 square feet in size shall be allowed a
maximum sign area of 250 square feet, plus 20% or 300 square feet.
3. Buildings that are over 150,000 square feet in size shall be allowed a maximum
sign area of 250 square feet, plus 30% or 325 square feet.
(c) In calculating the sign area of a proposed sign that contains more than two faces,
the Zoning Administrator shall determine the sum of the areas of each face and divide by two,
assuring that the result does not exceed the allowable sign area for the property.
(d) The total allowable sign area shall include the sum of the areas of all freestanding
and projecting signs.
(3) Flush-mounted signs. Within the limitations and restrictions as further provided in this
subchapter, the total sign area of any flush-mounted, wall or window sign which any establishment is
permitted to display shall be computed in accordance to the following formula:
(a) Single tenant buildings. One square foot of sign area per every one linear foot of
primary street frontage; provided, however, that, no establishment in any district shall display more
than 375 square feet of sign area;
(b) Multi-tenant buildings. For multi-tenant retail (strip centers) or mixed-use buildings
one square foot of sign area per every one linear foot of primary store frontage. For multi-tenant
office buildings, one square foot of sign area per every one linear foot of street frontage; provided,
however, that, no multi-tenant office building in any district shall display more than 375 square feet
of sign area; and
(c) Inclusions. The total allowable sign area shall include the sum of the areas of all
flush-mounted, wall and window signs.
(B) Sign illumination. Unless restricted otherwise in this chapter, illumination of signs is
permitted, subject to the following requirements:
(1) No sign shall employ red, yellow or green lights in such a manner as to confuse or
interfere with vehicular traffic.
(2) Electronic message boards shall only use lights of a single color on a contrasting
background.
2018 S-1
270 Swansea - Land Usage
(3) No sign shall have blinking, flashing or fluttering lights or any other illuminating device
which has a changing light intensity, brightness or color.
(4) The light from any illuminated sign shall be shaded, shielded or directed so that it
creates neither a nuisance to adjacent property nor a traffic hazard.
(C) Dynamic display signs. Unless restricted otherwise in this chapter, dynamic display signs
shall be permitted, subject to the following requirements:
(1) No animation or movement of any content is permitted.
(2) The dynamic display portion of any sign constructed after May 1, 2018 shall be a
maximum of 25 square feet and must be placed on the lower half of the sign structure.
(3) Each displayed message must remain visible for at least ten seconds before being
replaced with another message.
(4) Signs with dynamic displays are to be located at least 200 feet from any residentiallyzoned
property or, if placed at a distance of 200 feet or less, meet the following criteria:
(a) Be a flush-mounted sign placed on the building or a free-standing (monument style)
sign structure;
(b) The maximum dynamic display sign area shall be 15 square feet and must be placed
on the lower half of the sign structure. Free-standing sign structures with a dynamic display shall
have a maximum dynamic display height of six feet; and
(c) Be turned off between the hours of 11:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m.
(5) The light from any dynamic display sign shall be shaded, shielded or directed so that it
creates neither a nuisance to adjacent property nor a traffic hazard.
(6) Dynamic display signs shall be allowed no greater than 5,000 candela per square meter
(NITS) during daylight hours and 350 candela per square meter (NITS) from dusk until dawn.
(7) Compliance amnesty. Existing dynamic display signs which cannot immediately comply
with division (C)(3) above shall be allocated 30 days from April 16, 2018, to take the necessary steps
ensure that the dynamic display portion of the sign adheres to these performance standards. If not in
conformance by this date, the portion of the sign which contains the dynamic display shall be turned
off or otherwise be non-operational until the owner of the sign can make the necessary changes to the
sign and demonstrate conformance with division (C)(3) above.
2018 S-1
Zoning 270A
(8) No person or contractor shall install or alter a dynamic display sign that, because of its
position, shape, movement or color, interferes with the proper functioning of a traffic sign, signal or
that constitutes a traffic hazard.
(9) Dynamic display sign locations shall be marked on the subject property prior to
installation and demonstrate that they adhere to the distance requirements of this division (C).
(D) Sign movement. Any sign that revolves, rotates or mechanically moves in any manner is
strictly prohibited.
(E) Sign location and maintenance.
(1) No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free access or egress
from any door, window, fire escape or driveway.
(2) No sign shall be erected or maintained in such a manner that it interferes with, obstructs
the view of or is likely to be confused with any authorized traffic-control device.
(3) Every sign shall be designed and constructed in conformity with any applicable
provisions of the adopted building codes.
(4) Every sign shall be maintained in a safe, neat and attractive condition by its owner.
(5) Signs at vacant businesses, including the posts or other supports thereof, may remain,
but shall be maintained in a safe and neat condition, free of loose parts and peeling paint.
(Prior Code, § 20-1405) (Ord. 1564, passed 2-16-2010; Ord. 1637, passed 3-5-2012; Ord. 1699,
passed 3-17-2014; Ord. 1819, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.150 SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS.
In order to accomplish the purpose of this subchapter, the following special restrictions apply.
(A) Conservation districts. No sign other than those permitted by § 154.148 of this chapter shall
be erected in any conservation district.
(B) Residential districts. No sign other than those permitted by § 154.148 of this chapter shall
be erected in any residential district.
(C) Business and industrial districts. No establishment located in any business district or in any
industrial district shall display on any street front a total area of sign in excess of the allowance
derived by application of the provisions and formula set forth in § 154.149(A) of this chapter.
Additionally, signs
2018 S-1
270B Swansea - Land Usage
in any business or industrial district shall conform to the requirements indicated in the following
sections of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1406) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 154.999
2018 S-1
Zoning 271
§ 154.151 FREESTANDING SIGNS.
(A) A freestanding sign is any sign permanently mounted which stands apart from and is not
attached to any building or structure.
(B) Freestanding signs shall comply with the following regulations.
(1) Freestanding signs shall be limited to one per lot in those districts where said signs are
allowed; provided, however, that, any establishment on a lot with frontage on two streets shall be
allowed to erect one freestanding sign on each, of the two street frontages if each sign meets all other
provisions of this code, including the total allowable sign area for such signs.
(2) No part of any freestanding sign shall be located closer than ten feet from the public
right-of-way or obstruct motorists’ view.
(3) It is preferred that all freestanding signs shall be monument style unless an issue of
particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved
would result in an excessive structure or contribute to an unsafe condition.
(4) The maximum height of any freestanding sign shall not exceed 30 feet above the curb
line.
(Prior Code, § 20-1407) (Ord. 1564, passed 2-16-2010; Ord. 1631, passed 12-5-2011; Ord. 1699,
passed 3-17-2014; Ord. 1811, passed 2-20-2018) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.152 OFF-PROPERTY FREESTANDING SIGNS.
(A) Off-premises signs (special use permit required).
(1) (a) Special use permit. Off-premise signs shall be permitted only by a special use
permit and following section 154.213 of this code.
(b) Exception. Any establishment which lacks frontage on a public street may erect a
freestanding sign at the closest intersection of any public road indicating the access way to the
establishment
(2) (a) Anyone wishing to erect an offsite sign must receive written permission from the
state or county along the street/highways mentioned below.
1. Frank Scott Parkway;
2. Highway 159;
3. Highway 161.
2018 S-1
272 Swansea - Land Usage
(b) Anyone erecting an off-property freestanding sign must submit either a legal
description or a recorded easement of the area that the erected sign will be located and/or proof of
owner ship of a parcel along the above mentioned roads.
(B) Temporary off-property sign. Temporary off-property freestanding signs would need the
owner's permission in writing to erect the temporary sign and the exact location of said sign on the
parcel. Temporary signs may not exceed 60 days.
(C) There shall be no more than one sign per lot/parcel for each business, the gross
allowable sign area shall not exceed 200 square feet per lot. The height shall be restricted to 15 feet
above any above mentioned street grade.
Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.153 PROJECTING SIGNS.
(A) A projecting sign is any sign which is attached to a building or structure, but which projects
from the plane of the wall to which it is attached by more than 18 inches.
(B) Projecting signs shall comply with the following regulations.
(1) No establishment shall display more than one projecting sign on any street front.
(2) No projecting sign shall:
(a) Extend above the roof line of the building to which it is attached;
(b) Extend below a point eight feet above the center of the frontage pavements;
(c) Project over a driveway or beyond the curb line of any public street;
(d) Project more than four feet from the building to which it is attached; or
(e) Exceed four square feet in area.
(Prior Code, § 20-1409) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.154 FLUSH-MOUNTED SIGNS.
(A) A flush-mounted sign is any sign mounted in such a way that the plane of its face is parallel
to the plane of the wall to which it is attached, including those integrated into the surface of the wall
itself. Flush-mounted signs also include window signs, which are, defined as any sign visible from
the exterior
Zoning 273
of the building or structure, which is painted directly on the surface of a window or affixed to or
suspended immediately behind the window for the, purpose of informing the passerby of the identity
of the proprietor or business, or of the product or service which can be obtained on the premises.
(B) Flush-mounted, wall and window signs shall comply with the following regulations:
(1) No flush-mounted, wall or window sign shall:
(a) Project more than 18 inches from the wall or surface to which it is attached; or
(b) Extend above the roof line of the building to which it is attached.
(2) Flush-mounted wall or window signs may be placed on any side or sides of a building
except the rear, but signs on side walls that lack street frontage shall not be illuminated.
(Prior Code, § 20-1410) (Ord. 1648, passed 5-21-2012; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see
§ 154.999
§ 154.155 CANOPY, AWNING AND MARQUEE SIGNS.
(A) Signs mounted flush on any canopy, awning, marquee or similar overhang shall be
considered flush-mounted or wall signs and shall meet the requirements of § 154.154 of this chapter.
(B) Signs suspended beneath a canopy, awning, marquee or similar overhang shall be
considered projecting signs and shall meet the requirements of § 154.152 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1411) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.156 CERTIFICATE OF SIGN COMPLIANCE.
Any person, firm or corporation wishing to erect any sign other than those expressly permitted
by § 154.148 of this chapter shall first secure a certificate of sign compliance in accordance with the
provisions of § 154.210(A) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1412) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.157 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
Any otherwise lawful non-conforming sign which exists on the effective date of this subchapter
may lawfully remain, subject to the following provisions.
(A) Maintenance. A non-conforming sign may be maintained by ordinary repairs.
274 Swansea - Land Usage
(B) Alterations, enlargement. A non-conforming sign shall not be altered or enlarged in any way
which would increase its non-conformity, except as follows.
(1) Re-facing the sign to change the name of the business is permitted.
(2) Enlargement of a sign is permitted; provided that, the enlargement complies with the
allowable sign area and sign illumination regulations of this subchapter.
(C) Relocation. A non-conforming sign shall not be moved unless, after relocation, it will
conform to all of the regulations of this subchapter.
(D) Reconstruction.
(1) A non-conforming sign which is destroyed by any means shall not be reconstructed
unless, after reconstruction, the sign will conform to all applicable regulations of this subchapter.
Exception: a non-conforming sign which is destroyed by any means shall not be reconstructed if the
Zoning Administrator determines that the cost of such reconstruction exceeds 50% of the sign’s
replacement value at the time of loss, unless, after reconstruction, the sign will conform to all
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located.
(2) In the event the Zoning Administrator determines the estimated cost of reconstruction is
equal to or less than 50% of the sign’s replacement value at the time of loss, repairs or
reconstruction shall be permitted; provided, such work begins within six months from the date the
damage occurred and is completed within one year after construction begins.
(3) The Zoning Administrator may require that the reconstruction cost estimate be made by
a bona fide sign contractor, and that the sign’s value at the time of loss be determined by a licensed
real estate appraiser.
(4) The owner of the damaged sign shall be responsible for obtaining these estimates on
behalf of the Zoning Administrator.
(E) Vacant/discontinued businesses. Signs in place at vacant businesses may remain and be
reused.
(F) Non-conformities under permit authority. The regulations of this subchapter shall not effect
the terms of any permit issued prior to the effective date of this subchapter, or any pertinent
amendment thereto; provided that, the work authorized by such permit is completed within a
reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 20-1413) (Ord. 1564, passed 2-16-2010; Ord. 1578, passed 6-7-2010; Ord. 1637,
passed 3-5-2012; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.158 VIOLATIONS.
(A) General.
Zoning 275
(1) The Zoning Administrator or his or her designee shall order the removal of any sign
erected or maintained in violation of this subchapter, by giving seven days’ notice in writing to the
owner of such sign, or to the owner of the building, structure or premises on which such sign is
located.
(2) Such notice shall require the owner to remove the sign or to bring it into compliance, at
the owner’s expense.
(3) The Zoning Administrator or his or her designee may remove a sign immediately,
without notice, and at the owner’s expense, if said sign is attached to a public utility pole, street sign
or located on the public right-of-way; or if said sign is in violation of this subchapter and is
advertising an event which is set to occur before the provisions of this section could normally be
enforced; or if, in his or her opinion, the condition of the sign presents an immediate threat to the
safety of the public.
(B) Reconstruction.
(1) A non-conforming sign which is destroyed by any means shall not be reconstructed if
the Zoning Administrator determines that the cost of such reconstruction exceeds 50% of the sign’s
replacement value at the time of loss, unless, after reconstruction, the sign will conform to all
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located.
(2) In the event the Zoning Administrator determines the estimated cost of reconstruction is
equal to or less than 50% of the sign’s replacement value at the time of loss, repairs or
reconstruction shall be permitted; provided, such work begins within six months from the date the
damage occurred and is completed within one year after construction begins.
(3) The Zoning Administrator may require that the reconstruction cost estimate be made by
a bona fide sign contractor, and that the sign’s value at the time of loss be determined by a licensed
real estate appraiser.
(4) The owner of the damaged sign shall be responsible for obtaining these estimates on
behalf of the Zoning Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 20-1414) (Ord. 1479, passed 1-22-2007; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
ADULT USES
§ 154.170 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
(A) Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate adult businesses in order to promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the village and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of adult uses within the village.
276 Swansea - Land Usage
(2) The provisions of this subchapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a
limitation or restriction on the content of, or reasonable access to, any communicative materials,
including adult-oriented materials.
(3) Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this subchapter to restrict or deny access
by adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution or Art. I, § 4, of the State Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their intended market.
(4) Neither is it the intent, nor effect, of this chapter to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene material.
(B) Findings.
(1) Adult and adult-oriented businesses, as defined herein, should be regulated.
(2) They should be segregated from one another and from houses of worship, schools,
parks and residential neighborhoods to protect the public health, welfare and safety because, inter
alia, adult-oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety
of adverse secondary effects, including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, illicit and
unsanitary sexual activity, illicit drug use, decreased desirability of and negative impacts on the use
of surrounding properties, blight, litter and sexual assault and exploitation.
(3) The village has a substantial government interest in preventing each of the
aforementioned adverse effects.
(Prior Code, § 20-1601) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-7-2007; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.171 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADULT BOOK/VIDEO STORE. An establishment having 20% or more of its stock in trade in
books, magazines or other periodicals, films, videos, DVDs (for rent or sale) or other visual media
or viewing on premises, but not viewing booths which are prohibited below, which are distinguished
or characterized by their principal emphasis on matters depicting describing, or relating to nudity,
explicit sexual conduct (whether auto-erotic, heterosexual, homosexual or otherwise), bestiality or
sadomasochistic activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BUSINESS/ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any establishment having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade or business activity in a use such as, but not
limited to, the following: adult book stores; adult motion picture theaters; adult entertainment
centers; adult nightclubs
Zoning 277
or adult spas, where specific anatomical areas are displayed, explicit sexual conduct is depicted
and/or sexual activity is explicitly or implicitly encouraged or tolerated.
ADULT ENTERTAINER. Any individual who engages in the activities defined below under
“adult nightclub”, and who receives a salary, wages, tips, gratuities or other remuneration (either
from patrons of a business, or from the owner, operator and/or his or her assigns, partners,
employees or agents of that business) for engaging in such activities.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS. See ADULT BUSINESS.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET. See ADULT NIGHTCLUB.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An establishment with a capacity of 50 or more
persons, used regularly and routinely for the viewing of motion pictures having as a dominant theme
material distinguished or characterized by their principal emphasis on matters depicting, describing
or relating to nudity, explicit sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons
therein.
ADULT NIGHTCLUB. A public or private establishment, which is licensed to serve food or
alcoholic beverages, which features dancers or waitresses, or strippers, go-go dancers, exotic
dancers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainment, or where explicit sexual conduct is
depicted and/or sexual activities explicitly or implicitly encouraged or implied.
ADULT NOVELTY STORE. An establishment having at least 20% of its stock in trade in
devices, clothing, novelties, lotions and other items which are distinguished or characterized by their
principal emphasis on or use for explicit sexual activities or specific anatomical areas.
ADULTS ONLY. Any items or activities for persons 18 years of age or older emphasizing,
depicting, describing or relating to nudity, explicit sexual conduct (whether auto-erotic, heterosexual,
homosexual or otherwise), bestiality or sadomasochistic activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT SPA OR SAUNA. An establishment primarily in the business of providing massage
services and/or steam baths, where explicit sexual conduct is depicted and/or sexual activity is
explicitly or implicitly encouraged or tolerated. Such establishments and all masseuses employed at
such establishments shall be licensed in accordance with state regulations.
ADULT SUPER CENTER. An establishment having any combination of the adult-oriented
businesses defined in this subchapter.
BODY SHOP or MODEL STUDIO. A public or private establishment where for any form of
consideration or gratuity, models who display specified anatomical areas are provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed or similarly depicted by persons paying
such consideration or gratuity, or where for any form of consideration or gratuity, nude or semi-nude
dancing,
278 Swansea - Land Usage
readings, counseling sessions, body painting and other activities that present materials distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to nudity, explicit sexual
conduct or specific anatomical areas are provided for observation by or communication to persons
paving such consideration or gratuity.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP. Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building that is used
primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
NUDE/NUDITY. The display of the human male or female genitalia, pubic hair, perineum, anal
or pubic regions, female breast with no covering or with less than fully opaque covering. Any person
insufficiently clothed in any manner so that any of the following body parts are not entirely covered
with a fully opaque covering (body paint, body dyes, liquid latex and similar substances shall not be
considered opaque coverings):
(1) The male or female genitals;
(2) The male or female anal or pubic areas;
(3) Pubic hair;
(4) The female breast (at or below the areola); or
(5) The buttocks (attire which is considered insufficient to comply with this requirement
includes, but is not limited to, G-strings, T-backs and thongs).
RAP PARLOR. An establishment or place primarily in the business of providing nonprofessional
conversation or similar services for adults, where explicit sexual conduct is depicted
and/or sexual activity is explicitly or implicitly encouraged or tolerated.
RESIDENCE. Any structure used by one or more persons as a dwelling.
SEXUAL ACTIVITY/CONDUCT. Any of the following conditions:
(1) Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
(2) Acts or representation of acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy,
bestiality, oral copulation or flagellation;
(3) Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, anal or pubic region, buttock or female
breast; and
(4) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities set forth in divisions
(1) through (3) above.
Zoning 279
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA. A term used to include the genitals, pubic area, anus or
perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Any of the following conditions:
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(a) Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair;
(b) Anus and/or buttock; and
(c) Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
(2) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely
covered.
VIEWING BOOTH. Any booth, cubical, room or stall within the premises of an adult oriented
business used to display by audio or visual reproduction, projection or other means, any of the
specified anatomical areas as defined above.
(Prior Code, § 20-1602) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.172 LOCATION.
Adult business shall be permitted within the PB Districts and shall be special uses within the HB,
HI and LI Zoning Districts, and shall be subject to the following restrictions.
(A) No adult business shall be permitted within 650 feet of another existing adult business.
(B) No adult business shall be located within 650 feet of any residentially classified zoning
district, including single-family residential, multi-family residential and mobile home residential.
(C) No adult business shall be located within 650 feet of an existing school, place of worship,
park, library, day care center or playground.
(Prior Code, § 20-1603) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.173 MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES.
For the purpose of this subchapter, measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures or objects, from the property line of the adult business to the nearest
property line of a school, place of worship, park, library, playground, day care center, district zoned
for residential use or another adult use.
(Prior Code, § 20-1604) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
280 Swansea - Land Usage
§ 154.174 LICENSING.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on or
to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premise within the village, the
operation of an adult oriented business, without first having obtained a license for such adult
business.
(B) Every applicant for a license to maintain, conduct or conduct an adult business shall file an
application upon the form provided by the Village Clerk furnishing the following information:
(1) The applicant’s name;
(2) The applicant’s permanent home address, length of residency and, if less than three
years, previous address;
(3) The applicant’s age and marital status and, if married, the name of his or her spouse;
(4) The name and address of the person, firm, corporation, partnership or association with
whom the applicant is employed or represents; and the length of time of such employment or
representation;
(5) Name and address of the applicant’s employer during the past three years, if different
from the present employer;
(6) The date or approximate date, the most recent application for license for an adult
business, if any, was made by the applicant;
(7) A statement of whether a license for an adult business issued to the applicant under this
section has been revoked;
(8) The name of the business, the business location and legal description of the property
and a description of the type of adult business;
(9) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of
the total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared, but shall be drawn to a designated scale, or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior
of the premises to, an accuracy of plus or minus six inches;
(10) A statement of each and every conviction for violation of any provision of this section
or any other code of any other Illinois municipality or other local government entity regulating adult
businesses;
(11) A statement of the criminal record of the applicant, excluding traffic records;
Zoning 281
(12) A signed statement stating the name and address of the statutory agent or other agent
authorized to receive service of process; and
(13) Each applicant shall pay the application fee as denominated in § 110.03 of this code of
ordinances.
(C) All statements made with respect to the application or in connection therewith shall be
verified and shall be made under oath by the applicant.
(D) The Chief of Police shall keep on file an accurate record of every application received and
acted upon, together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all licenses for adult
businesses issued under the provisions of this section and of the denial of any such applications.
(E) No license for an adult business shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the
commission of any felony under the laws of this or any other state or federal law, within five years
prior to the date of application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a misdemeanor, in any
jurisdiction, involving misrepresentation, deceit or an omission of any material fact in any
commercial
transaction; nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this
section; nor to any person whose license for an adult business issued hereunder has previously been
revoked has herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 20-1605) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.175 ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
(A) Temporary license.
(1) Upon the filing of a completed application for an adult business license, the Chief of
Police shall issue a temporary license to the applicant.
(2) The temporary license shall expire upon the final administrative decision of the village
to deny or grant a license.
(3) Within 30 days after the receipt of a completed application, the Chief of Police shall
either issue a license or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license.
(B) Reasons for refusal to grant a license. The Chief of Police shall approve the application and
grant an adult business license, unless one or more of the following is true:
(1) An applicant is less than 18 years of age;
(2) An applicant has failed to provide the information required by § 154.174 of this chapter
or has provided false information on the application;
282 Swansea - Land Usage
(3) The premises to be used for the adult business currently are in violation of or are not in
compliance with the village’s health, fire or building codes, or the locational requirements of §
154.172 of this chapter;
(4) The applicant failed to pay the license application fee; or
(5) The applicant has a license under this part that has been revoked within the previous
year.
(C) License term and restrictions.
(1) The granting of a license to a licensee for an adult business shall be for one year and
shall begin on May 1 and continue through April 30. Applications granted after May 1 of any given
year shall be effective for less than a full year and shall continue through April 30.
(2) The license fees of those licenses granted after May 1 of the calendar year shall be
reduced in proportion to the full calendar months which have expired in the year prior to the issuance
of the license.
(3) The license is non-transferable to any other person other than the applicants listed on
the application, and is valid only for the location listed on the application.
(D) Renewal of license.
(1) The licensee who has been granted a license to operate an adult business, and who
wishes to renew a license shall:
(a) File a renewal application of its license on the form provided by and sent to the
licensee by the village before April 30; and
(b) Follow all conditions of § 154.174 of this chapter.
(2) Upon application for renewal, the licensee shall pay annual business registration fee and
the corresponding license see as denominated in § 154.176(A) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1606) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.176 LICENSE FEES AND DISPLAYING OF LICENSE.
(A) The following schedule of annual fees, excluding the one-time application fee, for the
various procedures outlined in this subchapter are intended to defray administrative costs connected
with such procedures, and do not constitute a tax or other revenue-raising device.
(1) Application fee: $100, non-refundable, to be paid upon submission of the license
application;
Zoning 283
(2) Business registration fee: $25;
(3) Adult book/video store license: $1,000;
(4) Adult motion picture theater license: $1,000;
(5) Adult nightclub license: $1,000 (plus any applicable liquor license);
(6) License for adult novelty store: $1,000;
(7) License for adult spa/sauna: $1,000;
(8) License for adult super center:
(a) Two thousand two hundred and fifty dollars for up to two adult businesses;
(b) Three thousand five hundred dollars for up to three adult businesses; and
(c) Five thousand dollars for four or more adult businesses.
(B) Upon issuance of a license, said license shall be prominently displayed in a conspicuous
place within the adult business so that the license may be readily seen by persons entering the
premises.
(C) The increased fee for a late payment of the registration fee will be the same as other
business registration fees in the village and can be found at § 154.172 of this chapter.
(D) In the event a licensee fails to pay the license fee prior to April 30 of the calendar year, the
license shall be suspended and all licensed business shall cease until and unless the licensee pays the
license fee to the village. The suspension of a license, as provided for in this division (D), shall be
exempt from the notice and other provisions found in § 154.181 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1607) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.177 ENTERTAINER’S LICENSE.
(A) Any person who shall serve as an entertainer at a place for live adult entertainment shall
apply, in writing, to the Village Clerk, upon a form to be furnished by the Village Clerk.
(B) The form shall require the following information:
(1) The name, address, telephone number, Social Security number and date of birth of the
entertainer;
(2) The entertainer’s previous addresses for the ten years prior to the filing of the
application;
284 Swansea - Land Usage
(3) The applicant’s full criminal history, including, but not limited to, misdemeanor and
juvenile offenses;
(4) The entertainer’s previous employers for the ten years prior to the filing of the
application;
(5) The applicant must also execute a waiver and a release permitting the village and its
investigator to secure information from the applicant’s previous employers. Moreover, the applicant
must appear at the Police Department for fingerprinting;
(6) The applicant’s mental health history for the ten years prior to the filing of the
application;
(7) The names, address and telephone numbers of any and all other live adult entertainment
businesses in which the applicant is a partner, an employee, an entertainer, a stockholder, a sole
proprietor, affiliated or associated as either an owner or an operator;
(8) The applicant must also present two forms of photographic identification;
(9) The applicant must provide written statements from not less than three bona fide
residents of the city, setting forth that the applicant is of good moral character; and
(10) A certificate from a medical doctor designating that the applicant has, within the 30
days immediately prior thereto, been examined and found to be free of any contagious or
communicable diseases, including, but not limited to, venereal disease, HIV, hepatitis or other such
diseases.
(Prior Code, § 20-1608) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.178 EMPLOYEES/PATRONS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years of age to be employed in any
capacity within an adult business.
(B) It shall be unlawful for anyone under the age of 18 years of age to patronize or enter an
adult business.
(Prior Code, § 20-1609) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.179 PERIODIC INSPECTION.
(A) To ensure compliance with the specific regulations of this subchapter, adult businesses
licensees and their employees shall permit officers or agents of the village to inspect, from time to
time on an occasional basis, portions of the adult business premises where patrons are permitted,
during those times when the adult business is occupied by patrons or is open for business.
Zoning 285
(B) The village shall construe this section narrowly to authorize reasonable inspections of the
permitted premises pursuant to this subchapter, but not to authorize a harassing or excessive pattern
of inspections.
(Prior Code, § 20-1610) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.180 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE
Each license shall expire on April 30 and may be renewed only by filing an application as
provided in § 154.175(D) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1611) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.181 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
(A) The village shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a license for a period not to
exceed 30 days, if a licensee has knowingly violated any section of this subchapter, or has knowingly
allowed an employee of the adult business to violate this subchapter.
(B) The issuance of a written notice of intent to suspend shall not be a prerequisite to the
issuance of a written notice of intent to revoke a license per § 154.182 of this chapter.
(C) The license shall also be suspended, for failure to pay the license fee prior to April 30 of the
calendar year, as enumerated in § 154.176(D) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1612) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.182 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
(A) The village shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke an adult business license, if a
cause of suspension in § 154.181 of this chapter occurs, and the license has been suspended within
the preceding 12 months.
(B) The village shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke an adult business license, if a
licensee:
(1) Provided false information in conjunction with the application for the adult business
license;
(2) Allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
(3) Allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4) Operated the adult business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was
suspended; and
286 Swansea - Land Usage
(5) Allowed a any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation to
occur in or on the licensed premises.
(C) When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in § 154.183 of this chapter, the
village revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year.
(D) The licensee shall not be issued a license for one year from the date the revocation becomes
effective; provided that, if the conditions of § 154.183(D) of this chapter are met, a provisional
license will be granted.
(Prior Code, § 20-1613) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.183 HEARING ON LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
(A) Notice.
(1) If facts exist for denial, suspension or revocation of a license under this subchapter, the
Chief of Police shall notify the applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of the intent to deny,
suspend or revoke the license, including the grounds thereof, by personal, delivery or certified mail.
(2) The notification shall be directed to the most current business address on file with the
Chief of Police.
(3) Within five working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide to the
Chief of Police, in writing, a response that shall include a statement of reasons why the license
should not be denied, suspended or revoked.
(4) Within three days of the receipt of respondent’s written response, the Board Trustees
shall notify respondent in writing of the hearing date on respondent’s denial, suspension or
revocation proceeding.
(B) Hearing. At the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Trustees after receipt of
respondent’s written response, the Board of Trustees shall conduct a hearing, at which respondent
shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel, and to present evidence and witnesses on his
or her behalf.
(C) Decision.
(1) The Board of Trustees shall issue a written opinion and decision within five days of the
hearing.
Zoning 287
(2) (a) If a response is not received by the Board of Trustees in the time provided or, if
after a hearing, the Board of Trustee finds that grounds as specified in this subchapter exist for
denial, suspension or revocation, then such denial, suspension or revocation shall become final five
days after the Board of Trustees sends, by certified mail, written notice that the license has been
denied, suspended or revoked.
(b) Such notice shall include a statement advising the applicant or licensee of the right
to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(3) If the Board of Trustees finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension or revocation
of a license, then within five days after the hearing, the Board of Trustees shall withdraw the intent
to deny, suspend or revoke the license, and shall so notify the respondent in writing by certified mail
of such action, and shall contemporaneously issue the license.
(D) Appeal and provisional license.
(1) When a decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license becomes final, the applicant or
licensee (aggrieved party) whose application for a license has been denied, or whose license has been
suspended or revoked, shall have the right to appeal such action to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the
village’s enforcement of the denial, suspension or revocation, the village shall immediately issue the
aggrieved party a provisional license.
(3) The provisional license shall allow the aggrieved party to continue operation of the adult
business or to continue employment as an adult business employee, as the case may be, and will
expire upon the court’s entry of a judgment on the aggrieved party’s action to appeal, challenge,
restrain or otherwise enjoin the village’s enforcement.
(Prior Code, § 20-1614) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.184 HOURS OF OPERATION.
No adult business shall be open to the public between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m.
of each day, including those adult businesses licensed to sell alcoholic beverages.
(Prior Code, § 20-1615) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.185 SIGNAGE AND WINDOW DISPLAYS.
(A) In addition to the sign regulations listed in §§ 154.145 through 154.158 of this chapter, all
signs for adult businesses shall comply with the following: window displays advertising adult
products or depicting any adult theme shall be prohibited.
288 Swansea - Land Usage
(B) All windows shall be opaque in order to prevent pedestrians and/or the motoring public
from viewing any products or activities inside the establishment.
(Prior Code, § 20-1616) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.186 EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS.
(A) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business shall not exhibit
on the premises, in any form, a viewing booth, as defined above.
(B) This section is not intended to prohibit adult motion picture theaters, as defined above.
(Prior Code, § 20-1617) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.187 EXHIBITION OF A NUDE ADULT ENTERTAINER PROHIBITED.
(A) Any adult entertainer performing, dancing or otherwise employed by an adult nightclub shall
not be nude, as defined above.
(B) At all times shall an adult entertainer cover his or her genital area, as defined above.
(Prior Code, § 20-1618) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.188 CULPABLE MENTAL STATE REQUIRED.
(A) Where any provision or offense herein fails to state a necessary level of culpability to
establish a violation or liability, the offense shall be established upon a showing that the person acted
knowingly or recklessly with regard to the predicate act.
(B) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this subchapter, an act by an
employee shall be imputed to the adult business licensee to establish a violation of this subchapter, or
to deny, suspend or revoke a license, only if a licensee allowed, either knowingly or recklessly, a
violation of this subchapter to occur.
(C) It shall be a defense to liability that the adult business licensee was powerless to prevent the
violation.
(Prior Code, § 20-1619) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
Zoning 289
§ 154.189 FAILURE OF OFFICIAL TO MEET TIME FRAME.
(A) In the event that a government official is required to take an act or to do a thing pursuant to
this subchapter within a prescribed time, and fails to take such act or to do such thing within the time
prescribed, such failure shall not prevent the exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or
licensee.
(B) If the act required of the official under this subchapter, but not completed in the time
prescribed, includes approval of condition(s) necessary for the village’s approval of an application
for an adult business license (including a renewal), the applicant or license shall be deemed to have
satisfied the condition(s) for which approval was sought.
(Prior Code, § 20-1620) (Ord. 1494, passed 8-6-2004; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.200 APPLICATION FEES.
(A) The following schedule establishes application fees for the various certificates, permits and
procedures listed in this chapter, which are intended to defray the administrative costs connected with
the processing of such applications, and as such do not constitute a tax or other revenue-raising
device.
Application For Fee
Amendment to the map (rezoning) $225
Amendment to the text $225
Appeal $225
Certificate of non-conformance $20
Certificate of sign compliance $50
Certificate of zoning compliance (initial and final) $35
Special use permit $225
Variation $225
(B) Until such fees have been paid, no application for any of the above shall be deemed to have
been filed and no action shall be taken on such application.
(Prior Code, § 20-1502) (Ord. 1551, passed 5-18-2009; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014; Ord. 1790,
passed 9-18-2017)
2018 S-1
290 Swansea - Land Usage
§ 154.201 AUTHORITY.
(A) The primary authority for administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
shall be vested in the following:
(1) Zoning Administrator;
(2) Planning and Zoning Board; and
(3) Board of Trustees.
(B) In addition to the above, other officials, appointees or employees of the village may be
required and authorized to perform functions authorized in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1503) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.202 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
(A) General. There is hereby created the position of Zoning Administrator who is hereby
authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1504)
(B) Appointment and term of office.
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall be appointed annually by the President of the Board of
Trustees, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
(2) The Zoning Administrator’s term shall commence each May with the first regular
meeting of the Board of Trustees, and continue for one year or until his or her successor is appointed
and has qualified.
(Prior Code, § 20-1505)
(C) Compensation. The Zoning Administrator shall receive a salary or compensation such as is
provided by the President and the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 20-1506)
(D) Duties and responsibilities. The Zoning Administrator, or his or her authorized
representative, shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. This broad responsibility
encompasses, but is not limited to, the following specific duties:
(1) To provide information to the general public on matters related to this chapter, assist
them in understanding its provisions and assist them in any application process;
Zoning 291
(2) To review all applications for initial and final certificates of zoning compliance,
determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter, notify the applicant of any matters of noncompliance
and issue initial and final certificates of zoning compliance when appropriate;
(3) To review all applications for certificates of non-conformance and issue such certificates
when appropriate;
(4) To review the provisions of this chapter and render decisions on matters relative to
those provisions;
(5) To review and forward to the Planning and Zoning Board, all applications for variation
and appeals;
(6) To review and forward to the Planning and Zoning Board, all applications for special
use permits, amendments to the text and amendments to the official zoning map;
(7) To provide technical support to the Planning and Zoning Board;
(8) To issue certificates or permits for all variations, special uses, planned businesses and
planned unit developments, as approved by the Board of Trustees;
(9) To inspect lots, structures and uses to determine compliance with this chapter and,
where there are violations, to initiate appropriate corrective action;
(10) To maintain up-to-date records of matters related to this chapter including, but not
limited to, district maps, certificates of zoning compliance, special use permits, variances,
interpretative decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals, amendments and all applications/documents
related to any of these items;
(11) To prepare and cause to be published, on or before March 31 of each year, a map
showing the existing zoning district classifications and divisions in effect on the preceding December
31, if those classifications have been amended during the preceding calendar year; and
(12) To keep the President and Board of Trustees advised of zoning activities by written
report presented at the second regular meeting each month, and to perform such other duties as the
Board of Trustees may, from time to time, prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 20-1507)
(Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.203 COMPLAINTS.
(A) Whenever any person alleges that a violation of the provisions of this chapter has occurred,
that person shall file a written complaint on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator.
292 Swansea - Land Usage
(B) The Zoning Administrator shall record such complaints, promptly investigate and, if
necessary, institute appropriate corrective action.
(Prior Code, § 20-1508) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.204 CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDERS; CONTENTS OF ORDER; SERVICE OF
ORDER.
(A) General. Whenever the Zoning Administrator finds, by complaint, inspection or otherwise,
that any lot, structure or use, or work thereon, is in violation of this chapter, he or she shall so notify
the responsible party, and shall order appropriate corrective action.
(Prior Code, § 20-1509)
(B) Contents of order. Every order to take corrective action shall be issued in writing and shall
at least include:
(1) A description of the premises sufficient for identification;
(2) A statement indicating the nature of the violation;
(3) A statement of the corrective action necessary to effect compliance;
(4) The date by which the violation must be corrected;
(5) A statement that the alleged violator is entitled to a conference with the Zoning
Administrator if he or she so desires;
(6) The date by which an appeal of the corrective action order must be filed and a statement
of the procedure for so filing; and
(7) A statement that failure to obey a corrective action order shall result in revocation of an
issued certificate of zoning compliance and may result in the imposition of fines.
(Prior Code, § 20-1510)
(C) Service of order. A corrective action order shall be deemed properly served upon the owner,
occupant or operator of the offending lot, structure or use if it is:
(1) Served upon him or her personally;
(2) Sent by certified mail to his or her last known address; or
(3) Posted in a conspicuous place on or about the affected premises.
(Prior Code, § 20-1511)
(Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
Zoning 293
§ 154.205 STOP WORK ORDERS.
Whenever any work is being done in violation of an initial certificate of zoning compliance, the
Zoning Administrator’s corrective action order may state that the violation must cease immediately,
in which case, the corrective action order is equivalent to a stop work order.
(Prior Code, § 20-1512) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.206 EMERGENCY MEASURES.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever the Administrator determines
that any violation of this chapter poses an imminent peril to life or property, he or she may institute,
without notice or hearing, any necessary proceedings to alleviate the perilous condition.
(Prior Code, § 20-1513) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.207 INITIAL CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE; ISSUANCE;
APPLICATION; DURATION OF CERTIFICATE; RELATIONSHIP TO BUILDING
PERMITS.
(A) General. An initial certificate of zoning compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator
and indicates that he or she has reviewed all plans for a proposed development and found those plans
to be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, thereby authorizing the applicant to proceed
with securing all required building permits.
(Prior Code, § 20-1514)
(B) Issuance.
(1) Upon the effective date of this chapter, no lot shall be created, no land shall be
developed, no new use or structure shall be established or erected and no existing use or structure
shall be enlarged, extended, altered, relocated or reconstructed until an initial certificate of zoning
compliance has been applied for and issued.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall not issue an initial certificate of zoning compliance,
unless, following consultation with technically qualified persons as necessary, he or she determines
that the proposed activity conforms to the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1515) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
(C) Application.
(1) Any person seeking an initial certificate of zoning compliance shall file an application
for such certificate on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator who shall review such application
and determine if the proposed plans conform to the provisions of this chapter.
294 Swansea - Land Usage
(a) If the Zoning Administrator finds that the plans, as submitted, comply with all
provisions of this chapter, he or she shall issue an initial certificate of zoning compliance, thereby
authorizing the applicant to proceed with securing all required building permits.
(b) If the Zoning Administrator should find that the plans, as submitted do not conform
to the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall promptly notify the applicant of the deficiencies and
identify corrections that are necessary in order to bring the plans into compliance.
(2) In addition to the required application form, the applicant shall submit the following:
(a) A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the proposed ground area, height and bulk of
the building or structure, the lot lines and dimensions, the location of building lines to lot lines, the
location of any signs, easements, underground utilities, septic tanks, tile fields and water wells; the
names and location of adjoining streets; and the location of driveways and off-street parking areas in
relation to those streets;
(b) A copy of the legal description of the property in question; and
(c) Detailed drawings and plans for any and all proposed buildings and structures.
(Prior Code, § 20-1516)
(D) Duration of certificate. Initial certificates of zoning compliance shall be valid for one year
from the date of issue, or until revoked for failure to abide by a corrective action order. The Zoning
Administrator may renew initial certificates of zoning compliance for successive one-year periods
upon written request; provided, the applicant is making a good faith effort to complete the authorized
work.
(Prior Code, § 20-1517)
(E) Relationship to building permits. Upon the effective date of this chapter, no building permit
for the erection, enlargement, extension, alteration or reconstruction of any structure shall be issued
until the applicant for such permit has properly obtained an initial certificate of zoning compliance
pertaining to such work.
(Prior Code, § 20-1518)
(Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.208 FINAL CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE; ISSUANCE.
(A) A final certificate of zoning compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator and indicates
that he or she has reviewed the actual construction of a proposed development and found that
construction to be in compliance with plans submitted at the time of application and, therefore, in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1519)
Zoning 295
(B) (1) No lot, or part thereof, recorded or developed after the effective date of this chapter,
and no structure or use, or part thereof, that has been erected, enlarged, altered, relocated or
reconstructed after the effective date of this chapter, shall be used, occupied or put into operation
until a final certificate of zoning compliance has been issued.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a final certificate of zoning compliance until it
has been determined, by inspection, that the work authorized by the initial certificate of zoning
compliance has been completed in accordance with approved plans. Failure to obtain a final
certificate of zoning compliance shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1520)
(Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.209 CERTIFICATES OF NON-CONFORMANCE; ISSUANCE; APPLICATION;
DURATION OF CERTIFICATE.
(A) General. A certificate of non-conformance is issued by the Zoning Administrator and
indicates that he or she has reviewed a specific building, structure, lot or use, at the request of the
applicant, and has determined that the building, structure, lot or use lawfully existed prior to the
effective date of this chapter, and though not in conformance with all provisions of this chapter, shall
be allowed to remain within the provisions of §§ 154.095 through 154.101 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1521)
(B) Issuance. The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a certificate of non-conformance, unless,
following consultation with technically qualified persons as necessary, he or she determines that the
building, structure, lot or use lawfully existed prior to changes in the zoning regulations which
created the non-conformity.
(Prior Code, § 20-1522)
(C) Application.
(1) Any person seeking a certificate of non-conformance shall file an application for such
certificate on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator who shall review such application and
determine if the building, structure, lot or use lawfully existed prior to changes in the zoning
regulations, which created the non-conformity.
(a) If the Zoning Administrator finds that the building, structure, lot or use lawfully
existed prior to changes in the zoning regulations, which created the non-conformity, he or she shall
issue a certificate of non-conformance, thereby authorizing the building, structure, lot or use to
continue within the provisions of §§ 154.095 through 154.101 of this chapter.
296 Swansea - Land Usage
(b) If the Zoning Administrator should find that the building, structure, lot or use did
not lawfully exist prior to changes in the zoning regulations, which created the non-conformity, he or
she shall promptly notify the applicant of his or her findings, and identify corrections that are
necessary in order to bring the building, structure, lot or use into compliance with this chapter.
(2) In addition to the required application form, the applicant shall submit the following:
(a) A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the actual ground area, height and bulk of all
buildings and structures, the lot lines and dimensions, the location of building lines to lot lines, the
location of any signs, easements, underground utilities, septic tanks, till fields and water wells; the
names and locations of adjoining streets; and the location of driveways and off-street parking areas in
relation to those streets;
(b) A copy of the legal description of the property in question; and
(c) Detailed documentation, which supports the claim of lawful existence prior to
changes in the zoning regulations, which created the non-conformity.
(Prior Code, § 20-1523)
(D) Duration of certificate. Certificates of non-conformance shall be valid from the date of
issue; provided that, no amendment to the provisions of this chapter occurs which would invalidate
such certificate; and, provided that, no alteration to the building, structure, lot or use occurs which
would invalidate the information originally submitted on the application for certificate of nonconformance.
(Prior Code, § 20-1524)
(Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.210 CERTIFICATES OF SIGN COMPLIANCE; ISSUANCE; APPLICATION;
DURATION OF CERTIFICATE.
(A) General. A certificate of sign compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator and
indicates that he or she has reviewed all plans for a proposed sign and found those plans to be in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, thereby authorizing the applicant to proceed with
securing any required building permits and with sign installation.
(Prior Code, § 20-1525)
(B) Issuance.
(1) Upon the effective date of this chapter, no sign shall be installed, erected, enlarged,
extended, altered, relocated or reconstructed, until a certificate of sign compliance has been applied
for and issued.
Zoning 297
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a certificate of sign compliance, unless,
following consultation with technically qualified persons as necessary, he or she determines that the
proposed activity conforms to the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1526)
(C) Application.
(1) Any person seeking a certificate of sign compliance shall file an application for such
certificate on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator who shall review such application and
determine if the proposed plans conform to the provisions of this chapter.
(a) If the Zoning Administrator finds that the plans, as submitted, comply with all
provisions of this chapter, he or she shall issue a certificate of sign compliance, thereby authorizing
the applicant to proceed with securing any required building permits and with sign installation.
(b) If the Zoning Administrator should find that the plans, as submitted do not conform
to the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall promptly notify the applicant of the deficiencies and
identify corrections that are necessary in order to bring the plans into compliance.
(2) In addition to the required application form, the applicant shall submit, if not previously
submitted, the following:
(a) A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the proposed ground area, height and bulk of
all signs, the lot lines and dimensions, the location of building lines to lot lines, the location of any
easements, underground utilities, septic tanks, tile fields and water wells, the names and locations of
adjoining streets; and the location of accessways and off-street parking areas in relation to those
streets;
(b) A copy of the legal description of the property in question; and
(c) Detailed drawings and plans for all proposed signs.
(Prior Code, § 20-1527)
(D) Duration of certificate. Certificates of sign compliance shall be valid for one year from the
date of issue, or until revoked for failure to abide by a corrective action order.
(Prior Code, § 20-1528)
(Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.211 APPEALS; HEARING; DECISIONS; STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.
(A) General.
(1) The Planning and Zoning Board shall hear and decide appeals from any order,
requirement or determination made by the Planning and Zoning Administrator or other administrative
official.
298 Swansea - Land Usage
(2) An appeal in which it is alleged that there is an error in any decision made by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator under this chapter may be taken to the Planning and Zoning
Board by any person or governmental agency aggrieved by such decision.
(3) Every appeal shall be filed by the applicant with specifics of the action complained of,
within 45 days.
(Prior Code, § 20-1529)
(B) Hearing.
(1) The Planning and Zoning Board shall promptly schedule a public hearing following
notice of the appeal and shall, thereafter, give notice of said hearing to the parties involved,
including the applicant and the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
(2) Notice of the time and place for said hearing shall be published at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the village, not more than 30 days, nor less than 15 days, before
said hearing.
(Prior Code, § 20-1530)
(C) Decisions.
(1) (a) The Planning and Zoning Board shall render a written decision on the appeal within
a reasonable time, but in no event shall that decision be rendered more than 90 days after the filing
of the notice of appeal by the Clerk.
(b) Any member of the Planning and Zoning Board who was absent from the public
hearing, but certifies that he or she has read the transcript of the proceedings before the Board, may
vote upon any question before the Board.
(2) The Board shall promptly forward a copy of the decision to the applicant, Planning and
Zoning Administrator and Village Clerk.
(3) The Board may affirm, or may, upon the concurring vote of five members, reverse,
wholly or in part, or modify the decision of the Planning and Zoning Administrator, as, in its
opinion, ought to be done and, to that end, shall have the powers of the Planning and Zoning
Administrator.
(4) All decisions rendered by the Planning and Zoning Board on any administrative order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall, in all
instances, be final administrative determinations, and shall be subject to judicial review only in
accordance with applicable law.
(Prior Code, § 20-1531) (Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
Zoning 299
(D) Stay of proceedings.
(1) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the decision appealed, unless the
Planning and Zoning Administrator certifies to the Planning and Zoning Board, after the notice of the
appeal has been filed with him or her, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.
(2) In such a case, the proceedings shall not be stayed, unless by a restraining order, which
may be granted by the Board of Trustees or by a court of record on application, on notice to the
Planning and Zoning Administrator, and on due cause shown.
(Prior Code, § 20-1532)
(Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 154.212 VARIATIONS; AUTHORITY TO RECOMMEND VARIATION; STANDARDS
FOR ISSUANCE; APPLICATION; HEARING; FINDINGS OF FACT,
RECOMMENDATION; ACTION BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES; EFFECT OF DENIAL;
DURATION OF PERMIT.
(A) General. In specific cases, where practical difficulties or a particular hardship would be
incurred by the strict applications of the provisions of this chapter, the Planning and Zoning Board,
after conducting a public hearing, may recommend to the Board of Trustees that a variation of the
regulations of this chapter be granted in accordance with this section.
(Prior Code, § 20-1533)
(B) Authority to recommend variation. The Planning and Zoning Board shall have the authority
to recommend variation to the provisions of this chapter only in accordance with the standards
outlined in division (C) below, and only in instances as set out in divisions (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3),
(B)(4), (B)(5) and (B)(7) below:
(1) To permit any minimum setback less than that required by the applicable regulations;
(2) To permit the same off-street parking facility to qualify for two or more uses; provided
that, substantial use of such facility by each user does not take place at approximately the same hours
of the same days of the week;
(3) To reduce the required off-street parking or loading facilities by not more than one
parking or loading space, or 25% of the required spaces, whichever is greater;
(4) To increase, by not more than 25%, the maximum distance that required parking spaces
are permitted to be located from the use served;
300 Swansea - Land Usage
(5) To permit a variation in all districts for signs:
(a) Relative to the maximum height above-grade or the minimum height above-grade;
(b) Relative to the minimum setback requirements; or
(c) Relative to the maximum projection.
(6) To permit a variation of the regulations as listed in § 152.04 of this code of ordinances;
or
(7) In a re-subdivision, to reduce the minimum lot dimension by no more than 5% in any
dimension of any lot in a single-family residential district platted prior to 1-1-1980.
(Prior Code, § 20-1534)
(C) Standards for issuance. The Planning and Zoning Board shall not make a recommendation
to the Board of Trustees to vary any regulation to this chapter unless, in each specific case, the
Planning and Zoning has found that:
(1) The proposed variation is in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this
chapter;
(2) Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of
the specific property involved, a practical difficulty or particular hardship to the owner would result,
as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were to be carried
out;
(3) The conditions upon which the application for a variation are based are unique to the
property for which the variation is sought, and are not generally applicable to other property within
the same zoning classification;
(4) The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be used under
the conditions allowed by the regulations of the zoning classification; provided, however, that, the
variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to increase financial gain;
(5) The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by this chapter and has not been created by
any persons presently having an interest in the property;
(6) The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to
other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located; and
(7) The proposed variation will not:
(a) Impair an adequate supply of light and air to the adjacent property;
(b) Substantially increase the congestion of public streets;
Zoning 301
(c) Increase the danger of fire;
(d) Endanger the public safety; or
(e) Impair property values within the neighborhood.
(Prior Code, § 20-1535)
(D) Application.
(1) Every application for a variation shall be filed on forms provided by the Planning and
Zoning Administrator, who shall review said application and initiate a permanent record thereof.
(2) In addition to the required application form, the Planning and Zoning Administrator
shall require the applicant to submit the following:
(a) A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the actual ground area, height and bulk of all
existing and proposed buildings and structures, the lot lines and dimensions, the location of building
lines to lot lines, the location of any signs, easements, underground utilities, septic tanks, tile fields
and water wells; the names and locations of adjoining streets; and the location of driveways and offstreet
parking areas in relation to those streets; and
(b) Any and all documentation, which supports the claim of practical difficulty or
specific hardship.
(3) The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall promptly forward copies of the
application form and all attachments and relative documentation to the Chairperson and members of
the Planning and Zoning Board.
(4) The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall also file every application for variation
with the County Soil and Water Conservation District, as per state law.
(Prior Code, § 20-1536)
(E) Hearing.
(1) The Planning and Zoning Board shall schedule and hold a public hearing within 60 days
after the application for variation is filed.
(2) Notice indicating the time, date and place of the hearing, and the nature of the proposed
variation, shall be given not more than 30, nor less than 15, days before said hearing:
(a) By first class mail to the applicant; and
(b) By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the village.
302 Swansea - Land Usage
(3) (a) Any interested party, at any such hearing, may appear and testify either in person
or by a duly-authorized agent or attorney.
(b) Every applicant shall have the right to present witnesses on his, her or their behalf
and to request that the Chairperson subpoena persons to appear.
(Prior Code, § 20-1537)
(F) Findings of fact, recommendation.
(1) The Planning and Zoning Board may recommend approval or denial of the application
for variation, upon the concurring vote of five members.
(2) The Planning and Zoning Board shall submit such recommendation in writing to the
Board of Trustees within a reasonable time, but in no event shall that recommendation be submitted
more than 30 days after the public hearing on the application for variation.
(3) The recommendation so submitted shall be accompanied by findings of fact specifying
the reason or reasons for the recommendation, and referring to any exhibits containing plans and
specifications for the proposed variation, copies of which shall remain a part of the permanent record
of the Planning and Zoning Board.
(4) The terms of relief, if any, shall be contained within the recommendation, but clearly
set forth in a conclusion or a statement separate from the Planning and Zoning Board’s findings.
(Prior Code, § 20-1538)
(G) Action by the Board of Trustees.
(1) The Board of Trustees shall not act upon a proposed variation to this chapter until it has
received and reviewed a written recommendation and findings of fact of the Planning and Zoning
Board.
(2) The Board of Trustees may grant or deny any variation for which an application has
been submitted, and on which a public hearing has been held, regardless of the recommendation from
the Planning and Zoning Board; provided, however, that, any variation which fails to receive the
approval of the Planning and Zoning Board shall not be passed, except by the favorable vote of at
least two-thirds of the members of the Board of Trustees.
(3) The Board of Trustees, having voted to grant any variation, shall adopt said variation in
ordinance form, at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(4) If an application for a proposed variation is not acted upon finally by the Board of
Trustees within 90 days of the date the Board of Trustees received the Planning and Zoning Board’s
recommendation, and such time is not extended by mutual consent of the Board of Trustees and the
applicant, the variation shall be deemed to have been denied.
(Prior Code, § 20-1539)
Zoning 303
(H) Effect of denial. No application for a variation which has been denied by the Board of
Trustees shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of the order of denial, except on
the grounds of new evidence or proof that conditions then exist which did not exist prior to the
submission of the application and which are found to be valid by the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 20-1540)
(I) Duration of variation. Any ordinance varying the provisions of this chapter shall be invalid
one year from the date of its passage and approval by the Board of Trustees, unless the variation, as
permitted, has been substantially implemented by the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 20-1541)
(Ord. 1409, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 1660, passed 9-4-2012; Ord. 1663, passed 10-1-2012; Ord.
1699, passed 3-17-2014)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 70 ILCS 405/22.02(a), 65 ILCS 5/11-13-6 and 65 ILCS5/11-13-11
§ 154.213 SPECIAL USE PERMITS; AUTHORITY TO GRANT SPECIAL USE PERMITS;
STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE; APPLICATION; HEARING; FINDINGS OF FACT,
RECOMMENDATION; ACTION BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES; EFFECT OF DENIAL;
DURATION OF PERMIT.
(A) General. This chapter is based upon the division of the village into districts, within which
the uses of land, and the uses and bulk of buildings and structures are substantially uniform. It is
recognized, however, that there are special uses which, because of their unique characteristics, can
only be classified in any particular district upon consideration in each case of the impact of those uses
upon neighboring land and uses, and for the public need for the particular uses at the particular
location. Such uses fall into three categories:
(1) Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with public interest;
(2) Uses entirely private in character, but of such an unusual nature that their operation
may give to unique problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring property, public facilities
or the village as a whole; and
(3) Uses, either public or private, that, because of past or present conditions, need special
consideration.
(Prior Code, § 20-1542)
(B) Authority to grant special use permits.
(1) The Planning and Zoning Board shall have the authority to recommend granting of a
special use permit only in accordance with the standards outlined in § 154.212(C) of this chapter.
304 Swansea - Land Usage
(2) A special use permit shall authorize only such uses as are listed on the permit and only
under the conditions of this chapter and any other conditions that may be made part of said permit.
(Prior Code, § 20-1543)
(C) Standards for issuance. The Planning and Zoning Board shall not make a recommendation
to the Board of Trustees to grant any special use permit unless, in each specific case, the Planning
and Zoning Board has found that:
(1) The establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use will not be detrimental
to or endanger the public’s health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare;
(2) The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the
immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property
values within the neighborhood;
(3) The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district;
(4) Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or other necessary facilities have been or
are being provided;
(5) Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so
designated as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets;
(6) Adequate measures have been taken or will be taken to protect any facilities near the
proposed special use, such as a school or nursing homes, that may require special protection.
(7) The special use shall in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the
district in which it is located, except as such regulations may, in each instance, be modified by the
Board of Trustees pursuant to the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Board.
(Prior Code, § 20-1544)
(D) Application.
(1) Every application for a special use shall be filed on forms provided by the Planning and
Zoning Administrator, who shall review said application and initiate a permanent record thereof.
(2) In addition to the required application form, the Planning and Zoning Administrator
shall require the applicant to submit the following: a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the actual
ground area, height and bulk of all existing and proposed buildings and structures, the lot lines and
dimensions, the location of building lines to lot lines, the location of any signs, easements,
underground utilities, septic tanks, tile fields and water wells; the names and locations of adjoining
streets; and the location of driveways and off-street parking areas in relation to those streets.
Zoning 305
(3) The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall promptly forward copies of the
application form and all attachments and relative documentation to the Chairperson and members of
the Planning and Zoning Board.
(Prior Code, § 20-1545)
(E) Hearing.
(1) The Planning and Zoning Board shall schedule and hold a public hearing within 60 days
after the application for special use permit is filed.
(2) Notice indicating the time, date and place of the hearing, and the nature of the proposed
special use, shall be given not more than 30, nor less than 15, days before said hearing:
(a) By first class mail to the applicant; and
(b) By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the village.
(3) (a) Any interested party, at any such hearing, may appear and testify either in person
or by a duly-authorized agent or attorney.
(b) Every applicant shall have the right to present witnesses on his, her or their behalf
and to request that the Chairperson subpoena persons to appear.
(Prior Code, § 20-1546)
(F) Findings of fact, recommendation.
(1) The Planning and Zoning Board may recommend approval or denial of the application
for special use permit, upon the concurring vote of five members.
(2) The Planning and Zoning Board shall submit such recommendation, including the
reason or reasons for the recommendation, in writing to the Board of Trustees within a reasonable
time, but in no event shall that recommendation be submitted more than 30 days after the public
hearing on the application for special use permit.
(3) The recommendation so submitted shall be accompanied by findings of fact referring to
any exhibits containing plans and specifications for the proposed special use, copies of which shall
remain a part of the permanent record of the Planning and Zoning Board, and specifying the
following:
(a) The extent to which the proposed special use departs from the zoning and
subdivision regulations of the village;
(b) The conformance or non-conformance of the proposed special use with the
standards for issuance listed under § 154.212(C) of this chapter;
306 Swansea - Land Usage
(c) The relationship and the compatibility of the proposed special use to adjacent
properties and neighborhoods; and
(d) The effect of the proposed special use on the development pattern, tax base and
economic well being of the village.
(4) (a) Special conditions, if any, shall be contained within the recommendation, but
clearly set forth in a conclusion or a statement separate from the Planning and Zoning Board’s
findings.
(b) In recommending that a special use permit be granted, the Planning and Zoning
Board shall stipulate if the permit is transferable to successive owners of the property in question, or
if the permit is not transferable to any other person or any other property.
(Prior Code, § 20-1547)
(G) Action by the Board of Trustees.
(1) The Board of Trustees shall not act upon a proposed special use permit application until
it has received and reviewed a written recommendation and findings of fact from the Planning and
Zoning Board.
(2) The Board of Trustees may grant or deny any special use permit for which an
application has been submitted, and on which a public hearing has been held, regardless of the
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Board.
(3) The Board of Trustees, having voted to grant any special use permit, shall adopt said
permit in ordinance form, at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(4) If an application for a proposed special use is not acted upon finally by the Board of
Trustees within 90 days of the date the Board of Trustees received the Planning and Zoning Board’s
recommendation, and such time is not extended by mutual consent of the Board of Trustees and the
applicant, the special use shall be deemed to have been denied.
(Prior Code, § 20-1548)
(H) Effect of denial. No application for a special use permit which has been denied by the Board
of Trustees shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of the order of denial, except
on the grounds of new evidence or proof that conditions then exist which did not exist prior to the
submission of the application and which are found to be valid by the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 20-1549)
(I) Duration of permit.
(1) Any ordinance granting a special use permit shall be invalid one year from the date of
its passage and approval by the Board of Trustees, unless the special use, as permitted, has been
substantially implemented by the applicant.
Zoning 307
(2) The Board of Trustees shall require any special use permit which is issued, to stipulate
the conditions of its duration if the property is sold to another person.
(Prior Code, § 20-1550)
(Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-1.1
§ 154.214 AMENDMENTS TO THE TEXT; INITIATION; STANDARDS FOR
AMENDMENT TO THE TEXT; APPLICATION; HEARING; FINDINGS OF FACT,
RECOMMENDATION; ACTION BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
(A) General. The regulations established by this chapter may be amended from time to time by
the Board of Trustees through the enactment of an amending ordinance; provided, however, that, the
Planning and Zoning Board shall first conduct a public hearing to consider such amendment and,
thereafter, submit its recommendation and findings of fact to the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 20-1551)
(B) Initiation. Amendments to the text may be proposed by the Board of Trustees, the Planning
and Zoning Administrator, the Planning and Zoning Board or any other party in interest.
(Prior Code, § 20-1552)
(C) Standards for amendment to the text. The Planning and Zoning Board shall not make a
recommendation to the Board of Trustees to grant any amendment to the text unless, in each specific
case, the Planning and Zoning Board has found that:
(1) The proposed amendment is in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this
chapter; and
(2) The granting of the amendment will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious
to other property or improvements in the village.
(Prior Code, § 20-1553)
(D) Application.
(1) Every application for an amendment to the text shall be filed on forms provided by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator, who shall review said application and initiate a permanent
record thereof.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall promptly forward copies of the application form and all
attachments and relative documentation to the Chairperson and members of the Planning and Zoning
Board.
(Prior Code, § 20-1554)
308 Swansea - Land Usage
(E) Hearing.
(1) The Planning and Zoning Board shall schedule and hold a public hearing within 60 days
after the application for amendment to the map text is filed.
(2) Notice indicating the time, date and place of the hearing, and the nature of the proposed
amendment, shall be given not more than 30, nor less than 15, days before said hearing:
(a) By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the village; and
(b) By first class mail to the applicant and the owners of those properties adjacent to
the proposed amendment and rezoning.
(3) (a) Any interested party, at any such hearing, may appear and testify either in person
or by a duly-authorized agent or attorney.
(b) Every applicant shall have the right to present witnesses on his, her or their behalf
and to request that the Chairperson subpoena persons to appear.
(4) Any school district within which the property in question, or any part of the property in
question, is located, shall have the right to appear and present evidence at such hearings.
(Prior Code, § 20-1555)
(F) Findings of fact, recommendation.
(1) The Planning and Zoning Board may recommend approval or denial of the proposed
amendment to the text, upon the concurring vote of five members.
(2) The Planning and Zoning Board shall submit such recommendation, including the
reason or reasons for the recommendation, in writing to the Board of Trustees within a reasonable
time, but in no event shall that recommendation be submitted more than 30 days after the public
hearing on the application for amendment.
(3) The recommendation so submitted, shall be accompanied by findings of fact, copies of
which shall remain a part of the permanent record of the Planning and Zoning Board.
(Prior Code, § 20-1556)
(G) Action by the Board of Trustees.
(1) The Board of Trustees shall not act upon a proposed amendment to the text until it has
received and reviewed a written recommendation and findings of fact from the Planning and Zoning
Board.
Zoning 309
(2) (a) The Board of Trustees may grant or deny any proposed amendment to the text for
which an application has been submitted, and on which a public hearing has been held, regardless of
the recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Board; provided, however, that, when a written
protest against any proposed amendment to the text is filed with the Village Clerk, and signed and
acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of 20%
of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of 20% of the
frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, the amendment shall not be enacted,
except by a favorable vote of two-thirds of the Board of Trustees.
(b) In such cases, a copy of the written protest shall be served by the protestor or
protestors, on the applicant for the proposed amendment, and a copy upon the applicant’s attorney, if
any, by certified mail at the address of such applicant and attorney shown in the application for the
proposed amendment.
(3) The Board of Trustees, having voted to grant any amendment, shall adopt said
amendment in ordinance form, at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(4) If an application for an amendment to the text is not acted upon finally by the Board of
Trustees within 90 days of the date the Board of Trustees received the Planning and Zoning Board’s
recommendation, and such time is not extended by mutual consent of the Board of Trustees and the
applicant, the amendment shall be deemed to have been denied.
(Prior Code, § 20-1557)
(Ord. 1409, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 1663, passed 10-1-2012; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-6
§ 154.215 AMENDMENTS TO THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP; INITIATION; STANDARDS
FOR AMENDMENT TO THE MAP; APPLICATION; HEARING; FINDINGS OF FACT,
RECOMMENDATION; ACTION BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES; EFFECT OF DENIAL;
DURATION OF REZONING.
(A) General. The zoning districts established by this chapter, and depicted on the official zoning
map of the village may be amended, or rezoned, from time to time by the Board of Trustees through
the enactment of an amending ordinance; provided, however, that, the Planning and Zoning Board
shall first conduct a public hearing to consider such amendment and, thereafter, submit its
recommendation and findings of fact to the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 20-1558)
(B) Initiation. Amendments to the map may be proposed by the Board of Trustees, the Planning
and Zoning Administrator, the Planning and Zoning Board and by any other person having a freehold
interest, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, a contractual interest which may
become
310 Swansea - Land Usage
a freehold interest, an option to purchase or any exclusive possessory interest which is specifically
enforceable on the land which is described in the application for amendment to the map.
(Prior Code, § 20-1559)
(C) Standards for amendment to the map. The Planning and Zoning Board shall not make a
recommendation to the Board of Trustees to grant any amendment to the map unless, in each specific
case, the Planning and Zoning Board has found that:
(1) The proposed amendment is in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this
chapter;
(2) The proposed amendment is in the public interest and is not solely for the interest of the
applicant;
(3) The conditions upon which the application for an amendment is based are generally
applicable to other property within the same zoning classification, and are not unique to a specific
property; and
(4) The granting of the amendment will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious
to other property or improvements in the village.
(Prior Code, § 20-1560)
(D) Application.
(1) Every application for an amendment to the map shall be filed on forms provided by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator, who shall review said application and initiate a permanent
record thereof.
(2) In addition to the required application form, the Planning and Zoning Administrator
shall require the applicant to submit the following: a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the actual
ground area, height and bulk of all existing and proposed buildings and structures, the lot lines and
dimensions, the location of building lines to lot lines, the location of any signs, easements,
underground utilities, septic tanks, tile fields and water wells; the names and locations of adjoining
streets; and the location of driveways and off-street parking areas in relation to those streets.
(3) The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall promptly forward copies of the
application form and all attachments and relative documentation to the Chairperson and members of
the Planning and Zoning Board.
(4) The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall also file every application for amendment
to the map with the County Soil and Water Conservation District, as per state law.
(Prior Code, § 20-1561)
Zoning 311
(E) Hearing.
(1) The Planning and Zoning Board shall schedule and hold a public hearing within 60 days
after the application for amendment to the text is filed.
(2) Notice indicating the time, date and place of the hearing, and the nature of the proposed
amendment, shall be given not more than 30, nor less than 15, days before said hearing:
(a) By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the village; and
(b) By first class mail to the applicant, the owners of those properties adjacent to the
proposed amendment and rezoning.
(3) Any interested party, at any such hearing, may appear and testify either in person or by
a duly-authorized agent or attorney. Every applicant shall have the right to present witnesses on his,
her or their behalf and to request that the Chairperson subpoena persons to appear.
(4) Any school district within which the property in question, or any part of the property in
question, is located, shall have the right to appear and present evidence at such hearings.
(Prior Code, § 20-1562)
(F) Findings of fact, recommendation.
(1) The Planning and Zoning Board may recommend approval or denial of the proposed
amendment to the text, upon the concurring vote of five members.
(2) The Planning and Zoning Board shall submit such recommendation, including the
reason or reasons for the recommendation, in writing to the Board of Trustees within a reasonable
time, but in no event shall that recommendation be submitted more than 30 days after the public
hearing on the application for amendment.
(3) The recommendation so submitted shall be accompanied by findings of fact referring to
any exhibits containing plans and specifications for the proposed amendment, copies of which shall
remain a part of the permanent record of the Planning and Zoning Board, and specifying the
following:
(a) The existing uses of property within the general area of the property in question;
(b) The zoning classification of the property within the general area of the property in
question;
(c) The suitability of the property in question for the uses permitted under the existing
zoning classification;
312 Swansea - Land Usage
(d) The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the property in question,
including changes, if any, which have taken place since the day the property in question was placed
in its present zoning classification; and
(e) The conformance or non-conformance of the proposed amendment with the
standards for amendment listed under division (C) above, and the officially adopted plans of the
village.
(4) The Planning and Zoning Board may also recommend the enactment of an amendment
changing the zoning classification of the property in question to a classification other than that
requested by the applicant within 90 days of the date the Board of Trustees received the Planning and
Zoning Board recommendation, and such time is not extended by mutual consent of the Board of
Trustees and the applicant, the amendment shall be deemed to have been denied.
(Prior Code, § 20-1563)
(G) Action by the Board of Trustees.
(1) The Board of Trustees shall not act upon a proposed amendment to the map until it has
received and reviewed a written recommendation and findings of fact from the Planning and Zoning
Board.
(2) (a) The Board of Trustees may grant or deny any proposed amendment to the map for
which an application has been submitted, and on which a public hearing has been held, regardless of
the recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Board; provided, however, that, when a written
protest against any proposed amendment to the text is filed with the Village Clerk, and signed and
acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of 20%
of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of 20% of the
frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, the amendment shall not be enacted,
except by a favorable vote of two-thirds of the Board of Trustees.
(b) In such cases, a copy of the written protest shall be served by the protestor or
protestors, on the applicant for the proposed amendment, and a copy upon the applicant’s attorney, if
any, by certified mail at the address of such applicant and attorney shown in the application for the
proposed amendment.
(3) The Board of Trustees, having voted to grant any amendment, shall adopt said
amendment in ordinance form at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(4) If an application for an amendment to the map is not acted upon finally by the Board of
Trustees within 90 days of the date the Board of Trustees received the Planning and Zoning Board’s
recommendation, and such time is not extended by mutual consent of the Board of Trustees and the
applicant, the amendment to the text shall be deemed to have been denied.
(Prior Code, § 20-1564)
Zoning 313
(H) Effect of denial. No application for an amendment to the map which has been denied by the
Board of Trustees shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of the order of denial,
except on the grounds of new evidence or proof that conditions then exist which did not exist prior to
the submission of the application and which are found to be valid by the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 20-1565)
(I) Duration of rezoning. In any case where the boundary lines of the official zoning map of the
village have been amended, and no development has occurred on the property in the two years
following enactment of the amending ordinance, the Planning and Zoning Board may hold a public
hearing, after proper notice has been given, and recommend to the Board of Trustees that such
zoning be affirmed, or repealed and rezoned to its most appropriate district classification.
(Prior Code, § 20-1566)
(Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
Statutory reference:
Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-6 and 70 ILCS 405/22.02(a)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
(A) (1) Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with, or who
resists enforcement of any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $20,
nor more than $750, plus costs, for each offense.
(2) Each day that a violation continues after notification is given thereof shall be considered
a separate offense.
(3) Notification shall be by regular mail from the village to the last known mailing address
of the violator.
(4) Nothing contained in this division (A) shall prevent the village from taking any other
lawful action that may be necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-1501)
(B) (1) A person who violates §§ 154.170 through 154.189 of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine not to exceed $750.
(2) Each day the violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be fined as such.
(3) A person who violates §§ 154.170 through 154.189 of this chapter is subject to a suit
for injunction.
314 Swansea - Land Usage
(4) Nothing in this section, and no action taken hereunder, shall be held to exclude or
prevent such criminal or other civil proceedings as may be authorized by other state or local law.
(Prior Code, § 20-1621)
(Ord. 1494, passed 8-7-2007; Ord. 1699, passed 3-17-2014)
Zoning315
APPENDIX A: ILLUSTRATIONS
316 Swansea - Land Usage
Zoning 317
318 Swansea - Land Usage
Zoning 319
320 Swansea - Land Usage
Zoning 321
322 Swansea - Land Usage
Zoning 323
324 Swansea - Land Usage
Zoning 325
326 Swansea - Land Usage
Zoning 327
328 Swansea - Land Usage
Zoning 329
330 Swansea - Land Usage
INDEX
1
2 Swansea - Index
INDEX
ABANDONED VEHICLES
Abandonment, 70.101
Authorization of bond fees, 70.112
Definitions, 70.100
Disposal of unclaimed vehicles, 70.108
Liability of village, officers, agencies, and towing services, 70.111
Police record for disposed vehicle, 70.109
Police responsibilities, 70.104
Possession of vehicle by other party; towing, 70.102
Public sale proceeds, 70.110
Public sale; reclamation, 70.107
Removal of motor vehicles or other vehicles; towing or hauling away, 70.103
State Police information, 70.106
Unknown owner, 70.105
ABETTING (See AIDING)
ACCIDENTS
Accident involving damage to vehicle, 76.08
Accidents involving death or personal injuries, 76.06
Duty to report accident, 76.10
Duty upon damaging unattended vehicle or other property, 76.09
Penalty, 76.99
When driver fails to report, 76.12
ACCOUNTING MANAGER, 32.09
ADMINISTRATOR, VILLAGE, 32.06
ADULT USES
Culpable mental state required, 154.188
Definitions, 154.171
Employees/patrons, 154.178
Entertainer’s license, 154.177
Exhibition of nude entertainer prohibited, 154.187
Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos, 154.186
3
4 Swansea - Index
ADULT USES (Cont’d)
Expiration of license, 154.180
Failure of official to meet time frame, 154.189
Hearing on license denial, suspension or revocation, 154.183
Hours of operation, 154.184
Issuance and revocation of license, 154.175
License fees and displaying of license, 154.176
Licensing, 154.174
Location, 154.172
Measurement of distances, 154.173
Periodic inspection, 154.179
Purpose and intent, 154.170
Revocation of license, 154.182
Signage and window displays, 154.185
Suspension of license, 154.181
AGGRAVATED ASSAULT, 132.02
AIDING
Offenses
Aid to an offense, 130.25
Aiding an escape, 130.23
AIRCRAFT
Littering from aircraft, 135.08
ALARM SYSTEMS, 130.33
ALCOHOL (See also LIQUOR)
Pedestrians under influence of alcohol or drugs, 74.11
ALLEYS
Restrictions on Stopping, Standing and Parking
Alleys, 72.23
Sidewalks and alleys to be kept free from litter, 135.05
ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES
Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn vehicles, 70.017
ANIMAL SERVICES WARDEN, 90.14
Index 5
ANIMALS
Cats
Community
Definitions, 90.20
Managed care of feral cats/community cats, 90.22
Purpose, 90.21
Keeping crying cats, 90.32
Keeping of numerous cats in the village, 90.36
Dogs
Animal Services Warden, 90.14
Definitions, 90.01
Disposition of dogs deemed nuisances, 90.13
Dogs to be inoculated and to have name tags affixed to collars, 90.02
Duration of inoculation, 90.04
Exhibition of certificate upon request, 90.06
Impoundment of dogs running at large or unlicensed dogs; citation of owner or
keeper, 90.08
Impoundment of dogs which have bitten persons, 90.11
Inoculation to be performed by licensed veterinarian; issuance of certificate, 90.03
Notice and citation to owner or keeper of impoundment, 90.09
Pound designated, 90.12
Redemption of impounded dogs, 90.10
Restraint of dogs, 90.07
Specifications for tag, 90.05
General Regulations
Animals in village, 90.35
Cruelty to animals prohibited, 90.33
Injury to property, 90.30
Keeping barking dogs and crying cats, 90.32
Keeping of numerous dogs and cats in the village, 90.36
Manner of keeping, 90.31
Wild or vicious animals, 90.34
Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn vehicles, 70.017
Unattended draft animals, 71.108
Urban Chickens
Chickens at large, 90.60
Definitions, 90.50
Enclosures, 90.55
Feed and water, 90.58
Non-commercial use only, 90.54
Nuisance, 90.62
Number and type of chickens allowed, 90.52
Odor and noise impacts, 90.56
2018 S-1
6 Swansea - Index
ANIMALS (Cont’d)
Urban Chickens (Cont’d)
Permit required, 90.51
Permits restricted to single-family dwellings, 90.53
Predators, rodents, insects and parasites, 90.57
Unlawful acts, 90.61
Waste storage and removal, 90.59
ASSAULT, 132.01
ASSEMBLIES
Disorderly assembly, 130.20
Disturbing assemblies, 130.17
Disturbing church services, 130.16
Public health and safety
Assembling at public places and restaurants, 134.21
ATTORNEY, VILLAGE 32.03
AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX
Filing copy, 36.073
Filing report, 36.071
Payment, 36.072
Tax imposed, 36.070
BATTERY, 132.03
BICYCLES
Carrying articles, 73.05
Clinging to vehicles, 73.03
Lamps and other equipment on bicycles, 73.06
Riding on bicycles, 73.02
Riding on roadways and bicycle paths, 73.04
Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles, 73.01
BIDDING
Competitive bidding, 36.014
BLIND PERSONS
Pedestrians
Blind, hearing-impaired or physically handicapped pedestrian right-of-way, 74.05
BOARD OF BUILDING APPEALS, 150.005
2018 S-1
Index 6A
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
Administration, 35.064
Appointment, 35.061
Appointment by Board, 35.063
Established, 35.060
Qualifications, 35.062
2018 S-1
6B Swansea - Index
Index 7
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Claims, 31.14
Committees, 31.05
Composition and general powers, 31.01
Contracts, 31.13
Election procedure, 31.10
Meetings, 31.02
Municipal officers, employees; regulations, 31.11
Ordinances, 31.09
Quorum, 31.07
Rules, 31.08
Special committees, 31.06
Special meetings, 31.03
Subdivisions
Administration and Enforcement
Amendments; public hearing; notice; action by the Board of
Trustees, 153.087
Authority, 153.076
Boundary adjustments for minor plat, 153.088
Code Administrator; appointment and term of office; compensation; duties
and responsibilities, 153.077
Complaints, 153.079
Corrective action orders; contents of order; service of order, 153.080
Emergency measures, 153.082
Final plats; requirements for filing; required certificates; administrative
review procedures; action by the Board of Trustees; changes in approved
final plats; maintenance of improvements; duration of
guarantee, 153.085
Improvement plans; requirements for filing; requirements for inspection;
requirements for “as-built” records; requirements for assurance of
completion; acceptable forms of assurance; eligible sureties; term of
assurance, extension; release of bond, escrow deposit; failure to complete
improvements, 153.084
Lot consolidation of a minor final plat, 153.089
Preliminary plats; requirements for filing; action by the Planning and
Zoning Board; action by the Board of Trustees, 153.083
Schedule of fees, 153.075
Stop-work orders, 153.081
Variations; review by the Planning and Zoning Board; action by the Board
of Trustees, 153.086
Village Engineer; appointment and term of office; compensation; duties
and responsibilities, 153.078
Vacancies, 31.04
8 Swansea - Index
BOARD OF TRUSTEES (Cont’d)
Village offices consolidated, 31.12
Zoning; Administration and Enforcement
Amendments to the official zoning map; initiation; standards for amendment to
the map; application; hearing; findings of fact, recommendation; action by the
Board of Trustees; effect of denial; duration of rezoning , 154.215
Amendments to the text; initiation; standards for amendment to the text;
application; hearing; findings of fact,
recommendation; action by the Board of Trustees , 154.214
Special use permits; authority to grant special use permits; standards for issuance;
application; hearing; findings of fact, recommendation; action by the Board of
Trustees; effect of denial; duration of permit, 154.213
Variations; authority to recommend variation; standards for issuance; application;
hearing; findings of fact, recommendation; action by the Board of Trustees;
effect of denial; duration of variation , 154.212
BODILY HARM
Aggravated assault, 132.02
Assault, 132.01
Battery, 132.03
Criminal housing management, 132.04
Tattooing body of minor, 132.05
BRIDGES
Pedestrians
Bridge and railroad signals, 74.12
Street and bridge tax, 36.106
BUDGET
Procedures
Adoption of annual budget, 36.030
Computation of annual budget, 36.031
Financial reserves, 36.032
Public inspection, notice and hearing on budget, 36.033
Revision of annual budget, 36.034
BUDGET OFFICER, 32.05
BUILDING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT, 32.28
Index 9
BUILDING CODE
Board of Building Appeals, 150.005
Building Regulations
Adoption of Building Code, 150.020
Adoption of Residential Building Code, 150.022
Applications, licenses and permits, 150.025
Building Code; additions, insertions and changes, 150.021
Compliance with the Code, 150.024
Inspections and certificates of occupancy, 150.026
Residential Building Code; additions, insertions and changes, 150.023
Code Administrator; administration and enforcement; appointment and term of office;
compensation; duties and responsibilities, 150.001
Demolition Regulations
Conditions of demolition, 150.033
Fee required, 150.031
Permit required, 150.030
Procedure, 150.032
Electrical Regulations
Additional regulations, manufactured homes, 150.042
Adoption of Code, 150.040
Annual and semiannual inspections, 150.046
Applications, licenses and permits, 150.044
Compliance with the Code, 150.043
General exceptions, 150.041
Inspections and certificates of approval, 150.045
Fire Code Regulations
Additional inspections and fees, 150.108
Additions, insertions and changes, 150.106
Adoption of the International Fire Code, 150.105
Compliance with Code, 150.107
Inspection and permit fees, 150.003
Inspection of existing commercial property, 150.002
Mechanical Regulations
Adoption of Fuel Gas Code, 150.062
Adoption of Mechanical Code, 150.060
Applications, licenses and permits, 150.065
Compliance with the Code, 150.064
Fuel Gas Code; additions, insertions and changes, 150.063
Inspections and certificates of occupancy, 150.066
Mechanical Code; additions, insertions and changes, 150.061
Nuisances
Nuisance conditions, 150.007
Notice of, 150.009
Owner, agent of owner, defined, 150.006
2018 S-1
10 Swansea - Index
BUILDING CODE (Cont’d)
Registration of owners, 150.008
Table of fees, 150.004
Plumbing Regulations
Administrative authority, 150.083
Adoption of Code, 150.081
Adoption of the Existing Building Code, 150.090
Conformity to state license statute required, 150.082
Definitions, 150.080
Existing Building Code; additions, insertions and changes, 150.091
Inspections, defective work, re-inspection, 150.086
Office of Plumbing Inspector, 150.084
Plumbing permits, 150.085
Requirement of bond, 150.087
Sump pumps, 150.089
Violations, 150.088
Property Maintenance Code (See PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE)
BUILDING REGULATIONS (See BUILDING CODE)
BUS STANDS
Stopping, standing, parking, 72.24
BUSINESS DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION, 32.29
BUSINESS LICENSING, GENERAL REGISTRATION
Business registration requirement, 110.01
Duration of registration, 110.04
Fees, 110.03
Penalty, 110.99
Registration forms, 110.02
Suspension; revocation and appeal, 110.05
CAB STANDS
Stopping, standing, parking, 72.24
CANNABIDIOL, PRODUCTS CONTAINING, 130.38
CATS
Community Cats
Definitions, 90.20
Managed care of feral cats/community cats, 90.22
Purpose, 90.21
Keeping barking dogs and crying cats, 90.32
Keeping of numerous dogs and cats in the village, 90.36
2018 S-1
Index 11
CHURCH SERVICES
Disturbing church services, 130.16
CIGARETTES
Sale of cigarettes to minors, 130.21
CLERK, VILLAGE
Deputy, 32.01
Generally, 32.01
Village Clerk’s certificate, 10.19
COASTERS
Traffic-control; prohibitions
Use of roller skates, coasters or similar devices, 71.102
CODE ADMINISTRATOR, 32.07
CODE OF ORDINANCES, GENERAL PROVISIONS
Amendments to code, 10.09
Code alteration, 10.18
Conflicting provisions, 10.08
Definitions, 10.02
Errors and omissions, 10.12
General penalty, 10.99
Historical and statutory references, 10.17
Official time, 10.05
Ordinances repealed, 10.13
Ordinances saved, 10.15
Ordinances unaffected, 10.14
Reference to other sections, 10.07
Reference to public office or officer, 10.11
Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal, 10.06
Rules of construction, 10.04
Section headings, 10.03
Severability, 10.10
Technical codes, 10.16
Title of code; acceptance; jurisdiction, 10.01
Village Clerk’s certificate, 10.19
CONCEALED WEAPONS, 130.26
CORPORATE FUND PROPERTY TAX, 36.100
CORRECTIVE ACTION PLANS, 30.10
2018 S-1
12 Swansea - Index
CRIMINAL HOUSING MANAGEMENT, 132.04
CROSSWALKS
Pedestrians
Crossing at other than crosswalks, 74.03
Pedestrian right-of-way at crosswalks; school zones, 74.02
Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks, 74.06
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
Prohibited, 90.33
CURFEWS
Civil Emergency
Curfew, 34.03
General offenses, 130.31
DEBRIS (See also NUISANCES)
Abatement, 91.39
Accumulation prohibited, 91.36
Definitions, 91.35
Foreclosure of lien, 91.42
Lien, 91.40
Notice to person, 91.37
Payment, 91.41
Service of notice, 91.38
DECEPTIVE ACTS
Deceptive altering or sale of coins, 133.03
DELINQUENCY
Encouraging delinquency, 130.22
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
Department established, 50.01
Full time positions established, 50.04
Supervision, 50.02
Village vehicle, 50.03
DEPUTY FIRE CHIEF
Duties of the Chief and Deputy Chief, 35.084
DEPUTY POLICE CHIEF
Office of Deputy Police Chief created, 35.003
2018 S-1
Index 13
DISABLED PARKING
Restrictions
Parking for persons with disabilities, 72.17
Unauthorized use of parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities, 72.18
DISABLED PERSONS
Pedestrians
Blind, hearing-impaired or physically handicapped pedestrian right-of-way, 74.05
DISORDERLY ASSEMBLY, 130.20
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
Elements of the offense, 134.16
DISTURBING ASSEMBLIES, 130.17
DISTURBING CHURCH SERVICES, 130.16
DOCKS
Loading and unloading docks, 135.13
DOGS
Animal Services Warden, 90.14
Definitions, 90.01
Disposition of dogs deemed nuisances, 90.13
Dogs to be inoculated and to have name tags affixed to collars, 90.02
Duration of inoculation, 90.04
Exhibition of certificate upon request, 90.06
Impoundment of dogs running at large or unlicensed dogs; citation of owner or keeper, 90.08
Impoundment of dogs which have bitten persons, 90.11
Inoculation to be performed by licensed veterinarian; issuance of certificate, 90.03
Keeping barking dogs and crying cats, 90.32
Keeping of numerous dogs and cats in the village, 90.36
Notice and citation to owner or keeper of impoundment, 90.09
Pound designated, 90.12
Redemption of impounded dogs, 90.10
Restraint of dogs, 90.07
Specifications for tag, 90.05
DRAFT ANIMALS
Unattended draft animals, 71.108
DRAMSHOP INSURANCE
Required, 115.10
14 Swansea - Index
DRIVEWAYS
Emerging from alley, building, private road or driveway, 71.082
Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway, 71.065
DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE
Chemical and other tests, 76.03
Intoxicated driving, 76.02
Penalty, 76.99
DRUGS
Pedestrians under influence of alcohol or drugs, 74.11
ELECTIONS
Board of Trustees
Election procedure, 31.10
Mayor
Election, 31.25
ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES, 74.14
ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS (See also PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE)
Additional regulations, manufactured homes, 150.042
Adoption of Code, 150.040
Annual and semiannual inspections, 150.046
Applications, licenses and permits, 150.044
Compliance with the Code, 150.043
General exceptions, 150.041
Inspections and certificates of approval, 150.045
EMERGENCIES
Public safety
Civil Emergency
Authority of Mayor to issue orders, 34.04
Curfew, 34.03
Declaration of emergency, 34.02
Definitions, 34.01
Effectiveness, 34.05
Notification, 34.06
Emergency Management
Assistant Coordinators, 34.25
Authority to accept services, gifts, grants or loans, 34.31
Compensation, 34.33
Coordinator, 34.23
2018 S-1
Index 15
EMERGENCIES (Cont’d)
Public safety (Cont’d)
Emergency Management (Cont’d)
Definitions, 34.20
Deputy Coordinator, 34.24
Establishment, 34.22
Functions, 34.26
Immunity, 34.32
Limitations, 34.21
Local disaster emergencies, 34.27
Oath, 34.29
Purchasing and expenditures, 34.28
Testing of disaster warning devices, 34.30
EMERGENCY VEHICLES
Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles, 71.066
Pedestrians yield to authorized emergency vehicles, 74.10
EMPLOYEES
Rules and regulations
Absence for attendance in court, 33.09
Additional benefits, 33.18
Appearance and general behavior, 33.15
Break-time/lunch, 33.14
Employee pension, 33.17
Exclusion of school crossing guards, 33.19
Holidays, 33.04
Hours of the Government Center, administrative offices, 33.01
Hours of the sewer plant, 33.03
Hours of the Street Department, 33.02
Insurance, 33.13
Leave of absence for death in family, 33.08
Military reserve training and emergency call-up, 33.10
Overtime pay and compensatory time, 33.07
Pay schedules, 33.16
Police Department; Additional Benefits
Educational benefits, 33.38
Insurance, 33.40
Longevity, 33.39
Payment for call back; court time and stand-by pay, 33.35
Police pension, 33.36
Retirement benefits, 33.41
Uniform allowance, 33.37
16 Swansea - Index
EMPLOYEES (Cont’)
Rules and regulations (Cont’)
Sick leave, 33.06
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act
Adoption of Act, 33.60
Definitions, 33.61
Prohibited political activities, 33.62
Gift ban, 33.63
Future amendments to the Act, 33.64
Future declaration of unconstitutionality of the Act, 33.65
Tuition reimbursement, 33.12
Vacation, 33.05
Village office and property utilization, 33.11
EMPLOYEES
Public officers and employees to obey traffic code; exceptions, 70.016
ENGINEER, VILLAGE, 32.04
ESCAPES, 130.24
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Additions, insertions and changes, 150.091
Adoption, 150.090
FALSE POLICE, 130.32
FARM TRACTORS
Operation, 71.105
FENCES
Barbed wire and electric fences, 130.19
FINANCE, REVENUE
Automobile Renting Occupation Tax
Filing copy, 36.073
Filing report, 36.071
Payment, 36.072
Tax imposed, 36.070
Budget Procedures
Adoption of annual budget, 36.030
Computation of annual budget, 36.031
Financial reserves, 36.032
Index 17
FINANCE, REVENUE (Cont’d)
Budget Procedures (Cont’d)
Public inspection, notice and hearing on budget, 36.033
Revision of annual budget, 36.034
Foreign Fire Insurance Companies
Conformance, 36.085
Required reports, 36.086
Unlawful operation, 36.087
Gas and Electric Utility Tax
Collection, 36.157
Definitions, 36.155
Resellers, 36.159
Tax, 36.156
Tax remittance and return, 36.158
General Taxes
Corporate fund property tax, 36.100
Fire protection tax, 36.101
Insurance and tort judgments tax, 36.102
Municipal auditing tax, 36.103
Police Pension Fund tax, 36.104
Police protection tax, 36.105
Street and bridge tax, 36.106
Industrial Revenue Bonds
Application fee, 36.057
Application process and requirements, 36.047
Approval for bond issue, 36.049
Attorney review, 36.050
Definitions, 36.046
Denial of application, 36.055
Hold harmless agreement, 36.054
Insurance required, 36.053
Presentation of project, 36.059
Prevailing wage rate, 36.052
Professional review process, 36.051
Project disclosure, 36.056
Sale of bonds, 36.048
Village policy, 36.045
Village review process, 36.058
Investment Policy
Asset allocation, 36.013
Authorized and suitable investments, 36.007
Collateralization, 36.009
Competitive bidding, 36.014
18 Swansea - Index
FINANCE, REVENUE (Cont’d)
Investment Policy (Cont’d)
Diversification, 36.010
Ethics and conflicts of interest, 36.006
Internal controls, 36.012
Investment restrictions, 36.008
Limitation of liability, 36.015
Liquidity, 36.004
Objective, 36.002
Policy, 36.001
Reporting, 36.016
Return on investments, 36.005
Safekeeping and custody, 36.011
Safety, 36.003
Penalty, 36.999
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax
Collection of tax by retailers, 36.122
Definitions, 36.120
Resellers, 36.124
Returns to department, 36.123
Simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed, 36.121
Water Utility Tax
Additional taxes, 36.137
Collection, 36.141
Credit for over-payment, 36.143
Definitions, 36.138
Effective date, 36.139
Necessity, 36.135
Notification, 36.140
Reports to municipality, 36.142
Tax imposed, 36.136
FIRE ALARMS, 130.32
FIRE APPARATUS
Following fire apparatus
FIRE CHIEF
Duties of the Chief and Deputy Chief, 35.084
FIRE CODE REGULATIONS (See also PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE)
Additional inspections and fees, 150.108
Additions, insertions and changes, 150.106
2018 S-1
Index 19
FIRE CODE REGULATIONS (Cont’d)
Adoption of the International Fire Code, 150.105
Compliance with Code, 150.107
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
Administration, 35.064
Appointment, 35.061
Appointment by Board, 35.063
Established, 35.060
Qualifications, 35.062
Command at fires, 35.092
Creation of Department, 35.080
Disciplinary action, 35.093
Duties, 35.087
Duties of the Chief and Deputy Chief, 35.084
Entering fire houses, 35.096
Equipment, 35.097
Fire Pension
Established, 35.110
Meetings, 35.113
Pension Board, 35.111
Powers and duties, 35.112
Salary, 35.114
Injury while on duty, 35.095
Inspections, 35.086
Membership, 35.088
Membership process, 35.089
Mutual aid agreements, 35.098
Obedience to orders, 35.090
Office of Chief and Deputy created, 35.081
Removal from office, 35.083
Reports, 35.085
Reserving the public meeting room, 35.099
Supervision, 35.091
Use of apparatus, 35.094
Village vehicle, 35.082
FIRE EQUIPMENT
Criminal damage to firefighting apparatus, hydrants or equipment, 133.05
FIRE HOSE
Driving over fire hose, 71.100
20 Swansea - Index
FIRE HYDRANTS
Criminal damage to firefighting apparatus, hydrants or equipment, 133.05
FIRE LANES
Stopping, standing, parking, 72.19
FIRE PENSION
Established, 35.110
Meetings, 35.113
Pension Board, 35.111
Powers and duties, 35.112
Salary, 35.114
FIRE PROTECTION TAX, 36.101
FIREARMS
Defacing identification marks of firearms, 134.04
Discharging firearms or other weapons in village; exception, 130.27
Register of sales by dealer, 134.03
Unlawful sale of firearms, 134.02
Unlawful use of weapons, 134.01
FIREFIGHTING APPARATUS
Criminal damage to firefighting apparatus, hydrants or equipment, 133.05
FIREWORKS
Penalty, 94.99
Regulations, 94.01
FISCAL YEAR, 30.06
FLOODPLAINS
Abrogation and greater restrictions, 152.12
Base flood elevation, 152.04
Definitions, 152.03
Development permit, 152.06
Disclaimer of liability, 152.11
Duties of the Code Administrator, 152.05
Penalty, 152.99
Preventing increased flood heights and resulting damages, 152.07
Protecting buildings, 152.08
Purpose, 152.02
Index 21
FLOODPLAINS (Cont’d)
Subdivision and other development requirements, 152.09
Title, 152.01
Variances, 152.10
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD, 32.26
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES
Conformance, 36.085
Required reports, 36.086
Unlawful operation, 36.087
FUEL GAS CODE
Adoption of Fuel Gas Code, 150.062
Fuel Gas Code; additions, insertions and changes, 150.063
FUNERAL PROCESSIONS, 71.067
GAMBLING, 134.18
GAMES OF CHANCE
Definitions, 114.01
Raffles, 114.02
Video gaming, 114.03
GARBAGE (See also LITTER, NUISANCES)
Abatement, 91.39
Accumulation prohibited, 91.36
Collection
General Regulations
Definitions, 51.20
Depositing materials on another’s property, 51.25
Depositing materials on streets, 51.26
Disposal of yard waste, 51.24
Enforcement, 51.30
Removal or damage to village recycling bins, 51.23
Title to wastes, 51.21
Unauthorized use of refuse containers, 51.27
Uncovered refuse, 51.28
Unlawful removal of recyclable material, 51.22
Wind-blown refuse, 51.29
22 Swansea - Index
GARBAGE (Cont’d)
Collection (Cont’d)
Licensing Requirements (Cont’d)
Disposal within city prohibited; exception, 51.06
License application, issuance and renewal, 51.03
License required, 51.01
License; fee, 51.04
Types of license; limitation on number, 51.02
Vehicle requirements, 51.05
Non-Residential Collections
Approved containers, 51.67
Collection services, 51.68
Commercial collection, 51.65
Disposal in containers required, 51.66
Penalty, 51.99
Residential Collections
Collection required, 51.45
Collection services, 51.51
Commingling prohibited, 51.48
Construction debris, 51.47
Method of collection, 51.46
Replacement of recycling bins, 51.50
Title to recycling bins, 51.49
Definitions, 91.35
Foreclosure of lien, 91.42
Lien, 91.40
Notice to person, 91.37
Payment, 91.41
Service of notice, 91.38
GAS AND ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX
Collection, 36.157
Definitions, 36.155
Resellers, 36.159
Tax, 36.156
Tax remittance and return, 36.158
GIFT BAN, 33.63
GOVERNMENT CENTER
Hours of the Government Center, administrative offices, 33.01
HALLOWEEN
Regulations, 130.35
Index 23
HANDICAPPED PERSONS
Pedestrians
Blind, hearing-impaired or physically handicapped pedestrian right-of-way, 74.05
Electric personal assistive mobility devices, 74.14
HARASSMENT BY TELEPHONE, 134.17
HIGHWAYS (See also STREETS)
Driving on control led-access highways, 71.106
Obstructing person in highways, 71.104
Pedestrians walking on highways, 74.08
Putting glass or other hazardous materials on highway prohibited, 71.103
Traffic signs, signals and markers
Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker, 70.038
Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances and structures, 70.037
ILLINOIS STATE VEHICLE CODE
Adoption, 70.002
IMPOUNDMENT, MOTOR VEHICLE
Administrative fee, 70.087
Administrative hearing, 70.083
Definitions, 70.080
Disposition of impounded motor vehicle, 70.084
Motor vehicle possession, 70.085
Refund of administrative fee, 70.087
Towing agency, 70.086
Violations authorizing impoundment, 70.081
INDUSTRIAL REVENUE BONDS
Application fee, 36.057
Application process and requirements, 36.047
Approval for bond issue, 36.049
Attorney review, 36.050
Definitions, 36.046
Denial of application, 36.055
Hold harmless agreement, 36.054
Insurance required, 36.053
Presentation of project, 36.059
Prevailing wage rate, 36.052
Professional review process, 36.051
Project disclosure, 36.056
Sale of bonds, 36.048
Village policy, 36.045
Village review process, 36.058
2018 S-1
24 Swansea - Index
INSPECTORS, VILLAGE
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
Easements, 50.15
INSUFFICIENT FUNDS
Policy, 130.37
INSURANCE AND TORT JUDGMENTS TAX, 36.102
INTOXICATED DRIVING, 76.02
INVESTMENT POLICY
Asset allocation, 36.013
Authorized and suitable investments, 36.007
Collateralization, 36.009
Competitive bidding, 36.014
Diversification, 36.010
Ethics and conflicts of interest, 36.006
Internal controls, 36.012
Investment restrictions, 36.008
Limitation of liability, 36.015
Liquidity, 36.004
Objective, 36.002
Policy, 36.001
Reporting, 36.016
Return on investments, 36.005
Safekeeping and custody, 36.011
Safety, 36.003
JUNK YARDS
Application, 112.03
Definitions, 112.02
Disqualification, 112.04
License, 112.05
License fee, 112.08
License required, 112.01
Minors, 112.07
Physical requirements, 112.06
LEAVES OF ABSENCE
Death in family, 33.08
LIQUOR COMMISSIONER, 31.35
Index 25
LIQUOR CONTROL
Applications, 115.03
Classification; fees, 115.07
Definitions, 115.01
Display of license, 115.11
Disposition of fees, 115.14
Dramshop insurance required, 115.10
Examination of applicant, 115.04
License required, 115.02
Limitation of licenses, 115.08
Liquor Commissioner, 31.35
Nature of license, 115.09
Pedestrians under influence of alcohol or drugs, 74.11
Persons ineligible to be licensed, 115.05
Record of licenses, 115.12
Regulations
Change of location, 115.29
Diseased employees, 115.37
Disorderly house, 115.38
Election days, 115.33
Exclusionary provision, 115.46
Hours, 115.25
Identification required, 115.42
Inspections, 115.47
Liquor in vehicles; minors, 115.31
Minor selling liquor, 115.40
Open view into interior, 115.26
Posting warning, 115.45
Prohibited locations, 115.27
Prohibited sales; generally, 115.39
Restricted residential areas, 115.32
Restriction of sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, 115.44
Sanitary conditions, 115.36
Stores selling school supplies, lunches, 115.28
Transfer of identification card, 115.43
Transporting in motor vehicles, 115.30
Unlawful acts, 115.34
Unlawful entertainment, 115.35
Unlawful purchase of liquor, 115.41
Revocation of licenses, 115.13
Term, 115.06
26 Swansea - Index
LIQUOR CONTROL (Cont’d)
Violations
Act of agent of employee; liability of licensee, 115.61
Owner of premises permitting violation, 115.60
Revocation of license after conviction, 115.62
LITTER (See also GARBAGE)
Clearing of litter from open private property by village, 135.15
Construction sites, 135.12
Definitions, 135.01
Enforcement, 135.16
Handbills, 135.10
Litter in parks, 135.09
Littering from aircraft, 135.08
Littering from vehicles, 135.07
Littering prohibited, 135.02
Loading and unloading docks, 135.13
Owner to maintain private premises, 135.06
Parking lots, 135.14
Parks, 92.03
Posting notices prohibited, 135.11
Prevention of scattering, 135.03
Sidewalks and alleys to be kept free from litter, 135.05
Upsetting or tampering with receptacles, 135.04
MANUFACTURED HOMES
Additions to manufactured homes, 151.007
Age of manufactured homes, 151.015
Anchors and tie downs, 151.010
Compliance with district regulations, 151.012
Compliance with Zoning Code, 151.002
Dependent manufactured homes, 151.003
Display of title, 151.013
Emergency parking, 151.005
General applicability, 151.001
Jacks and stabilizers, 151.008
Manufactured Home Park Design Standards
Electrical distribution and service, 151.063
Liquid and gas fuel piping and storage, 151.062
Maintenance of park facilities, 151.068
Manufactured home space; minimum size, 151.064
Index 27
MANUFACTURED HOMES (Cont’d)
Manufactured Home Park Design Standards (Cont’d)
On-street parking, 151.066
Plumbing regulations, 151.060
Public hazards, 151.067
Refuse disposal and pest control, 151.061
Service buildings and requirements, 151.057
Sewage disposal, 151.059
Site layout, 151.056
Site location, 151.055
Speed limit, 151.065
Water supply, 151.058
Manufactured Home Park License and Permit Requirements
Amendment of site plan, 151.036
Continuing compliance with regulations, 151.040
Enforcement, 151.041
Inspection and licensing requirement, 151.037
Issuance of license, expiration and renewal, 151.032
Manufactured home parks, 151.031
Permit to construct or alter, 151.033
Purpose, 151.030
Rejection of application, 151.035
Required inspections, 151.034
Revocation or suspension of license, 151.038
Right to public hearing, 151.039
Manufactured Home Residential Subdivision
Additional requirements, 151.082
Incorporation of Subdivision Code, 151.081
Purpose and intent, 151.080
Recreational vehicle in manufactured home parks, 151.016
Sales and inspection, 151.006
Skirting, 151.011
Stands, 151.009
State requirements, 151.014
Transformation of manufactured home, 151.004
MAYOR
Appointment of officers, 31.27
Civil Emergency
Authority of Mayor to issue orders, 34.04
Deciding vote, 31.36
28 Swansea - Index
MAYOR (Cont’d)
Designation of officers’ duties, 31.29
Election, 31.25
Formal occasions, 31.32
General duties, 31.33
Liquor Commissioner, 31.35
Mayor pro-tem, 31.30
Release of prisoners, 31.34
Removal of officers, 31.28
Signature, 31.31
Supervisory powers, 31.26
MAYOR PRO-TEM, 31.30
MECHANICAL CODE (See also PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE)
Additions, insertions and changes, 150.061
Adoption, 150.060
MECHANICAL REGULATIONS (See also PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE)
Adoption of Fuel Gas Code, 150.062
Adoption of Mechanical Code, 150.060
Applications, licenses and permits, 150.065
Compliance with the Code, 150.064
Fuel Gas Code; additions, insertions and changes, 150.063
Inspections and certificates of occupancy, 150.066
Mechanical Code; additions, insertions and changes, 150.061
MEETINGS
Board of Trustees
Meetings, 31.02
Ordinances, 31.09
Quorum, 31.07
Special meetings, 31.03
MINORS (See also CIGARETTES, CURFEW, JUNK YARDS, LIQUOR CONTROL)
Junk yards
Minors, 112.07
Liquor control
Liquor in vehicles; minors, 115.31
Minor selling liquor, 115.40
Sale of cigarettes to minors, 130.21
Tattooing body of minor, 132.05
2018 S-1
Index 29
MOB ACTION, 134.15
MOPEDS
Clinging to vehicles, 73.26
Lamps on mopeds, 73.24
Operating motorcycle on one wheel, 73.23
Required equipment on motorcycles, 73.22
Riding on mopeds, 73.25
Riding on motorcycles, 73.20
Special equipment for persons riding motorcycles, 73.21
MOTOR VEHICLES
Automobile Renting Occupation Tax
Filing copy, 36.073
Filing report, 36.071
Payment, 36.072
Tax imposed, 36.070
Bicycles
Clinging to vehicles, 73.03
Riding on roadways and bicycle paths, 73.04
Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles, 73.01
Liquor in vehicles; minors, 115.31
Littering from vehicles, 135.07
Mopeds
Clinging to vehicles, 73.26
Lamps on mopeds, 73.24
Operating motorcycle on one wheel, 73.23
Required equipment on motorcycles, 73.22
Riding on mopeds, 73.25
Riding on motorcycles, 73.20
Special equipment for persons riding motorcycles, 73.21
Motorcycles
Clinging to vehicles, 73.26
Lamps on mopeds, 73.24
Operating motorcycle on one wheel, 73.23
Required equipment on motorcycles, 73.22
Riding on mopeds, 73.25
Riding on motorcycles, 73.20
Special equipment for persons riding motorcycles, 73.21
Offenses
Accident involving damage to vehicle, 76.08
Accidents involving death or personal injuries, 76.06
Adoption of other specific statutes, 76.04
30 Swansea - Index
MOTOR VEHICLES (Cont’d)
Offenses (Cont’d)
Chemical and other tests, 76.03
Duty to give information and render aid, 76.07
Duty to report accident, 76.10
Duty upon damaging unattended vehicle or other property, 76.09
False reports, 76.11
Intoxicated driving, 76.02
Penalty, 76.99
Reckless driving, 76.01
Street racing, 76.05
When driver fails to report, 76.12
Park regulations
Motor vehicles, 92.09
Parking regulations
Fire lanes, Ch. 78, Sch. II
Loading zones, Ch. 78, Sch. III
Method of Parking
General parking regulations, 72.01
Unattended motor vehicles, 72.02
No parking zones, Ch. 78, Sch. I
Penalty, 72.99
Restrictions on Stopping, Standing and Parking
Alleys, 72.23
Cab and bus stands, 72.24
Fire lanes, 72.19
Limited parking, 72.21
On-street parking, 72.20
Parking for persons with disabilities, 72.17
Parking on private property, 72.25
Signs, 72.26
Stopping, standing or parking outside business or residence district, 72.16
Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places, 72.15
Unauthorized use of parking spaces reserved for persons with
disabilities, 72.18
Vehicles for sale, 72.22
Snow Emergencies
Announcement of snow emergency, 72.40
Snow emergency routes, 72.42
Termination of emergency, 72.41
Snow routes, Ch. 78, Sch. IV
Index 31
MOTOR VEHICLES (Cont’d)
Parking regulations (Cont’d)
Violations
Duty of lessor of vehicle on notice of violation of this chapter, 72.58
Officers authorized to remove vehicles, 72.57
Parking violations, 72.55
Prima facie proof, 72.56
Pedestrians
Blind, hearing-impaired or physically handicapped pedestrian right-of-way, 74.05
Bridge and railroad signals, 74.12
Crossing at other than crosswalks, 74.03
Drivers to avoid colliding with pedestrians, 74.04
Electric personal assistive mobility devices, 74.14
Motorized wheelchairs, 74.13
Pedestrian obedience to traffic-control devices and traffic regulations, 74.01
Pedestrian right-of-way at crosswalks; school zones, 74.02
Pedestrians soliciting rides or business, 74.07
Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks, 74.06
Pedestrians under influence of alcohol or drugs, 74.11
Pedestrians walking on highways, 74.08
Pedestrians yield to authorized emergency vehicles, 74.10
Penalty, 74.99
Right-of-way on sidewalks, 74.09
Standing or loitering, 74.15
Street designations
Closed streets, 71.153
Signs, 71.150
Through streets, 71.151
Yield streets, 71.152
Traffic-control regulations
Overtaking and Passing
Driving on right side of roadway; exceptions, 71.035
Driving on roadways laned for traffic, 71.043
Limitations on overtaking on the left, 71.039
Meeting or overtaking school bus, 71.040
No passing zones, 71.042
One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands, 71.041
Overtaking vehicles on the left, 71.037
Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions, 71.036
When overtaking on the right is permitted, 71.038
32 Swansea - Index
MOTOR VEHICLES (Cont’d)
Traffic-control regulations (Cont’d)
Parades
Alternative permit, 71.131
Appeal procedure when permit denied, 71.130
Application for permit, 71.127
Contents of permit, 71.133
Definitions, 71.125
Duties of permittee, 71.134
Notice of rejection of permit application, 71.129
Notice to village and other officials when permit issued, 71.132
Permit required, 71.126
Public content during parades, 71.135
Revocation of permit, 71.136
Standards for issuance of permit, 71.128
Penalty, 71.999
Prohibitions
Backing, 71.095
Coasting, 71.099
Driving on control led-access highways, 71.106
Driving upon sidewalk, 71.101
Encroachments, 71.107
Farm tractor operation, 71.105
Following fire apparatus; driving over fire hose, 71.100
Following vehicle too closely, 71.096
Obstructing person in highways, 71.104
Obstruction of driver's view or driving mechanism, 71.097
Opening vehicle doors, 71.098
Processions, 71.110
Putting glass or other hazardous materials on highway prohibited, 71.103
Riding on running boards, 71.109
Trucks, 71.111
Unattended draft animals, 71.108
Use of roller skates, coasters or similar devices, 71.102
Right-of-Way
Funeral processions, 71.067
Merging traffic, 71.064
Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency
vehicles, 71.066
Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway, 71.065
Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection, 71.063
Index 33
MOTOR VEHICLES (Cont’d)
Traffic-control regulations (Cont’d)
Right-of-Way (Cont’d)
Vehicle turning left, 71.061
Vehicles approaching or entering the intersection, 71.060
Vehicles entering stop crosswalk, 71.062
Special Stops Required
Certain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings, 71.081
Emerging from alley, building, private road or driveway, 71.082
Obedience to signal indicating approach of train or railroad track
equipment, 71.080
Stop when traffic obstructed, 71.083
Speed Restrictions
Maximum attainable operating speed, 71.003
Minimum speed regulation, 71.004
Special speed limits while passing schools, 71.002
Speed limits, 71.001
Street designations
Closed streets, 71.153
Signs, 71.150
Through streets, 71.151
Yield streets, 71.152
Turning and Starting; Signals
Limitations on U-turns, 71.016
Method of giving hand and arm signals, 71.020
Required position and method of turning at intersections, 71.015
Signal by hand and arm or signal device, 71.019
Starting parked vehicle, 71.017
When signal required, 71.018
Traffic, general regulations
Abandoned vehicles
Abandonment, 70.101
Authorization of bond fees, 70.112
Definitions, 70.100
Disposal of unclaimed vehicles, 70.108
Liability of village, officers, agencies, and towing services, 70.111
Police record for disposed vehicle, 70.109
Police responsibilities, 70.104
Possession of vehicle by other party; towing, 70.102
Public sale proceeds, 70.110
Public sale; reclamation, 70.107
34 Swansea - Index
MOTOR VEHICLES (Cont’d)
Traffic, general regulations (Cont’d)
Abandoned vehicles (Cont’d)
Removal of motor vehicles or other vehicles; towing or hauling away, 70.103
State Police information, 70.106
Unknown owner, 70.105
Administration
Accident investigations, 70.058
Accident reports, 70.060
Accident studies, 70.059
Annual traffic safety report, 70.061
Duty of Traffic Division, 70.056
Generally, 70.055
Records of traffic violations, 70.057
Traffic Commission, 70.064
Traffic-control regulations and devices, 70.063
Traffic Engineer, 70.062
Adoption of Illinois State Vehicle Code, 70.002
Definitions, 70.001
Impoundment of Motor Vehicle
Administrative fee, 70.087
Administrative hearing, 70.083
Definitions, 70.080
Disposition of impounded motor vehicle, 70.084
Motor vehicle possession, 70.085
Seizure and impoundment, 70.082
Towing agency, 70.086
Violations authorizing impoundment, 70.081
Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws
Fleeing or attempted to elude police officer, 70.018
Obedience to police officers, 70.015
Public officers and employees to obey traffic code; exceptions, 70.016
Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn vehicles, 70.017
Penalty, 70.999
Traffic Signs, Signals and Markings
Display of unauthorized signs, signals, markings or advertising
signs, 70.035
Flashing signals, 70.034
Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs or signals, 70.036
Lane-control signals, 70.033
No-turning signs and turning markers, 70.040
2018 S-1
Index 35
MOTOR VEHICLES (Cont’d)
Traffic, general regulations (Cont’d)
Traffic Signs, Signals and Markings (Cont’d)
Obedience to traffic-control devices, 70.030
Pedestrian-control signals, 70.032
Posting signs, 70.042
Shopping centers powers to contract, 70.043
Stop and yield signs, 70.041
Traffic-control signal legend, 70.031
Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker, 70.038
Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances and structures, 70.037
Zones of quiet, 70.039
Traffic schedules
Load limit streets, Ch. Sch. VI
No U-turn zones, Ch. Sch. VIII
One-way streets and alleys, Ch. Sch. VII
Pedestrian crosswalks, Ch. Sch. XI
School speed zones, Ch. Sch. X
School traffic-control signal locations, Ch. Sch. II
Speed limit zones, Ch. Sch. IX
Stop intersection locations, Ch. Sch. III
Through streets and stop intersections, Ch. Sch. IV
Through streets and yield right-of-way intersections, Ch. Sch. V
Traffic-control signal locations, Ch. Sch. I
Vehicle conditions
Condition and Equipment of Vehicles
Excessive engine braking noise prohibited, 75.06
Gas and smoke, 75.03
Generally, 75.01
Mufflers, prevention of noise, 75.05
Noise, 75.04
Scope and effect of equipment requirements, 75.02
Vehicle equipment
Condition and Equipment of Vehicles
Excessive engine braking noise prohibited, 75.06
Gas and smoke, 75.03
Generally, 75.01
Mufflers, prevention of noise, 75.05
Noise, 75.04
Scope and effect of equipment requirements, 75.02
36 Swansea - Index
MOTOR VEHICLES (Cont’d)
Vehicle loads
Overweight and Oversized Vehicle Permits
Applications for and issuance of permit, 75.42
Bonds, indemnification and insurance, 75.44
Definitions, 75.40
Denial, suspension and reinstatement, 75.45
Permit fee, 75.46
Permits, 75.41
Police escorts, 75.43
Size, Weight and Loads
Covers or tarpaulins required for certain loads, 75.24
Limited load streets, 75.26
Projecting loads on passenger vehicles, 75.21
Protruding members of vehicles, 75.22
Zoning
Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
Computation of required spaces, 154.131
General provisions, 154.116
Landscaping, 154.123
Lighting, 154.122
Loading area design standards, 154.125
Location of required loading spaces, 154.130
Location of required parking, 154.124
Parking lot design standards, 154.117
Purpose and intent, 154.115
Requirements for access, 154.120
Requirements for access, 154.127
Requirements for buffer strips, 154.129
Requirements for construction, 154.121
Requirements for construction, 154.128
Requirements for loading spaces, 154.126
Requirements for parking lot aisles, 154.119
Requirements for parking spaces, 154.118
Table of loading spaces, by classification, 154.133
Table of parking spaces, by classification, 154.132
MOTORCYCLES
Clinging to vehicles, 73.26
Lamps on mopeds, 73.24
Operating motorcycle on one wheel, 73.23
Index 37
MOTORCYCLES (Cont’d)
Required equipment on motorcycles, 73.22
Riding on mopeds, 73.25
Riding on motorcycles, 73.20
Special equipment for persons riding motorcycles, 73.21
MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS, 74.13
MUNICIPAL AUDITING TAX, 36.103
MUNICIPAL YEAR, 30.07
NOISE
Vehicles
Condition and Equipment of Vehicles
Excessive engine braking noise prohibited, 75.06
Mufflers, prevention of noise, 75.05
Noise, 75.04
Scope and effect of equipment requirements, 75.02
NUDITY IN PUBLIC, 131.01
NUISANCES
Abatement, 91.04
Building Code
Nuisance conditions, 150.007
Notice of, 150.009
Owner, agent of owner, defined, 150.006
Cats
Keeping barking dogs and crying cats, 90.32
Keeping of numerous dogs and cats in the village, 90.36
Debris
Abatement, 91.39
Accumulation prohibited, 91.36
Definitions, 91.35
Foreclosure of lien, 91.42
Lien, 91.40
Notice to person, 91.37
Payment, 91.41
Service of notice, 91.38
Dogs
Disposition of dogs deemed nuisances, 90.13
Keeping barking dogs and crying cats, 90.32
Keeping of numerous dogs and cats in the village, 90.36
2018 S-1
38 Swansea - Index
NUISANCES (Cont’d)
Failure to comply with notice, 91.03
Garbage
Abatement, 91.39
Accumulation prohibited, 91.36
Definitions, 91.35
Foreclosure of lien, 91.42
Lien, 91.40
Notice to person, 91.37
Payment, 91.41
Service of notice, 91.38
Notice to abate, 91.02
Specific nuisances enumerated, 91.01
Urban chickens
Chickens at large, 90.60
Definitions, 90.50
Enclosures, 90.55
Feed and water, 90.58
Non-commercial use only, 90.54
Nuisance, 90.62
Number and type of chickens allowed, 90.52
Odor and noise impacts, 90.56
Permit required, 90.51
Permits restricted to single-family dwellings, 90.53
Predators, rodents, insects and parasites, 90.57
Unlawful acts, 90.61
Waste storage and removal, 90.59
Weeds
Abatement, 91.19
Definitions, 91.15
Foreclosure of lien, 91.22
Lien, 91.20
Notice, 91.17
Nuisance, 91.16
Payment, 91.21
Service of notice, 91.18
OBSTRUCTIONS, HIGHWAYS
Obstructing person in highways, 71.104
Putting glass or other hazardous materials on highway prohibited, 71.103
2018 S-1
Index 39
OFFENSES
Abusing a police officer, 130.15
Aid to an offense, 130.25
Aiding an escape, 130.23
Alarm systems, 130.33
Barbed wire and electric fences, 130.19
Concealed weapons, 130.26
Criminal Code adopted, 130.02
Curfew, 130.31
Definitions
Meaning of words and phrases, 130.01
Destruction of public property, 130.29
Discarded refrigerators, 130.30
Discharging firearms or other weapons in village; exception, 130.27
Disorderly assembly, 130.20
Disturbing assemblies, 130.17
Disturbing church services, 130.16
Disturbing the peace, 130.18
Encouraging delinquency, 130.22
Escapes, 130.24
False police or fire alarms, 130.32
Impersonation of officer, 130.28
Insufficient funds policy, 130.37
Limitations on burning yard waste, 130.34
Regulations for Halloween, 130.35
Sale of cigarettes or tobacco to minors, 130.21
Yard sales, 130.36
Penalty, 130.99
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Criminal damage to firefighting apparatus, hydrants or equipment, 133.05
Criminal damage to property, 133.04
Criminal trespass to land, 133.06
Deceptive altering or sale of coins, 133.03
Theft, 133.01
Theft of labor services, 133.02
OFFICERS
Impersonation of officer, 130.28
OFFICERS, PUBLIC
Public officers and employees to obey traffic code; exceptions, 70.016
40 Swansea - Index
OFFICERS, VILLAGE
Budget Officer, 32.05
Civil Code Enforcement Officer, 32.08
Code Administrator, 32.07
Village Administrator, 32.06
Village Attorney, 32.03
Village Clerk; Deputy, 32.01
Village Engineer, 32.04
Village Treasurer, 32.02
OFFICIALS, VILLAGE
Budget Officer, 32.05
Civil Code Enforcement Officer, 32.08
Code Administrator, 32.07
General provisions
Bonds of village officers, 30.03
Salaries of village officials, 30.09
Salaries regulation, 30.04
Village Administrator, 32.06
Village Attorney, 32.03
Village Clerk; Deputy, 32.01
Village Engineer, 32.04
Village of Swansea Trave, Meal and Lodging Expense Reimbursement Request
Form, Ch. 30, App. A
Village Treasurer, 32.02
ORGANIZATIONS, VILLAGE
Building and Zoning Department, 32.28
Business District Development and Redevelopment Commission, 32.29
Foreign Fire Insurance Board, 32.26
Park Board, 32.27
Planning and Zoning Board, 32.25
PARADES
Alternative permit, 71.131
Appeal procedure when permit denied, 71.130
Application for permit, 71.127
Contents of permit, 71.133
Definitions, 71.125
2018 S-1
Index 41
PARADES (Cont’d)
Duties of permittee, 71.134
Notice of rejection of permit application, 71.129
Notice to village and other officials when permit issued, 71.132
Penalty, 71.999
Permit required, 71.126
Public content during parades, 71.135
Revocation of permit, 71.136
Standards for issuance of permit, 71.128
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
Definitions, 137.01
Parents and guardians responsible for acts, 137.02
PARK BOARD, 32.27
PARKING LOTS
Litter, 135.14
PARKING REGULATIONS
Fire lanes, Ch. 78, Sch. II
Loading zones, Ch. 78, Sch. III
Method of Parking
General parking regulations, 72.01
Unattended motor vehicles, 72.02
No parking zones, Ch. 78, Sch. I
Penalty, 72.99
Restrictions on Stopping, Standing and Parking
Alleys, 72.23
Cab and bus stands, 72.24
Fire lanes, 72.19
Limited parking, 72.21
On-street parking, 72.20
Parking for persons with disabilities, 72.17
Parking on private property, 72.25
Signs, 72.26
Stopping, standing or parking outside business or residence district, 72.16
Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places, 72.15
Unauthorized use of parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities, 72.18
Vehicles for sale, 72.22
42 Swansea - Index
PARKING REGULATIONS (Cont’d)
Snow Emergencies
Announcement of snow emergency, 72.40
Snow emergency routes, 72.42
Termination of emergency, 72.41
Snow routes, Ch. 78, Sch. IV
Violations
Duty of lessor of vehicle on notice of violation of this chapter, 72.58
Officers authorized to remove vehicles, 72.57
Parking violations, 72.55
Prima facie proof, 72.56
Zoning
Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
Computation of required spaces, 154.131
General provisions, 154.116
Landscaping, 154.123
Lighting, 154.122
Loading area design standards, 154.125
Location of required loading spaces, 154.130
Location of required parking, 154.124
Parking lot design standards, 154.117
Purpose and intent, 154.115
Requirements for access, 154.120
Requirements for access, 154.127
Requirements for buffer strips, 154.129
Requirements for construction, 154.121
Requirements for construction, 154.128
Requirements for loading spaces, 154.126
Requirements for parking lot aisles, 154.119
Requirements for parking spaces, 154.118
Table of loading spaces, by classification, 154.133
Table of parking spaces, by classification, 154.132
PARKS
Litter in parks, 135.09
Regulations
Animals, 92.08
Applications for required permits, 92.13
Decision on permit application, 92.14
Destruction of park property, 92.02
Erection of structures, 92.06
Index 43
PARKS (Cont’d)
Regulations (Cont’d)
Fires in parks, 92.04
Issuance; denial of permit, 92.15
Littering, water pollution, 92.03
Motor vehicles, 92.09
Park hours, 92.01
Penalty, 92.99
Picnics, 92.05
Prohibited acts, 92.16
Reserving facilities, 92.11
Sales, amusements for gain, 92.10
Signs, 92.07
Special events, 92.12
PEDDLERS
Appeal of permit denial or revocation, 111.13
Application for permits; qualifications, 111.04
Credentials, 111.07
Definitions, 111.02
Denial of permit, 111.11
Exemptions, 111.05
Fee, 111.08
Issuance of permit, 111.06
Maintenance of no contact list, 111.17
Maintenance of registry, 111.16
Notice to solicitors; duty to observe, 111.10
Penalty, 111.99
Permit required, 111.03
Purpose; policy, 111.01
Regulations and prohibitions, 111.09
Revocation of permit, 111.12
Solicitation on streets by charitable organizations, 111.14
Solicitor's bond, 111.15
PEDESTRIANS
Blind, hearing-impaired or physically handicapped pedestrian right-of-way, 74.05
Bridge and railroad signals, 74.12
Crossing at other than crosswalks, 74.03
Drivers to avoid colliding with pedestrians, 74.04
Electric personal assistive mobility devices, 74.14
44 Swansea - Index
PEDESTRIANS (Cont’d)
Motorized wheelchairs, 74.13
Pedestrian obedience to traffic-control devices and traffic regulations, 74.01
Pedestrian right-of-way at crosswalks; school zones, 74.02
Pedestrians soliciting rides or business, 74.07
Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks, 74.06
Pedestrians under influence of alcohol or drugs, 74.11
Pedestrians walking on highways, 74.08
Pedestrians yield to authorized emergency vehicles, 74.10
Penalty, 74.99
Right-of-way on sidewalks, 74.09
Standing or loitering, 74.15
Traffic-control
Pedestrian-control signals, 70.032
PICNICS
Parks, 92.05
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD
Created; members; appointments and the like, 32.25
Subdivisions
Preliminary plats; requirements for filing; action by the Planning and Zoning
Board; action by the Board of Trustees, 153.083
Variations; review by the Planning and Zoning Board; action by the Board of
Trustees, 153.086
PLUMBING INSPECTOR, 150.084
PLUMBING REGULATIONS (See also PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE)
Administrative authority, 150.083
Adoption of Code, 150.081
Adoption of the Existing Building Code, 150.090
Conformity to state license statute required, 150.082
Definitions, 150.080
Existing Building Code; additions, insertions and changes, 150.091
Inspections, defective work, re-inspection, 150.086
Office of Plumbing Inspector, 150.084
Plumbing permits, 150.085
Requirement of bond, 150.087
Sump pumps, 150.089
Violations, 150.088
2018 S-1
Index 45
POLICE (See also POLICE DEPARTMENT)
Abandoned vehicles
Police record for disposed vehicle, 70.109
Police responsibilities, 70.104
State Police information, 70.106
Abusing a police officer, 130.15
Benefits
Educational benefits, 33.38
Insurance, 33.40
Longevity, 33.39
Payment for call back; court time and stand-by pay, 33.35
Police pension, 33.36
Retirement benefits, 33.41
Uniform allowance, 33.37
Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws
Fleeing or attempted to elude police officer, 70.018
Obedience to police officers, 70.015
Public officers and employees to obey traffic code; exceptions, 70.016
Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn vehicles, 70.017
Offenses against
Refusing to aid an officer, 134.20
Resisting or obstructing a peace officer, 134.19
Police chief
Duties, 35.009
Duties of Chief, 35.006
Office of Chief created, 35.002
Office of Deputy Police Chief created, 35.003
Police Pension
Established, 35.030
Meetings, 35.033
Pension Board, 35.031
Powers and duties, 35.032
Salary, 35.034
Position of Sergeant, 35.007
POLICE DEPARTMENT (See also POLICE)
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
Administration, 35.064
Appointment, 35.061
Appointment by Board, 35.063
Established, 35.060
Qualifications, 35.062
46 Swansea - Index
POLICE DEPARTMENT (Cont’d)
Police Department
Appointments, 35.005
Conduct of members, 35.011
Creation of Department, 35.001
Duties, 35.009
Duties of Chief, 35.006
Office of Chief created, 35.002
Office of Deputy Police Chief created, 35.003
Position of Sergeant, 35.007
Residency, 35.014
Rules and regulations, 35.013
Serving process, 35.010
Stolen property, 35.015
Village vehicle, 35.004
Witness fees, 35.012
Rules of Police Department
Administration, 35.045
POLICE CHIEF
Duties, 35.009
Duties of Chief, 35.006
Office of Chief created, 35.002
Office of Deputy Police Chief created, 35.003
POLICE PENSION
Established, 35.030
Meetings, 35.033
Pension Board, 35.031
Powers and duties, 35.032
Salary, 35.034
POLICE PENSION FUND TAX, 36.104
POLICE PROTECTION TAX, 36.105
POLICE SERGEANT
Position of Sergeant, 35.007
PRISONERS
Mayors
Release of prisoners, 31.34
Index 47
PRIVATE ROADWAYS (See also STREETS)
Emerging from alley, building, private road or driveway, 71.082
Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway, 71.065
PROCESSIONS, 71.110
PROPERTY, DAMAGE OR INJURY TO
Animals; general regulations
Injury to property, 90.30
Criminal damage to property, 133.04
Destruction of public property, 130.29
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE (See also BUILDING CODE)
Definitions, 150.134
General, 150.133
Fire Safety Requirements
Fire-protection systems, 150.165
Fire-resistance ratings, 150.164
Foreclosure of lien, 150.168
General, 150.162
Lien, 150.166
Means of egress, 150.163
Payment, 150.167
General Requirements
Component serviceability, 150.140
Exterior property areas, 150.136
Exterior structures, 150.138
General, 150.135
Handrails and guardrails, 150.141
Interior structure, 150.139
Pest elimination, 150.143
Rubbish and garbage, 150.142
Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs, 150.137
Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations
General, 150.145
Light, 150.146
Occupancy limitation, 150.148
Ventilation, 150.147
Mechanical and Electrical Requirements
Dust systems, 150.161
Electrical equipment, 150.160
Electrical facilities, 150.159
General, 150.156
2018 S-1
48 Swansea - Index
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE (Cont’d)
Mechanical and Electrical Requirements (Cont’d)
Heating facilities, 150.157
Mechanical equipment, 150.158
Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements
General, 150.149
Plumbing systems and fixtures, 150.152
Required facilities, 150.150
Sanitary drainage system, 150.154
Storm drainage, 150.155
Toilet rooms, 150.151
Water system, 150.153
Scope and Administration
Applicability, 150.121
Approval, 150.125
Demolition, 150.130
Department of Property Maintenance Inspection, 150.123
Duties and powers of the code official, 150.124
Emergency measures, 150.129
General, 150.120
Means of appeal, 150.131
Notices and orders, 150.127
Stop work order, 150.132
Unsafe structure and equipment, 150.128
Violations, 150.126
PROPERTY, VILLAGE
Village office and property utilization, 33.11
PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND DECENCY
Firearms
Defacing identification marks of firearms, 134.04
Register of sales by dealer, 134.03
Unlawful sale of firearms, 134.02
Unlawful use of weapons, 134.01
General Regulations
Assembling at public places and restaurants, 134.21
Disorderly conduct; elements of the offense, 134.16
Gambling, 134.18
Harassment by telephone, 134.17
Mob action, 134.15
Refusing to aid an officer, 134.20
Resisting or obstructing a peace officer, 134.19
2018 S-1
Index 48A
PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND DECENCY (Cont’d)
Weapons
Defacing identification marks of firearms, 134.04
Register of sales by dealer, 134.03
Unlawful sale of firearms, 134.02
Unlawful use of weapons, 134.01
PUBLIC SAFETY
Civil Emergency
Authority of Mayor to issue orders, 34.04
Curfew, 34.03
Declaration of emergency, 34.02
Definitions, 34.01
Effectiveness, 34.05
Notification, 34.06
Emergency Management
Assistant Coordinators, 34.25
Authority to accept services, gifts, grants or loans, 34.31
Compensation, 34.33
Coordinator, 34.23
Definitions, 34.20
Deputy Coordinator, 34.24
Establishment, 34.22
Functions, 34.26
Immunity, 34.32
Limitations, 34.21
Local disaster emergencies, 34.27
Oath, 34.29
Purchasing and expenditures, 34.28
Testing of disaster warning devices, 34.30
PUBLIC WORKS, GENERAL PROVISIONS
Department of Public Works
Department established, 50.01
Full time positions established, 50.04
Supervision, 50.02
Village vehicle, 50.03
2018 S-1
48B Swansea - Index
Index 49
PUBLIC WORKS, GENERAL PROVISIONS (Cont’d)
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
Easements, 50.15
PURCHASING
Competitive bidding, 36.014
RAILROADS
Pedestrians
Bridge and railroad signals, 74.12
Special Stops Required
Certain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings, 71.081
Obedience to signal indicating approach of train or railroad track equipment, 71.080
RECKLESS DRIVING, 76.01
REFRIGERATORS
Discarded refrigerators, 130.30
REFUSE (See also LITTER, NUISANCES)
Abatement, 91.39
Accumulation prohibited, 91.36
Collection
General Regulations
Definitions, 51.20
Depositing materials on another’s property, 51.25
Depositing materials on streets, 51.26
Disposal of yard waste, 51.24
Enforcement, 51.30
Removal or damage to village recycling bins, 51.23
Title to wastes, 51.21
Unauthorized use of refuse containers, 51.27
Uncovered refuse, 51.28
Unlawful removal of recyclable material, 51.22
Wind-blown refuse, 51.29
50 Swansea - Index
REFUSE (Cont’d)
Collection (Cont’d)
Licensing Requirements
Disposal within city prohibited; exception, 51.06
License application, issuance and renewal, 51.03
License required, 51.01
License; fee, 51.04
Types of license; limitation on number, 51.02
Vehicle requirements, 51.05
Non-Residential Collections
Approved containers, 51.67
Collection services, 51.68
Commercial collection, 51.65
Disposal in containers required, 51.66
Penalty, 51.99
Residential Collections
Collection required, 51.45
Collection services, 51.51
Commingling prohibited, 51.48
Construction debris, 51.47
Method of collection, 51.46
Replacement of recycling bins, 51.50
Title to recycling bins, 51.49
Definitions, 91.35
Foreclosure of lien, 91.42
Lien, 91.40
Notice to person, 91.37
Payment, 91.41
Service of notice, 91.38
REFUSING TO AID AN OFFICER, 134.20
ROADS (See STREETS)
ROADWAYS (See also STREETS)
Bicycles
Riding on roadways and bicycle paths, 73.04
ROLLER SKATES
Traffic-control; prohibitions
Use of roller skates, coasters or similar devices, 71.102
Index 51
RUBBISH (See also LITTER, NUISANCES)
Abatement, 91.39
Accumulation prohibited, 91.36
Collection
General Regulations
Definitions, 51.20
Depositing materials on another’s property, 51.25
Depositing materials on streets, 51.26
Disposal of yard waste, 51.24
Enforcement, 51.30
Removal or damage to village recycling bins, 51.23
Title to wastes, 51.21
Unauthorized use of refuse containers, 51.27
Uncovered refuse, 51.28
Unlawful removal of recyclable material, 51.22
Wind-blown refuse, 51.29
Licensing Requirements
Disposal within city prohibited; exception, 51.06
License application, issuance and renewal, 51.03
License required, 51.01
License; fee, 51.04
Types of license; limitation on number, 51.02
Vehicle requirements, 51.05
Non-Residential Collections
Approved containers, 51.67
Collection services, 51.68
Commercial collection, 51.65
Disposal in containers required, 51.66
Penalty, 51.99
Residential Collections
Collection required, 51.45
Collection services, 51.51
Commingling prohibited, 51.48
Construction debris, 51.47
Method of collection, 51.46
Replacement of recycling bins, 51.50
Title to recycling bins, 51.49
Definitions, 91.35
Foreclosure of lien, 91.42
Lien, 91.40
Notice to person, 91.37
52 Swansea - Index
RUBBISH (Cont’d)
Payment, 91.41
Service of notice, 91.38
SCHOOL BUSSES
Meeting or overtaking school bus, 71.040
SCHOOL ZONES
Pedestrians
Pedestrian right-of-way at crosswalks; school zones, 74.02
SEWER PLANT
Hours of the sewer plant, 33.03
SEWER REGULATIONS
Building Sewers and Connections
Barricades, 52.046
Building sewer permit, 52.047
Classes of permits, 52.036
Connection at sewer, 52.045
Construction costs, 52.037
Fitting types and joints and connections, 52.040
Gravity flow, 52.044
Inspection, 52.043
Notification for inspection, 52.042
Responsibility of maintenance, 52.048
Separate sewers, 52.038
Slope and size of sewer, 52.041
Unauthorized tampering, 52.035
Use of old sewers, 52.039
Definitions, 52.001
Penalty, 52.999
Restrictions on the Use of Public Sewers
Action by village on prohibited discharges, 52.065
Determining regulations on measurements, tests and analyses, 52.070
Discharges of unpolluted drainage, 52.061
Discharges restricted, 52.060
Discharges; determination of acceptance, 52.064
Industrial user cost recovery system, 52.063
Interceptors provided, 52.066
Maintenance required at facilities, 52.067
Index 53
SEWER REGULATIONS (Cont’d)
Restrictions on the Use of Public Sewers (Cont’d)
Manhole required, 52.068
Measurements, tests and analyses, 52.069
Prohibited discharges, 52.062
Protection from damage, 52.072
Special agreements, 52.071
Sewer Regulations
Access to records, 52.123
Accounts, 52.121
Application for meter, 52.114
Authority to deduct, 52.113
Deductions for water not entering sewer, 52.112
Lien rights and collection, 52.117
Multiple units served by single meter, 52.111
Non-payment, 52.116
Notice of rates, 52.122
Owner-occupant liability, 52.115
Private water system, 52.110
Service discontinued, 52.119
Utility billing staff, 52.120
Water service discontinued, 52.118
Use of Public Sewers Required
Additional requirements, 52.023
Operation of private system, 52.022
Required use of sewer, 52.015
Unlawful connection to storm sewer, 52.016
Unlawful construction of privy, 52.019
Unlawful deposit of wastes, 52.017
Unlawful discharge into natural outlet, 52.018
When private system allowed, 52.020
When sewers become available, 52.021
Wastewater Service Charges
Basic user charge, 52.088
Basis for wastewater service charges, 52.085
Computation of surcharge, 52.090
Computation of wastewater service charge, 52.091
Debt service charge, 52.087
Measurement of flow, 52.086
Septic system sludge, 52.092
Surcharge rate, 52.089
Wastewater service charges for non-residents, 52.093
54 Swansea - Index
SEWER REGULATIONS (Cont’d)
Violations
Liability, 52.136
Notice of violation, 52.135
SEX OFFENSES
Harmful material, 131.04
Nudity in public, 131.01
Obscenity, 131.03
Public indecency, 131.02
Tie-in sales of obscene publications to distributors, 131.05
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Adult uses
Culpable mental state required, 154.188
Definitions, 154.171
Employees/patrons, 154.178
Entertainer’s license, 154.177
Exhibition of nude entertainer prohibited, 154.187
Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos, 154.186
Expiration of license, 154.180
Failure of official to meet time frame, 154.189
Hearing on license denial, suspension or revocation, 154.183
Hours of operation, 154.184
Issuance and revocation of license, 154.175
License fees and displaying of license, 154.176
Licensing, 154.174
Location, 154.172
Measurement of distances, 154.173
Periodic inspection, 154.179
Purpose and intent, 154.170
Revocation of license, 154.182
Signage and window displays, 154.185
Suspension of license, 154.181
SHOPPING CENTERS
Traffic-control
Shopping centers powers to contract, 70.043
Index 55
SHRUBS
Obstructions to streets
Certain trees prohibited, 93.35
Dangerous trees, 93.34
Decayed trees, 93.38
Gas pipes, 93.37
Injury, 93.33
Planting, 93.30
Removal, 93.32
Unlawful to plant trees and shrubbery, 93.31
Wires, 93.36
SICK LEAVE, 33.06
SIDEWALKS
Driving upon sidewalk, 71.101
Pedestrians
Right-of-way on sidewalks, 74.09
Sidewalks and alleys to be kept free from litter, 135.05
SIGN REGULATIONS
Zoning
Canopy, awning and marquee signs, 154.155
Certificate of sign compliance, 154.156
Flush-mounted signs, 154.154
Freestanding signs, 154.151
General prohibition, 154.146
General restrictions, 154.149
Non-conforming signs, 154.157
Off-property freestanding signs, 154.152
Projecting signs, 154.153
Purpose and intent, 154.145
Signs permitted in any zoning district, 154.148
Special restrictions, 154.150
Strictly prohibited signs, 154.147
Violations, 154.158
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
Collection of tax by retailers, 36.122
Definitions, 36.120
Resellers, 36.124
56 Swansea - Index
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX (Cont’d)
Returns to department, 36.123
Simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed, 36.121
SNOW EMERGENCIES
Parking
Announcement of snow emergency, 72.40
Snow emergency routes, 72.42
Termination of emergency, 72.41
SOLICITORS
Appeal of permit denial or revocation, 111.13
Application for permits; qualifications, 111.04
Credentials, 111.07
Definitions, 111.02
Denial of permit, 111.11
Exemptions, 111.05
Fee, 111.08
Issuance of permit, 111.06
Maintenance of no contact list, 111.17
Maintenance of registry, 111.16
Notice to solicitors; duty to observe, 111.10
Penalty, 111.99
Permit required, 111.03
Purpose; policy, 111.01
Regulations and prohibitions, 111.09
Revocation of permit, 111.12
Solicitation on streets by charitable organizations, 111.14
Solicitor's bond, 111.15
SOLID WASTE (See also LITTER, NUISANCES)
Abatement, 91.39
Accumulation prohibited, 91.36
Collection
General Regulations
Definitions, 51.20
Depositing materials on another’s property, 51.25
Depositing materials on streets, 51.26
Disposal of yard waste, 51.24
Enforcement, 51.30
Removal or damage to village recycling bins, 51.23
Index 57
SOLID WASTE (Cont’d)
Collection (Cont’d)
General Regulations (Cont’d)
Title to wastes, 51.21
Unauthorized use of refuse containers, 51.27
Uncovered refuse, 51.28
Unlawful removal of recyclable material, 51.22
Wind-blown refuse, 51.29
Licensing Requirements
Disposal within city prohibited; exception, 51.06
License application, issuance and renewal, 51.03
License required, 51.01
License; fee, 51.04
Types of license; limitation on number, 51.02
Vehicle requirements, 51.05
Non-Residential Collections
Approved containers, 51.67
Collection services, 51.68
Commercial collection, 51.65
Disposal in containers required, 51.66
Penalty, 51.99
Residential Collections
Collection required, 51.45
Collection services, 51.51
Commingling prohibited, 51.48
Construction debris, 51.47
Method of collection, 51.46
Replacement of recycling bins, 51.50
Title to recycling bins, 51.49
Definitions, 91.35
Foreclosure of lien, 91.42
Lien, 91.40
Notice to person, 91.37
Payment, 91.41
Service of notice, 91.38
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
Maximum attainable operating speed, 71.003
Minimum speed regulation, 71.004
Special speed limits while passing schools, 71.002
Speed limits, 71.001
58 Swansea - Index
STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT
Adoption of Act, 33.60
Definitions, 33.61
Prohibited political activities, 33.62
Gift ban, 33.63
Future amendments to the Act, 33.64
Future declaration of unconstitutionality of the Act, 33.65
STREET AND BRIDGE TAX, 36.106
STREET DEPARTMENT
Hours of the Street Department, 33.02
STREET RACING, 76.05
STREETS
Bicycles
Carrying articles, 73.05
Clinging to vehicles, 73.03
Lamps and other equipment on bicycles, 73.06
Riding on bicycles, 73.02
Riding on roadways and bicycle paths, 73.04
Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles, 73.01
Mopeds
Clinging to vehicles, 73.26
Lamps on mopeds, 73.24
Operating motorcycle on one wheel, 73.23
Required equipment on motorcycles, 73.22
Riding on mopeds, 73.25
Riding on motorcycles, 73.20
Special equipment for persons riding motorcycles, 73.21
Motor vehicles offenses
Accident involving damage to vehicle, 76.08
Accidents involving death or personal injuries, 76.06
Adoption of other specific statutes, 76.04
Chemical and other tests, 76.03
Duty to give information and render aid, 76.07
Duty to report accident, 76.10
Duty upon damaging unattended vehicle or other property, 76.09
False reports, 76.11
Intoxicated driving, 76.02
Index 59
STREETS (Cont’d)
Motor vehicles offenses (Cont’d)
Penalty, 76.99
Reckless driving, 76.01
Street racing, 76.05
When driver fails to report, 76.12
Motorcycles
Clinging to vehicles, 73.26
Lamps on mopeds, 73.24
Operating motorcycle on one wheel, 73.23
Required equipment on motorcycles, 73.22
Riding on mopeds, 73.25
Riding on motorcycles, 73.20
Special equipment for persons riding motorcycles, 73.21
Parking regulations
Fire lanes, Ch. 78, Sch. II
Loading zones, Ch. 78, Sch. III
Method of Parking
General parking regulations, 72.01
Unattended motor vehicles, 72.02
No parking zones, Ch. 78, Sch. I
Penalty, 72.99
Restrictions on Stopping, Standing and Parking
Alleys, 72.23
Cab and bus stands, 72.24
Fire lanes, 72.19
Limited parking, 72.21
On-street parking, 72.20
Parking for persons with disabilities, 72.17
Parking on private property, 72.25
Signs, 72.26
Stopping, standing or parking outside business or residence district, 72.16
Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places, 72.15
Unauthorized use of parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities, 72.18
Vehicles for sale, 72.22
Snow Emergencies
Announcement of snow emergency, 72.40
Snow emergency routes, 72.42
Termination of emergency, 72.41
Snow routes, Ch. 78, Sch. IV
60 Swansea - Index
STREETS (Cont’d)
Parking regulations (Cont’d)
Violations
Duty of lessor of vehicle on notice of violation of this chapter, 72.58
Officers authorized to remove vehicles, 72.57
Parking violations, 72.55
Prima facie proof, 72.56
Pedestrians
Blind, hearing-impaired or physically handicapped pedestrian right-of-way, 74.05
Bridge and railroad signals, 74.12
Crossing at other than crosswalks, 74.03
Drivers to avoid colliding with pedestrians, 74.04
Electric personal assistive mobility devices, 74.14
Motorized wheelchairs, 74.13
Pedestrian obedience to traffic-control devices and traffic regulations, 74.01
Pedestrian right-of-way at crosswalks; school zones, 74.02
Pedestrians soliciting rides or business, 74.07
Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks, 74.06
Pedestrians under influence of alcohol or drugs, 74.11
Pedestrians walking on highways, 74.08
Pedestrians yield to authorized emergency vehicles, 74.10
Penalty, 74.99
Right-of-way on sidewalks, 74.09
Standing or loitering, 74.15
Regulations
Excavation
Application for permit, 93.50
Barriers and lights, 93.60
Bond, 93.51
Exemptions, 93.58
Fitness of applicant, 93.55
Interference with barriers and lights, 93.62
Issuance of permit, 93.56
Liability of persons to village for damage, 93.63
Lights on material in street, 93.61
Manner of excavating, 93.52
Obstructing work in street, 93.59
Restoration of excavation, 93.53
Supervision, 93.57
Time limit, 93.54
Index 61
STREETS (Cont’d)
Regulations (Cont’d)
General Regulations
Building materials in street, 93.14
Burning, 93.10
Closing streets, generally, 93.02
Closing streets; block parties, 93.03
Closing streets; community events, 93.04
Closing streets; private construction, 93.05
Culverts, 93.09
Encroachments, 93.17
Injury to new pavements, 93.18
Materials on sidewalks, 93.11
Merchandise on public streets, 93.16
Obstructing street, 93.12
Porch, 93.07
Signs across street, 93.06
Signs and notices, 93.15
Undermining, 93.01
Vehicles on sidewalks, 93.08
Water from eaves, 93.13
Penalty, 93.99
Rights-of-Way Agreements, 93.65
Annual registration and fee, 93.66
Definitions, 93.64
Shrubs
Obstructions to Streets
Certain trees prohibited, 93.35
Dangerous trees, 93.34
Decayed trees, 93.38
Gas pipes, 93.37
Injury, 93.33
Planting, 93.30
Removal, 93.32
Unlawful to plant trees and shrubbery, 93.31
Wires, 93.36
Small wireless facilities, 93.67
Trees
Obstructions to Streets
Certain trees prohibited, 93.35
Dangerous trees, 93.34
Decayed trees, 93.38
Gas pipes, 93.37
Injury, 93.33
2018 S-1
62 Swansea - Index
STREETS (Cont’d)
Regulations (Cont’d)
Trees (Cont’d)
Obstructions to Streets (Cont’d)
Planting, 93.30
Removal, 93.32
Unlawful to plant trees and shrubbery, 93.31
Wires, 93.36
Street and bridge tax, 36.106
Street designations
Closed streets, 71.153
Signs, 71.150
Through streets, 71.151
Yield streets, 71.152
Subdivisions
Design and Improvement Standards
Designing blocks, 153.043
Designing curves, 153.045
Designing dead-end streets, 153.046
Designing intersections, 153.044
Reference monuments required, 153.037
Relationship to existing streets, 153.042
Standards for streets, 153.038
Street frontage required, 153.036
Traffic-control regulations
Overtaking and Passing
Driving on right side of roadway; exceptions, 71.035
Driving on roadways laned for traffic, 71.043
Limitations on overtaking on the left, 71.039
Meeting or overtaking school bus, 71.040
No passing zones, 71.042
One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands, 71.041
Overtaking vehicles on the left, 71.037
Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions, 71.036
When overtaking on the right is permitted, 71.038
Parades
Alternative permit, 71.131
Appeal procedure when permit denied, 71.130
Application for permit, 71.127
Contents of permit, 71.133
Definitions, 71.125
Duties of permittee, 71.134
2018 S-1
Index 63
STREETS (Cont’d)
Traffic-control regulations (Cont’d)
Parades (Cont’d)
Notice of rejection of permit application, 71.129
Notice to village and other officials when permit issued, 71.132
Permit required, 71.126
Public content during parades, 71.135
Revocation of permit, 71.136
Standards for issuance of permit, 71.128
Penalty, 71.999
Prohibitions
Backing, 71.095
Coasting, 71.099
Driving on control led-access highways, 71.106
Driving upon sidewalk, 71.101
Encroachments, 71.107
Farm tractor operation, 71.105
Following fire apparatus; driving over fire hose, 71.100
Following vehicle too closely, 71.096
Obstructing person in highways, 71.104
Obstruction of driver's view or driving mechanism, 71.097
Opening vehicle doors, 71.098
Processions, 71.110
Putting glass or other hazardous materials on highway prohibited, 71.103
Riding on running boards, 71.109
Trucks, 71.111
Unattended draft animals, 71.108
Use of roller skates, coasters or similar devices, 71.102
Right-of-Way
Funeral processions, 71.067
Merging traffic, 71.064
Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency
vehicles, 71.066
Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway, 71.065
Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection, 71.063
Vehicle turning left, 71.061
Vehicles approaching or entering the intersection, 71.060
Vehicles entering stop crosswalk, 71.062
Special Stops Required
Certain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings, 71.081
Emerging from alley, building, private road or driveway, 71.082
64 Swansea - Index
STREETS (Cont’d)
Traffic-control regulations (Cont’d)
Special Stops Required (Cont’d)
Obedience to signal indicating approach of train or railroad track equipment, 71.080
Stop when traffic obstructed, 71.083
Speed Restrictions
Maximum attainable operating speed, 71.003
Minimum speed regulation, 71.004
Special speed limits while passing schools, 71.002
Speed limits, 71.001
Turning and Starting; Signals
Limitations on U-turns, 71.016
Method of giving hand and arm signals, 71.020
Required position and method of turning at intersections, 71.015
Signal by hand and arm or signal device, 71.019
Starting parked vehicle, 71.017
When signal required, 71.018
Traffic, general regulations
Abandoned vehicles
Abandonment, 70.101
Authorization of bond fees, 70.112
Definitions, 70.100
Disposal of unclaimed vehicles, 70.108
Liability of village, officers, agencies, and towing services, 70.111
Police record for disposed vehicle, 70.109
Police responsibilities, 70.104
Possession of vehicle by other party; towing, 70.102
Public sale proceeds, 70.110
Public sale; reclamation, 70.107
Removal of motor vehicles or other vehicles; towing or hauling away, 70.103
State Police information, 70.106
Unknown owner, 70.105
Administration
Accident investigations, 70.058
Accident reports, 70.060
Accident studies, 70.059
Annual traffic safety report, 70.061
Duty of Traffic Division, 70.056
Generally, 70.055
Records of traffic violations, 70.057
Traffic Commission, 70.064
Index 65
STREETS (Cont’d)
Traffic, general regulations (Cont’d)
Administration (Cont’d)
Traffic-control regulations and devices, 70.063
Traffic Engineer, 70.062
Adoption of Illinois State Vehicle Code, 70.002
Definitions, 70.001
Impoundment of Motor Vehicle
Administrative fee, 70.087
Administrative hearing, 70.083
Definitions, 70.080
Disposition of impounded motor vehicle, 70.084
Motor vehicle possession, 70.085
Seizure and impoundment, 70.082
Towing agency, 70.086
Violations authorizing impoundment, 70.081
Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws
Fleeing or attempted to elude police officer, 70.018
Obedience to police officers, 70.015
Public officers and employees to obey traffic code; exceptions, 70.016
Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn vehicles, 70.017
Penalty, 70.999
Traffic Signs, Signals and Markings
Display of unauthorized signs, signals, markings or advertising signs, 70.035
Flashing signals, 70.034
Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs or signals, 70.036
Lane-control signals, 70.033
No-turning signs and turning markers, 70.040
Obedience to traffic-control devices, 70.030
Pedestrian-control signals, 70.032
Posting signs, 70.042
Shopping centers powers to contract, 70.043
Stop and yield signs, 70.041
Traffic-control signal legend, 70.031
Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker, 70.038
Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances and structures, 70.037
Zones of quiet, 70.039
Traffic schedules
Load limit streets, Ch. Sch. VI
No U-turn zones, Ch. Sch. VIII
One-way streets and alleys, Ch. Sch. VII
2018 S-1
66 Swansea - Index
STREETS (Cont’d)
Traffic schedules (Cont’d)
Pedestrian crosswalks, Ch. Sch. XI
School speed zones, Ch. Sch. X
School traffic-control signal locations, Ch. Sch. II
Speed limit zones, Ch. Sch. IX
Stop intersection locations, Ch. Sch. III
Through streets and stop intersections, Ch. Sch. IV
Through streets and yield right-of-way intersections, Ch. Sch. V
Traffic-control signal locations, Ch. Sch. I
Vehicle loads
Overweight and Oversized Vehicle Permits
Applications for and issuance of permit, 75.42
Bonds, indemnification and insurance, 75.44
Definitions, 75.40
Denial, suspension and reinstatement, 75.45
Permit fee, 75.46
Permits, 75.41
Police escorts, 75.43
Size, Weight and Loads
Covers or tarpaulins required for certain loads, 75.24
Limited load streets, 75.26
Projecting loads on passenger vehicles, 75.21
Protruding members of vehicles, 75.22
Zoning
Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
Computation of required spaces, 154.131
General provisions, 154.116
Landscaping, 154.123
Lighting, 154.122
Loading area design standards, 154.125
Location of required loading spaces, 154.130
Location of required parking, 154.124
Parking lot design standards, 154.117
Purpose and intent, 154.115
Requirements for access, 154.120
Requirements for access, 154.127
Requirements for buffer strips, 154.129
Requirements for construction, 154.121
Requirements for construction, 154.128
Requirements for loading spaces, 154.126
Index 67
STREETS (Cont’d)
Zoning (Cont’d)
Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations (Cont’d)
Requirements for parking lot aisles, 154.119
Requirements for parking spaces, 154.118
Table of loading spaces, by classification, 154.133
Table of parking spaces, by classification, 154.132
SUBDIVISIONS
Administration and Enforcement
Amendments; public hearing; notice; action by the Board of Trustees, 153.087
Authority, 153.076
Boundary adjustments for minor plat, 153.088
Code Administrator; appointment and term of office; compensation; duties and
responsibilities, 153.077
Complaints, 153.079
Corrective action orders; contents of order; service of order, 153.080
Emergency measures, 153.082
Final plats; requirements for filing; required certificates; administrative review
procedures; action by the Board of Trustees; changes in approved final plats;
maintenance of improvements; duration of guarantee , 153.085
Improvement plans; requirements for filing; requirements for inspection;
requirements for “as-built” records; requirements for assurance of completion;
acceptable forms of assurance; eligible sureties; term of assurance, extension;
release of bond, escrow deposit; failure to complete improvements, 153.084
Lot consolidation of a minor final plat, 153.089
Preliminary plats; requirements for filing; action by the Planning and Zoning
Board; action by the Board of Trustees, 153.083
Schedule of fees, 153.075
Stop-work orders, 153.081
Variations; review by the Planning and Zoning Board; action by the Board of
Trustees, 153.086
Village Engineer; appointment and term of office; compensation; duties and
responsibilities, 153.078
Conflicting laws, 153.005
Definitions, 153.008
Design and Improvement Standards
Clearing and grubbing, 153.028
Compaction verification, 153.031
Curb and gutter construction, 153.041
Dedication for public use, 153.048
68 Swansea - Index
SUBDIVISIONS (Cont’d)
Design and Improvement Standards (Cont’d)
Designing blocks, 153.043
Designing curves, 153.045
Designing dead-end streets, 153.046
Designing intersections, 153.044
Designing sidewalks, 153.047
Embankments, 153.029
Erosion control, 153.032
General design considerations, 153.050
General prohibition, 153.025
General suitability for subdivision, 153.026
Minimum lot size, 153.035
Pavement construction; flexible, 153.040
Pavement construction; rigid, 153.039
Preservation of trees, 153.033
Reference monuments required, 153.037
Relationship to existing streets, 153.042
Specific design requirements, 153.051
Specific standards for individual sewers, 153.055
Specific standards for sanitary sewers, 153.054
Specific standards for water facilities, 153.053
Standards for drainage and storm sewers, 153.049
Standards for easements, 153.056
Standards for grading and clearing, 153.027
Standards for lots, 153.034
Standards for streets, 153.038
Standards for utilities, 153.052
Street frontage required, 153.036
Subgrades, 153.030
Disclaimer of liability, 153.006
Interpretation, 153.004
Jurisdiction, 153.003
Manufactured Home Residential Subdivision
Additional requirements, 151.082
Incorporation of Subdivision Code, 151.081
Purpose and intent, 151.080
Penalty, 153.999
Purpose and intent, 153.002
Rules of construction, 153.007
Title, 153.001
Index 69
SUMP PUMPS, 150.089
TATTOOS
Tattooing body of minor, 132.05
TAXATION
Automobile Renting Occupation Tax
Filing copy, 36.073
Filing report, 36.071
Payment, 36.072
Tax imposed, 36.070
Gas and Electric Utility Tax
Collection, 36.157
Definitions, 36.155
Resellers, 36.159
Tax, 36.156
Tax remittance and return, 36.158
General Taxes
Corporate fund property tax, 36.100
Fire protection tax, 36.101
Insurance and tort judgments tax, 36.102
Municipal auditing tax, 36.103
Police Pension Fund tax, 36.104
Police protection tax, 36.105
Street and bridge tax, 36.106
Penalty, 36.999
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax
Collection of tax by retailers, 36.122
Definitions, 36.120
Resellers, 36.124
Returns to department, 36.123
Simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed, 36.121
Water Utility Tax
Additional taxes, 36.137
Collection, 36.141
Credit for over-payment, 36.143
Definitions, 36.138
Effective date, 36.139
Necessity, 36.135
Notification, 36.140
Reports to municipality, 36.142
Tax imposed, 36.136
TECHNICAL CODES, 10.16
70 Swansea - Index
THEFT
Petty theft, 133.01
Theft of labor services, 133.02
TOBACCO
Sale of tobacco to minors, 130.21
TOW YARDS
Application, 113.03
Definitions, 113.02
Disqualification, 113.04
License, 113.05
License fees, 113.08
License required, 113.01
Notifications and regulations, 113.07
Physical requirements, 113.06
Unclaimed vehicle report, 113.09
TOY VEHICLES (See BICYCLES; MOTORCYCLES AND MOPEDS)
TRAFFIC COMMISSION, 70.064
TRAFFIC-CONTROL
Overtaking and Passing
Driving on right side of roadway; exceptions, 71.035
Driving on roadways laned for traffic, 71.043
Limitations on overtaking on the left, 71.039
Meeting or overtaking school bus, 71.040
No passing zones, 71.042
One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands, 71.041
Overtaking vehicles on the left, 71.037
Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions, 71.036
Penalty, 71.999
When overtaking on the right is permitted, 71.038
Parades
Alternative permit, 71.131
Appeal procedure when permit denied, 71.130
Application for permit, 71.127
Contents of permit, 71.133
Index 71
TRAFFIC-CONTROL (Cont’d)
Parades (Cont’d)
Definitions, 71.125
Duties of permittee, 71.134
Notice of rejection of permit application, 71.129
Notice to village and other officials when permit issued, 71.132
Penalty, 71.999
Permit required, 71.126
Public content during parades, 71.135
Revocation of permit, 71.136
Standards for issuance of permit, 71.128
Prohibitions
Backing, 71.095
Coasting, 71.099
Driving on control led-access highways, 71.106
Driving upon sidewalk, 71.101
Encroachments, 71.107
Farm tractor operation, 71.105
Following fire apparatus; driving over fire hose, 71.100
Following vehicle too closely, 71.096
Obstructing person in highways, 71.104
Obstruction of driver's view or driving mechanism, 71.097
Opening vehicle doors, 71.098
Penalty, 71.999
Processions, 71.110
Putting glass or other hazardous materials on highway prohibited, 71.103
Riding on running boards, 71.109
Trucks, 71.111
Unattended draft animals, 71.108
Use of roller skates, coasters or similar devices, 71.102
Regulations and devices, 70.063
Right-of-Way
Funeral processions, 71.067
Merging traffic, 71.064
Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles, 71.066
Penalty, 71.999
Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway, 71.065
Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection, 71.063
Vehicle turning left, 71.061
Vehicles approaching or entering the intersection, 71.060
Vehicles entering stop crosswalk, 71.062
72 Swansea - Index
TRAFFIC-CONTROL (Cont’d)
Special Stops Required
Certain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings, 71.081
Emerging from alley, building, private road or driveway, 71.082
Obedience to signal indicating approach of train or railroad track equipment, 71.080
Penalty, 71.999
Stop when traffic obstructed, 71.083
Speed Restrictions
Maximum attainable operating speed, 71.003
Minimum speed regulation, 71.004
Penalty, 71.999
Special speed limits while passing schools, 71.002
Speed limits, 71.001
Street designations
Closed streets, 71.153
Signs, 71.150
Through streets, 71.151
Yield streets, 71.152
Traffic Signs, Signals and Markings
Display of unauthorized signs, signals, markings or advertising signs, 70.035
Flashing signals, 70.034
Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs or signals, 70.036
Lane-control signals, 70.033
No-turning signs and turning markers, 70.040
Obedience to traffic-control devices, 70.030
Pedestrian-control signals, 70.032
Posting signs, 70.042
Shopping centers powers to contract, 70.043
Stop and yield signs, 70.041
Traffic-control signal legend, 70.031
Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker, 70.038
Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances and structures, 70.037
Zones of quiet, 70.039
Turning and Starting; Signals
Limitations on U-turns, 71.016
Method of giving hand and arm signals, 71.020
Penalty, 71.999
Required position and method of turning at intersections, 71.015
Signal by hand and arm or signal device, 71.019
Starting parked vehicle, 71.017
When signal required, 71.018
Index 73
TRAFFIC DIVISION
Duty, 70.056
TRAFFIC ENGINEER, 70.062
TRAFFIC, GENERAL REGULATIONS
Abandoned vehicles
Abandonment, 70.101
Authorization of bond fees, 70.112
Definitions, 70.100
Disposal of unclaimed vehicles, 70.108
Liability of village, officers, agencies, and towing services, 70.111
Police record for disposed vehicle, 70.109
Police responsibilities, 70.104
Possession of vehicle by other party; towing, 70.102
Public sale proceeds, 70.110
Public sale; reclamation, 70.107
Removal of motor vehicles or other vehicles; towing or hauling away, 70.103
State Police information, 70.106
Unknown owner, 70.105
Administration
Accident investigations, 70.058
Accident reports, 70.060
Accident studies, 70.059
Annual traffic safety report, 70.061
Duty of Traffic Division, 70.056
Generally, 70.055
Records of traffic violations, 70.057
Traffic Commission, 70.064
Traffic-control regulations and devices, 70.063
Traffic Engineer, 70.062
Adoption of Illinois State Vehicle Code, 70.002
Definitions, 70.001
Impoundment of Motor Vehicle
Administrative fee, 70.087
Administrative hearing, 70.083
Definitions, 70.080
Disposition of impounded motor vehicle, 70.084
Motor vehicle possession, 70.085
Seizure and impoundment, 70.082
Towing agency, 70.086
Violations authorizing impoundment, 70.081
2018 S-1
74 Swansea - Index
TRAFFIC, GENERAL REGULATIONS (Cont’d)
Load limit streets, Ch. Sch. VI
No U-turn zones, Ch. Sch. VIII
Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws
Fleeing or attempted to elude police officer, 70.018
Obedience to police officers, 70.015
Public officers and employees to obey traffic code; exceptions, 70.016
Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn vehicles, 70.017
One-way streets and alleys, Ch. Sch. VII
Pedestrian crosswalks, Ch. Sch. XI
Penalty, 70.999
School speed zones, Ch. Sch. X
School traffic-control signal locations, Ch. Sch. II
Speed limit zones, Ch. Sch. IX
Stop intersection locations, Ch. Sch. III
Through streets and stop intersections, Ch. Sch. IV
Through streets and yield right-of-way intersections, Ch. Sch. V
Traffic-control signal locations, Ch. Sch. I
Traffic Signs, Signals and Markings
Display of unauthorized signs, signals, markings or advertising signs, 70.035
Flashing signals, 70.034
Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs or signals, 70.036
Lane-control signals, 70.033
No-turning signs and turning markers, 70.040
Obedience to traffic-control devices, 70.030
Pedestrian-control signals, 70.032
Posting signs, 70.042
Shopping centers powers to contract, 70.043
Stop and yield signs, 70.041
Traffic-control signal legend, 70.031
Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker, 70.038
Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances and structures, 70.037
Zones of quiet, 70.039
TRAFFIC LAWS
Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws
Fleeing or attempted to elude police officer, 70.018
Obedience to police officers, 70.015
Public officers and employees to obey traffic code; exceptions, 70.016
Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn
vehicles, 70.017
Index 75
TRAFFIC MARKINGS
Display of unauthorized signs, signals, markings or advertising signs, 70.035
No-turning signs and turning markers, 70.040
Obedience to traffic-control devices, 70.030
Pedestrian-control signals, 70.032
Shopping centers powers to contract, 70.043
Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker, 70.038
Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances and structures, 70.037
Zones of quiet, 70.039
TRAFFIC SIGNALS
Display of unauthorized signs, signals, markings or advertising signs, 70.035
Flashing signals, 70.034
Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs or signals, 70.036
Lane-control signals, 70.033
Obedience to traffic-control devices, 70.030
Pedestrian-control signals, 70.032
Shopping centers powers to contract, 70.043
Stop and yield signs, 70.041
Traffic-control signal legend, 70.031
Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances and structures, 70.037
TRAFFIC SIGNS
Display of unauthorized signs, signals, markings or advertising signs, 70.035
Flashing signals, 70.034
Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs or signals, 70.036
Lane-control signals, 70.033
No-turning signs and turning markers, 70.040
Obedience to traffic-control devices, 70.030
Pedestrian-control signals, 70.032
Posting signs, 70.042
Restrictions on Stopping, Standing and Parking
Signs, 72.26
Shopping centers powers to contract, 70.043
Stop and yield signs, 70.041
Traffic-control signal legend, 70.031
Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker, 70.038
Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances and structures, 70.037
Zones of quiet, 70.039
76 Swansea - Index
TRASH (See also LITTER, NUISANCES)
Abatement, 91.39
Accumulation prohibited, 91.36
Collection
General Regulations
Definitions, 51.20
Depositing materials on another’s property, 51.25
Depositing materials on streets, 51.26
Disposal of yard waste, 51.24
Enforcement, 51.30
Removal or damage to village recycling bins, 51.23
Title to wastes, 51.21
Unauthorized use of refuse containers, 51.27
Uncovered refuse, 51.28
Unlawful removal of recyclable material, 51.22
Wind-blown refuse, 51.29
Licensing Requirements
Disposal within city prohibited; exception, 51.06
License application, issuance and renewal, 51.03
License required, 51.01
License; fee, 51.04
Types of license; limitation on number, 51.02
Vehicle requirements, 51.05
Non-Residential Collections
Approved containers, 51.67
Collection services, 51.68
Commercial collection, 51.65
Disposal in containers required, 51.66
Penalty, 51.99
Residential Collections
Collection required, 51.45
Collection services, 51.51
Commingling prohibited, 51.48
Construction debris, 51.47
Method of collection, 51.46
Replacement of recycling bins, 51.50
Title to recycling bins, 51.49
Definitions, 91.35
Foreclosure of lien, 91.42
Lien, 91.40
Index 77
TRASH (Cont’d)
Notice to person, 91.37
Payment, 91.41
Service of notice, 91.38
TRAVEL EXPENSES
Reimbursement for travel expenses, 30.05
Village of Swansea Trave, Meal and Lodging Expense Reimbursement Request
Form, Ch. 30, App. A
TREASURER, VILLAGE, 32.02
TREES
Obstructions to streets
Certain trees prohibited, 93.35
Dangerous trees, 93.34
Decayed trees, 93.38
Gas pipes, 93.37
Injury, 93.33
Planting, 93.30
Removal, 93.32
Unlawful to plant trees and shrubbery, 93.31
Wires, 93.36
TRESPASS
Criminal trespass to land, 133.06
Specifically enumerated trespasses; suppression, 136.02
Trespasses prohibited, 136.01
TRUCKS
Traffic-control
Prohibitions, 71.111
URBAN CHICKENS
Chickens at large, 90.60
Definitions, 90.50
Enclosures, 90.55
Feed and water, 90.58
Non-commercial use only, 90.54
Nuisance, 90.62
Number and type of chickens allowed, 90.52
78 Swansea - Index
URBAN CHICKENS (Cont’d)
Odor and noise impacts, 90.56
Permit required, 90.51
Permits restricted to single-family dwellings, 90.53
Predators, rodents, insects and parasites, 90.57
Unlawful acts, 90.61
Waste storage and removal, 90.59
UTILITIES (See also PUBLIC WORKS)
Gas and Electric Utility Tax
Collection, 36.157
Definitions, 36.155
Resellers, 36.159
Tax, 36.156
Tax remittance and return, 36.158
Subdivisions
Specific standards for individual sewers, 153.055
Specific standards for sanitary sewers, 153.054
Specific standards for water facilities, 153.053
Standards for drainage and storm sewers, 153.049
Standards for utilities, 153.052
Water Utility Tax
Additional taxes, 36.137
Collection, 36.141
Credit for over-payment, 36.143
Definitions, 36.138
Effective date, 36.139
Necessity, 36.135
Notification, 36.140
Reports to municipality, 36.142
Tax imposed, 36.136
VEHICLE CONDITIONS
Condition and Equipment of Vehicles
Excessive engine braking noise prohibited, 75.06
Gas and smoke, 75.03
Generally, 75.01
Mufflers, prevention of noise, 75.05
Noise, 75.04
Scope and effect of equipment requirements, 75.02
Index 79
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT
Condition and Equipment of Vehicles
Excessive engine braking noise prohibited, 75.06
Gas and smoke, 75.03
Generally, 75.01
Mufflers, prevention of noise, 75.05
Noise, 75.04
Scope and effect of equipment requirements, 75.02
VEHICLE LOADS
Overweight and Oversized Vehicle Permits
Applications for and issuance of permit, 75.42
Bonds, indemnification and insurance, 75.44
Definitions, 75.40
Denial, suspension and reinstatement, 75.45
Permit fee, 75.46
Permits, 75.41
Police escorts, 75.43
Size, Weight and Loads
Covers or tarpaulins required for certain loads, 75.24
Limited load streets, 75.26
Projecting loads on passenger vehicles, 75.21
Protruding members of vehicles, 75.22
Pushing of disabled vehicles, 75.25
Scope and effect of size, weight, and load regulations, 75.20
Spilling loads prohibited, 75.23
VICIOUS ANIMALS, 90.34
VIDEO GAMING, 114.03
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR, 32.06
VILLAGE ATTORNEY, 32.03
VILLAGE CLERK
Village Clerk’s certificate, 10.19
VILLAGE CLERK; DEPUTY, 32.01
VILLAGE ENGINEER
Subdivisions
Village Engineer; appointment and term of office; compensation; duties and
responsibilities, 153.078
80 Swansea - Index
VILLAGE ENGINEER, 32.04
VILLAGE, GENERAL PROVISIONS
Bonds of village officers, 30.03
Corporate seal, 30.01
Corrective action plans, 30.10
Fiscal year, 30.06
Municipal year, 30.07
Qualifications for holding office, 30.02
Reimbursement for travel expenses, 30.05
Salaries of village officials, 30.09
Salaries regulation, 30.04
Village of Swansea Trave, Meal and Lodging Expense Reimbursement Request
Form, Ch. 30, App. A
Village records, 30.08
VILLAGE OFFICIALS
Bonds of village officers, 30.03
Salaries of village officials, 30.09
Salaries regulation, 30.04
VILLAGE PROPERTY
Village office and property utilization, 33.11
VILLAGE TREASURER, 32.02
WATER
Water Utility Tax
Additional taxes, 36.137
Collection, 36.141
Credit for over-payment, 36.143
Definitions, 36.138
Effective date, 36.139
Necessity, 36.135
Notification, 36.140
Reports to municipality, 36.142
Tax imposed, 36.136
2018 S-1
Index 81
WATER POLLUTION
Parks, 92.03
WEAPONS
Concealed weapons, 130.26
Defacing identification marks of firearms, 134.04
Discharging firearms or other weapons in village; exception, 130.27
Register of sales by dealer, 134.03
Unlawful sale of firearms, 134.02
Unlawful use of weapons, 134.01
WEEDS (See also NUISANCES)
Abatement, 91.19
Definitions, 91.15
Foreclosure of lien, 91.22
Lien, 91.20
Notice, 91.17
Nuisance, 91.16
Payment, 91.21
Service of notice, 91.18
WILD ANIMALS, 90.34
WIRELESS FACILITIES, SMALL, 93.67
YARD SALES, 130.36
YARD WASTE
Limitations on burning yard waste, 130.34
ZONES OF QUIET, 70.039
ZONING
Administration and Enforcement
Amendments to the official zoning map; initiation; standards for amendment to
the map; application; hearing; findings of fact, recommendation; action by the
Board of Trustees; effect of denial; duration of rezoning , 154.215
Amendments to the text; initiation; standards for amendment to the text;
application; hearing; findings of fact, recommendation; action by the Board of
Trustees, 154.214
Appeals; hearing; decisions; stay of proceedings, 154.211
Application fees, 154.200
Authority, 154.201
2018 S-1
82 Swansea - Index
ZONING (Cont’d)
Administration and Enforcement (Cont’d)
Certificates of non-conformance; issuance; application; duration of certificate, 154.209
Certificates of sign compliance; issuance; application; duration of certificate, 154.210
Complaints, 154.203
Corrective action orders; contents of order; service of order, 154.204
Emergency measures, 154.206
Final certificates of zoning compliance; issuance, 154.208
Initial certificates of zoning compliance; issuance; application; duration of certificate
relationship to building permits, 154.207
Special use permits; authority to grant special use permits; standards for issuance;
application; hearing; findings of fact, recommendation; action by the Board of
Trustees; effect of denial; duration of permit, 154.213
Stop work orders, 154.205
Variations; authority to recommend variation; standards for issuance; application;
hearing; findings of fact, recommendation; action by the Board of Trustees;
effect of denial; duration of variation , 154.212
Zoning Administrator, 154.202
Adult Uses
Culpable mental state required, 154.188
Definitions, 154.171
Employees/patrons, 154.178
Entertainer’s license, 154.177
Exhibition of nude entertainer prohibited, 154.187
Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos, 154.186
Expiration of license, 154.180
Failure of official to meet time frame, 154.189
Hearing on license denial, suspension or revocation, 154.183
Hours of operation, 154.184
Issuance and revocation of license, 154.175
License fees and displaying of license, 154.176
Licensing, 154.174
Location, 154.172
Measurement of distances, 154.173
Periodic inspection, 154.179
Purpose and intent, 154.170
Revocation of license, 154.182
Signage and window displays, 154.185
Suspension of license, 154.181
Compliance, 154.014
Conflicting laws, 154.007
Index 83
ZONING (Cont’d)
Contiguous parcels, 154.012
Definitions, 154.018
Disclaimer of liability, 154.016
Exemptions, 154.015
Existing agreements, 154.008
Existing building permits, 154.010
Existing violations, 154.009
Existing zoning permits, 154.011
General prohibition, 154.004
General Zoning Regulations - All Districts
Access to lots required, 154.057
Additional restrictions; specific uses, 154.059
Allowable intrusions into yards, 154.055
Area/bulk restrictions; accessory uses, 154.056
Exceptions to height limits, 154.053
Exceptions to setback requirements, 154.054
Meeting minimum area/bulk requirements, 154.052
Registration required for non-residential use, 154.051
Sewers and private sewerage systems, 154.058
Unlisted uses prohibited, 154.050
Illustrations, Ch. 154, App. A
Interpretation, 154.006
Jurisdiction, 154.005
Minimum requirements, 154.013
Non-Conformities
Certificates of non-conformance, 154.101
Non-conforming buildings and structures, 154.096
Non-conforming uses, 154.097
Non-conforming vacant lot of record, 154.098
Non-conformities under permit authority, 154.100
Purpose and intent, 154.095
Two or more lots in common ownership, 154.099
Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
Computation of required spaces, 154.131
General provisions, 154.116
Landscaping, 154.123
Lighting, 154.122
Loading area design standards, 154.125
Location of required loading spaces, 154.130
Location of required parking, 154.124
84 Swansea - Index
ZONING (Cont’d)
Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations (Cont’d)
Parking lot design standards, 154.117
Purpose and intent, 154.115
Requirements for access, 154.120
Requirements for access, 154.127
Requirements for buffer strips, 154.129
Requirements for construction, 154.121
Requirements for construction, 154.128
Requirements for loading spaces, 154.126
Requirements for parking lot aisles, 154.119
Requirements for parking spaces, 154.118
Table of loading spaces, by classification, 154.133
Table of parking spaces, by classification, 154.132
Penalty, 154.999
Purpose and intent, 154.002
Regulatory powers, 154.003
Separability, 154.017
Specific Regulations for Districts
“C” - Conservation District, 154.070
“FPO” - Floodplain Overlay District, 154.083
“HB” - Highway Business District, 154.079
“HI” - Heavy Industrial District, 154.082
“LI” - Light Industrial District, 154.081
“MH-1” - Mobile Home Residential District, 154.077
“MH-2” - Mobile Home Residential District, 154.078
“MR-1” - Two-Family Residential District, 154.075
“MR-2” - Multi-Family Residential District, 154.076
“PB” - Planned Business District, 154.080
“SR-1” - Single-Family Residential District, 154.071
“SR-2” - Single-Family Residential District, 154.072
“SR-3” - Single-Family Residential District, 154.073
“SR-4” - Single-Family Residential District, 154.074
Sign Regulations
Canopy, awning and marquee signs, 154.155
Certificate of sign compliance, 154.156
Flush-mounted signs, 154.154
Freestanding signs, 154.151
General prohibition, 154.146
General restrictions, 154.149
Non-conforming signs, 154.157
Index 85
ZONING (Cont’d)
Sign Regulations (Cont’d)
Off-property freestanding signs, 154.152
Projecting signs, 154.153
Purpose and intent, 154.145
Signs permitted in any zoning district, 154.148
Special restrictions, 154.150
Strictly prohibited signs, 154.147
Violations, 154.158
Title, 154.001
Zoning Districts
District boundaries, 154.033
Establishment of districts, 154.030
Minimum area requirement for districts, 154.031
Zoning of annexed land, 154.034
Zoning subject to pre-annexation, 154.035
Zoning map, 154.032
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR, 154.202
ZONING CODE
Urban chickens
Permits restricted to single-family dwellings, 90.53
ZONING DISTRICTS
District boundaries, 154.033
Establishment of districts, 154.030
General Zoning Regulations - All Districts
Access to lots required, 154.057
Additional restrictions; specific uses, 154.059
Allowable intrusions into yards, 154.055
Area/bulk restrictions; accessory uses, 154.056
Exceptions to height limits, 154.053
Exceptions to setback requirements, 154.054
Meeting minimum area/bulk requirements, 154.052
Registration required for non-residential use, 154.051
Sewers and private sewerage systems, 154.058
Unlisted uses prohibited, 154.050
Minimum area requirement for districts, 154.031
Specific Regulations for Districts
“C” - Conservation District, 154.070
“FPO” - Floodplain Overlay District, 154.083
86 Swansea - Index
ZONING DISTRICTS (Cont’d)
Specific Regulations for Districts (Cont’d)
“HB” - Highway Business District, 154.079
“HI” - Heavy Industrial District, 154.082
“LI” - Light Industrial District, 154.081
“MH-1” - Mobile Home Residential District, 154.077
“MH-2” - Mobile Home Residential District, 154.078
“MR-1” - Two-Family Residential District, 154.075
“MR-2” - Multi-Family Residential District, 154.076
“PB” - Planned Business District, 154.080
“SR-1” - Single-Family Residential District, 154.071
“SR-2” - Single-Family Residential District, 154.072
“SR-3” - Single-Family Residential District, 154.073
“SR-4” - Single-Family Residential District, 154.074
Zoning of annexed land, 154.034
Zoning subject to pre-annexation, 154.035
ZONING MAP, 154.032
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[Reserved]
1
2 Swansea - Table of Special Ordinances














PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
1
2 Swansea - Parallel References
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Cites Code Section
5 ILCS 70/1.01 10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.02 10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.03 10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.04 10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.05 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.07 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.08 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.09 10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.10 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.11 10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.12 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.15 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.16 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.17 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.20 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.24 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.28 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.29 10.02
5 ILCS 70/2 10.04
5 ILCS 120/2.02 31.03
5 ILCS 120/2.03 31.03
5 ILCS 140/1 et seq. 30.05
5 ILCS 175/1-101 et seq. 10.02
5 ILCS 275/1 34.27
5 ILCS 315/3 33.61
5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq. 33.60
5 ILCS 430/5-15 33.60
5 ILCS 430/70-5 33.60
10 ILCS 5/1-3 33.61
10 ILCS 5/9-1.4 33.61
10 ILCS 5/9-3 33.61
20 ILCS 1605/1 et seq. 134.18
20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq. 70.001
35 ILCS 105/1 et seq. 110.02, 154.051
3
4 Swansea - Parallel References
ILCS Cites Code Section
35 ILCS 115/1 et seq. 110.02, 154.051
35 ILCS 120/1 et seq. 36.071, 110.02, 154.051
35 ILCS 120/2-27 36.120
35 ILCS 630/1 et seq. 36.120
35 ILCS 636/5-1 et seq. 36.123
40 ILCS 5/3-125 36.104
40 ILCS 5/3-128 35.034
40 ILCS 5/7-139 33.06
55 ILCS 5/5-1127 70.001
55 ILCS 5/5-21001 154.018
55 ILCS 5/5-22001 154.018
65 ILCS 31.01
65 ILCS 5 10.02
65 ILCS 5/1-1-2 10.02
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1 10.99, 152.02
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1 10.99
65 ILCS 5/l-2-4 50.04
65 ILCS 5/1-2-12.1 70.112
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30 30.03
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50 31.04
65 ILCS 5/3.1-25 31.10
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35 31.26
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-10 31.08
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-15 31.08
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-151 31.08
65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-5 et seq. 30.04
65 ILCS 5/8-2-1 et seq. 36.034
65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1—5/8-2-9.10 36.030
65 ILCS 5/8-3-1 et seq. 36.100
65 ILCS 5/8-8-8 36.103
65 ILCS 5/8-11-2 36.136, 36.155, 36.156, 36.999
65 ILCS 5/8-11-7 36.070
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq. 35.064
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-17 35.002, 35.083
65 ILCS 5/11-1-3 36.105
65 ILCS 5/11-5-3 134.16
65 ILCS 5/11-7-1 36.101
65 ILCS 5/11-10-1—11-10-03 32.26
65 ILCS 5/11-12-8 153.025, 153.084
65 ILCS 5/11-12-9 153.003
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes 5
ILCS Cites Code Section
65 ILCS 5/11-12-12 152.02
65 ILCS 5/11-13-1 154.002
65 ILCS 5/11-13-1.1 154.213
65 ILCS 5/11-13-3 32.25
65 ILCS 5/11-13-4 152.10
65 ILCS 5/11-13-5 152.10
65 ILCS 5/11-13-6 154.212, 154.214, 154.215
65 ILCS 5/11-13-11 154.212
65 ILCS 5/11-13-19 154.032
65 ILCS 5/11-20-6 91.22
65 ILCS 5/11-20-7 91.22
65 ILCS 5/11-20-13 51.30
65 ILCS 5/11-30-2 152.02
65 ILCS 5/11-30-8 152.02
65 ILCS 5/11-31-2 152.02
65 ILCS 5/11-40-1 71.001, 75.20
65 ILCS 5/11-40-3 70.111, 74.13
65 ILCS 5/11-40-3.1 70.101
65 ILCS 5/11-81-1 36.106
65 ILCS 5/11-81-2 36.106
70 ILCS 405/22 153.084
70 ILCS 405/22.02(a) 154.212, 154.215
70 ILCS 605/1-1 et seq. 154.059
70 ILCS 1205/3-9 70.001
105 ILCS 5/2-3.51.5 71.999
210 ILCS 115/1 et seq. 151.014
210 ILCS 120/1 et seq. 151.014
220 ILCS 5/3-105 93.67
220 ILCS 5/5-101 et seq. 36.120
220 ILCS 5/9-221 36.120
220 ILCS 5/9-221.1 36.120
220 ILCS 5/9-222 36.120
220 ILCS 5/16-102 93.67
220 ILCS 5/16-108.5(I) 93.67
225 ILCS 225/1 et seq. 52.020
225 ILCS 225/1—225/24 154.058
225 ILCS 225/6 52.119
225 ILCS 460/0.01 et seq. 111.04, 111.05, 111.14
230 ILCS 114.02
230 ILCS 15/1 et seq. 114.02
230 ILCS 15/2 134.18
230 ILCS 15/2(b) 114.02
2018 S-1
6 Swansea - Parallel References
ILCS Cites Code Section
230 ILCS 15/3 114.02
230 ILCS 25/1 134.18
230 ILCS 40 114.03
235 ILCS 5/4-1 115.40
235 ILCS 5/4-2 115.01, 115.47
235 ILCS 5/4-4 115.13, 115.14, 115.47
235 ILCS 5/6-1 115.08
235 ILCS 5/6-2 115.05
235 ILCS 5/6-11 115.27
235 ILCS 5/6-16(a) 115.39
235 ILCS 5/6-20 115.41—115.43, 115.46
235 ILCS 5/6-21 115.10
235 ILCS 5/6-24 115.11
235 ILCS 5/6-33 115.44
235 ILCS 5/10-1 et seq. 150.007
410 ILCS 130/1 et seq. 130.38
410 ILCS 625/1 et seq. 110.01
410 ILCS 650/1 115.36
410 ILCS 650/10 115.37
415 ILCS 5/3.215 71.103
415 ILCS 5/3.220 71.103
415 ILCS 5/3.360 71.103
415 ILCS 5/12.3 52.093
415 ILCS 105/3 71.103
430 ILCS 30/3 71.081
430 ILCS 66/1 et seq. 130.26, 134.01
605 ILCS 5 93.67
605 ILCS 120/1 et seq. 70.035
625 ILCS 91.35
625 ILCS 5 70.001, 70.081
625 ILCS 5/1 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq. 32.08
625 ILCS 5/1-102 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-105 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-106 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-107 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-108 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-111.8 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-112 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-113 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-116 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-117.7 70.001
2018 S-1
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes 7
ILCS Cites Code Section
625 ILCS 5/1-120 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-120.7 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-125 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-126 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-130 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-131 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-132 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-135 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-136 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-137 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-138 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-139.1 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-140 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-140.10 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-140.15 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-141 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-145.001 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-146 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-147 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-148.2 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-148.3 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-148.3a-5 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-151 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-153 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-154 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-155 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-156 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-157 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-157.5 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-158 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-159.1 70.001, 73.20
625 ILCS 5/1-162 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-162.3 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-162.5 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-163 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-166 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-166.1 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-167 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-167.5 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-168 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-169 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-171 70.001
2018 S-1
8 Swansea - Parallel References
ILCS Cites Code Section
625 ILCS 5/1-171.6 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-171.8 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-172 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-174 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-176 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-177 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-178 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-179 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-181 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-182 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-187 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-187.1 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-188 10.02, 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-193 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-194 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-195 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-196 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-197 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-199 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-200 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-201 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-203 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-205 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-205.1 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-207 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-208 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-209 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-210.01 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-211 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-211.01 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-212 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-214 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-214.8 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-217 70.001
625 ILCS 5/2-118.1 76.03, 76.03
625 ILCS 5/2-118.2 76.03
625 ILCS 5/3-101 113.02
625 ILCS 5/3-101(d) 70.001
625 ILCS 5/3-609 72.18
625 ILCS 5/3-616 72.18
625 ILCS 5/3-707 70.103
625 ILCS 5/3-821.1 70.105
2018 S-1
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes 9
ILCS Cites Code Section
625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq. 70.085
625 ILCS 5/4-201—5/5-214.1 70.087
625 ILCS 5/4-201—5/5-215 70.087
625 ILCS 5/4-201—5/5-802 113.07
625 ILCS 5/4-202 70.102
625 ILCS 5/4-203 70.103, 76.99
625 ILCS 5/4-205 70.105
625 ILCS 5/4-206 70.106
625 ILCS 5/4-207 70.107
625 ILCS 5/4-208 70.108
625 ILCS 5/4-208(b) 70.108
625 ILCS 5/4-208(c) 70.108
625 ILCS 5/4-209 70.108
625 ILCS 5/4-209(a) 70.108
625 ILCS 5/4-209(b) 70.108
625 ILCS 5/4-209(b)(1) 70.108
625 ILCS 5/4-209(b)(2) 70.108
625 ILCS 5/4-209(c) 70.108
625 ILCS 5/4-210 70.109
625 ILCS 5/4-211(a) 70.110
625 ILCS 5/4-211(c) 70.110
625 ILCS 5/4-213 70.111
625 ILCS 5/6-101 70.081
625 ILCS 5/6-205 76.99
625 ILCS 5/6-303 70.081
625 ILCS 5/7-601 76.10
625 ILCS 5/7-601(b) 70.103
625 ILCS 5/11-203 70.015, 70.999
625 ILCS 5/11-204.1 70.081
625 ILCS 5/11-205 70.016
625 ILCS 5/11-206 70.016
625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(b)(4) 70.083
625 ILCS 5/11-208.7 70.081
625 ILCS 5/11-301 70.001, 72.18
625 ILCS 5/11-302 70.041
625 ILCS 5/11-305 70.030
625 ILCS 5/11-306 70.031, Ch. 77, Sch. I
625 ILCS 5/11-306 Ch. 77, Sch. II
625 ILCS 5/11-307 70.031, 70.032
625 ILCS 5/11-308 70.033
625 ILCS 5/11-309 70.034
2018 S-1
10 Swansea - Parallel References
ILCS Cites Code Section
625 ILCS 5/11-310 70.035
625 ILCS 5/11-311 70.036, 70.999
625 ILCS 5/11-312 70.037, 70.999
625 ILCS 5/11-313 70.038
625 ILCS 5/11-401 76.06
625 ILCS 5/11-401(b) 76.02
625 ILCS 5/11-402 76.08
625 ILCS 5/11-403 76.07
625 ILCS 5/11-404 76.09
625 ILCS 5/11-406 76.10
625 ILCS 5/11-406(a) 76.10
625 ILCS 5/11-406(b) 76.10
625 ILCS 5/11-409 76.11
625 ILCS 5/11-410 76.12
625 ILCS 5/11-415 76.10
625 ILCS 5/11-501 70.081, 70.103, 76.02, 76.03
625 ILCS 5/11-501.1 76.02, 76.03
625 ILCS 5/11-501.2 76.03
625 ILCS 5/11-501.4 76.04
625 ILCS 5/11-501.4-1 76.04
625 ILCS 5/11-501.5 76.04
625 ILCS 5/11-501.6 76.04
625 ILCS 5/11-501.9 76.04
625 ILCS 5/11-503 70.081, 76.99
625 ILCS 5/11-503(a) 76.01
625 ILCS 5/11-506 70.103, 76.05, 76.99
625 ILCS 5/11-506(a) 70.103
625 ILCS 5/11-601 71.001, 71.999
625 ILCS 5/11-604 71.001
625 ILCS 5/11-605 71.001, 74.02, 74.99
625 ILCS 5/11-605(a) 71.002
625 ILCS 5/11-605(c) 71.002
625 ILCS 5/11-605(e) 71.999
625 ILCS 5/11-605(e-5) 71.999
625 ILCS 5/11-605(f) 71.999
625 ILCS 5/11-605.1 71.002, 71.999
625 ILCS 5/11-606(a) 71.004
625 ILCS 5/11-611 71.003
625 ILCS 5/11-701 71.035
625 ILCS 5/11-702 71.036
625 ILCS 5/11-703 71.037, 71.999
2018 S-1
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes 11
ILCS Cites Code Section
625 ILCS 5/11-704 71.038
625 ILCS 5/11-705 71.039
625 ILCS 5/11-706 71.039
625 ILCS 5/11-707 71.042
625 ILCS 5/11-708 71.041
625 ILCS 5/11-709 71.043
625 ILCS 5/11-710 71.096
625 ILCS 5/11-711 71.106
625 ILCS 5/11-801 71.015
625 ILCS 5/11-802 71.016
625 ILCS 5/11-803 71.017, 71.040
625 ILCS 5/11-804 71.018
625 ILCS 5/11-805 71.019, 71.040
625 ILCS 5/11-806 71.020
625 ILCS 5/11-901 71.060
625 ILCS 5/11-902 71.061
625 ILCS 5/11-903 71.062
625 ILCS 5/11-904 71.063
625 ILCS 5/11-905 71.064
625 ILCS 5/11-906 71.065
625 ILCS 5/11-907 71.035
625 ILCS 5/11-907(b) 71.066
625 ILCS 5/11-908 71.035
625 ILCS 5/11-1001 74.01
625 ILCS 5/11-1002 74.02
625 ILCS 5/11-1002.5 74.99
625 ILCS 5/11-1003 74.03
625 ILCS 5/11-1003.1 74.04
625 ILCS 5/11-1004 74.05
625 ILCS 5/11-1004.1 74.13
625 ILCS 5/11-1005 74.06
625 ILCS 5/11-1005.1 74.14
625 ILCS 5/11-1006 74.07
625 ILCS 5/11-1007 74.08
625 ILCS 5/11-1008 74.09
625 ILCS 5/11-1009 74.10
625 ILCS 5/11-1010 74.11
625 ILCS 5/11-1011 74.12, 74.99
625 ILCS 5/11-1201 71.080, 71.999
625 ILCS 5/11-1202 71.081
625 ILCS 5/11-1204 70.031, 70.041
2018 S-1
12 Swansea - Parallel References
ILCS Cites Code Section
625 ILCS 5/11-1205 71.082
625 ILCS 5/11-1301 72.16, 72.18
625 ILCS 5/11-1301.1 72.18
625 ILCS 5/11-1301.2 72.18
625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3 72.18
625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3(c) 72.99
625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3(c-1) 72.99
625 ILCS 5/11-1302 72.57
625 ILCS 5/11-1303 72.15, 72.99
625 ILCS 5/11-1304 72.01, 72.16
625 ILCS 5/11-1305 72.57
625 ILCS 5/11-1401 72.02
625 ILCS 5/11-1402 71.095
625 ILCS 5/11-1403 73.20
625 ILCS 5/11-1403.1 73.25
625 ILCS 5/11-1403.2 73.23
625 ILCS 5/11-1404 73.21
625 ILCS 5/11-1405 73.22
625 ILCS 5/11-1406 71.097
625 ILCS 5/11-1407 71.098
625 ILCS 5/11-1410 71.099
625 ILCS 5/11-1411 71.100
625 ILCS 5/11-1412 71.100
625 ILCS 5/11-1412.1 71.101
625 ILCS 5/11-1412.2 71.101
625 ILCS 5/11-1413 71.103
625 ILCS 5/11-1414 71.040, 71.999
625 ILCS 5/11-1416 71.104
625 ILCS 5/11-1418 71.105
625 ILCS 5/11-1420 71.067
625 ILCS 5/11-1425 71.083, 71.999
625 ILCS 5/11-1502 73.01
625 ILCS 5/11-1503 73.02
625 ILCS 5/11-1504 73.03
625 ILCS 5/11-1505 73.04
625 ILCS 5/11-1505.1 73.04
625 ILCS 5/11-1506 73.05
625 ILCS 5/11-1507 73.06
625 ILCS 5/11-1507.1 73.24
625 ILCS 5/12-101 75.02
625 ILCS 5/12-101 et seq. 75.01, 75.02
2018 S-1
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes 13
ILCS Cites Code Section
625 ILCS 5/12-208 71.018
625 ILCS 5/12-215 70.016
625 ILCS 5/12-217 74.10
625 ILCS 5/12-215(b)(12) 72.16
625 ILCS 5/12-602 75.05
625 ILCS 5/12-602.1 75.06
625 ILCS 5/12-801 70.001, 71.081
625 ILCS 5/12-802(a) 70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-803 70.001, 71.081
625 ILCS 5/12-805 70.001, 71.081
625 ILCS 5/15-101 75.20
625 ILCS 5/15-101 et seq. 75.20
625 ILCS 5/15-105 75.21
625 ILCS 5/15-106 75.22
625 ILCS 5/15-109 75.23
625 ILCS 5/15-109.1 75.24
625 ILCS 5/15-111(a) 75.41
625 ILCS 5/15-114 75.25
625 ILCS 5/16-101 et seq. 70.999
625 ILCS 5/18a-100—5/18a-700 113.07
625 ILCS 5/18a-200 70.103
625 ILCS 5/18a-300 70.103
625 ILCS 5/18a-302 70.103
625 ILCS 5/18c-7201 93.67
625 ILCS 5/20-204 70.001
720 ILCS 130.02
720 ILCS 5/2-1—5/2-11 130.01
720 ILCS 5/2-13—5/2-16 130.01
720 ILCS 5/2-19 130.01
720 ILCS 5/2-20 130.01
720 ILCS 5/11-1.50 150.007
720 ILCS 5/11-14 150.007
720 ILCS 5/11-20 115.35
720 ILCS 5/11-30 115.35, 150.007
720 ILCS 5/12-1 132.01, 150.007
720 ILCS 5/12-3 132.03
720 ILCS 5/16-1 133.01
720 ILCS 5/16-3 133.01
720 ILCS 5/21-1 133.04, 150.007
720 ILCS 5/21-1.01 133.05
720 ILCS 5/21-3 133.06
2018 S-1
14 Swansea - Parallel References
ILCS Cites Code Section
720 ILCS 5/24-1 70.081, 150.007
720 ILCS 5/24-1.1 70.081
720 ILCS 5/24-1.2 70.081, 150.007
720 ILCS 5/24-1.25 70.081
720 ILCS 5/24-1.5 70.081
720 ILCS 5/24-1.6 70.081
720 ILCS 5/24-2.1 70.081
720 ILCS 5/24-2.2 70.081
720 ILCS 5/24-3 70.081
720 ILCS 5/24-3.1 70.081
720 ILCS 5/24-3.2 70.081
720 ILCS 5/24-3.3 70.081
720 ILCS 5/24-3.4 70.081
720 ILCS 5/24-3.5 70.081
720 ILCS 5/24-3.6 70.081
720 ILCS 5/24-3A 70.081
720 ILCS 5/24-4 134.03, 134.04
720 ILCS 5/25-1 134.15, 150.007
720 ILCS 5/26-1 134.16, 150.007
720 ILCS 5/28-1—5/28-9 111.05
720 ILCS 5/28-1 150.007
720 ILCS 5/28-2(b) 114.01
720 ILCS 5/31-8 134.19, 134.20
720 ILCS 550/1 et seq. 70.081, 150.007
720 ILCS 570/100 et seq. 70.081
720 ILCS 570/201 et seq. 70.081
720 ILCS 570/401 150.007
730 ILCS 5/5-4.5-75 150.126
735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. 111.13
745 ILCS 10/1-101 153.006
745 ILCS 10/9-107 36.102
765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq. 153.008, 153.025, 153.037
765 ILCS 205/1 153.084
765 ILCS 205/1(b) 153.083, 153.085
765 ILCS 205/2 152.09, 153.085
815 ILCS 5/8 134.18
820 ILCS 130/0/01 et seq. 36.052
820 ILCS 191/10 33.06
2018 S-1
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2017 Code
1-101 10.01
1-102 10.01
1-103 10.09
1-104 10.18
1-105 10.01
1-106 10.14
1-107 10.14
1-108 10.14
1-109 10.10
1-110 10.19
1-112 10.02, 10.05
1-113 10.03
1-114 10.99
1-115 10.99
1-116 10.99
1-117 10.99
2-101 31.01
2-102 31.02
2-103 31.03
2-104 31.04
2-105 31.05
2-106 31.06
2-107 31.07
2-108 31.08
2-109 31.09
2-110 31.10
2-111 31.11
2-112 31.12
2-113 31.13
2-115 31.25
2-116 31.26
2-117 31.27
2-118 31.28
2-119 31.29
15
16 Swansea - Parallel References
Prior Code 2017 Code
2-120 31.30
2-121 31.31
2-122 31.32
2-123 31.33
2-124 31.34
2-125 31.35
2-126 31.36
2-201 32.01
2-202 32.01
2-203 32.01
2-204 32.01
2-206 32.01
2-207 32.01
2-208 32.02
2-210 32.01
2-215 32.01
2-216 32.01
2-217 32.01
2-218 32.01
2-301 32.02
2-302 32.02
2-305 32.02
2-309 32.02
2-310 32.02
2-311 32.02
2-312 32.02
2-313 36.001—36.016
2-401 32.03
2-402 32.03
2-403 32.03
2-501 32.04
2-502 32.04
2-601 36.030
2-602 32.05
2-603 36.031
2-604 36.032
2-605 36.033
2-606 36.034
2-607 32.05
2-701 32.06
2-703 32.06
References to Prior Code 17
Prior Code 2017 Code
2-704 32.06
2-705 32.06
2-706 32.06
2-707 32.06
2-708 32.06
2-709 32.06
2-710 32.06
2-711 32.06
2-801 32.28
2-802 32.28
2-803 32.28
2-804 32.28
2-901 32.07
2-902 32.07
2-903 32.07
2-1101 32.25
2-1102 32.25
2-1103 32.25
2-1104 32.25
2-1105 32.25
2-1106 32.25
2-1107 32.25
2-1108 32.25
2-1201 32.26
2-1202 32.26
2-1203 32.26
2-1204 32.26
2-1205 32.26
2-1206 32.26
2-1207 32.26
2-1301 32.27
2-1302 32.27
2-1303 32.27
2-1304 32.27
2-1305 32.27
2-1306 32.27
2-1401 30.01
2-1402 30.02
2-1403 30.03
2-1404 30.04
2-1405 30.05
18 Swansea - Parallel References
Prior Code 2017 Code
2-1406 30.06
2-1407 30.07
2-1408 30.08
2-1501 33.60
2-1502 33.61
2-1503 33.62
2-1504 33.63
2-1509 33.64
2-1510 33.65
2-1601 32.29
2-1602 32.29
2-1603 32.29
2-1604 32.29
2-1605 32.29
2-1606 32.29
3-101 36.070
3-102 36.071
3-103 36.072
3-104 36.073
3-201 36.085
3-202 36.086
3-204 36.087
3-301 36.100
3-302 36.101
3-303 36.102
3-304 36.103
3-305 36.104
3-306 36.105
3-307 36.106
3-401 36.120
3-402 36.121
3-403 36.122
3-404 36.123
3-405 36.124
3-501 36.135
3-502 36.136
3-503 36.137
3-504 36.138
3-505 36.138
3-506 36.139
3-507 36.140
References to Prior Code 19
Prior Code 2017 Code
3-508 36.141
3-509 36.142
3-510 36.143
3-511 36.999
3-601 36.155
3-602 36.156
3-603 36.157
3-604 36.158
3-605 36.159, 36.999
4-101 33.01
4-102 33.02
4-103 33.03
4-105 33.04
4-106 33.05
4-107 33.06
4-108 33.07
4-109 33.08
4-110 33.09
4-111 33.10
4-112 33.11
4-113 33.12
4-114 33.13
4-115 33.14
4-116 33.15
4-117 33.16
4-118 33.17
4-119 33.18
4-120 33.19
4-201 33.35
4-202 33.36
4-203 33.37
4-204 33.38
4-205 33.39
4-206 33.40
5-101 34.01
5-102 34.02
5-103 34.03
5-104 34.04
5-105 34.05
5-106 34.06
5-301 35.001
20 Swansea - Parallel References
Prior Code 2017 Code
5-302 35.002
5-303 35.003
5-304 35.004
5-305 35.005
5-306 35.006
5-308 35.007
5-310 35.008
5-311 35.009
5-312 35.010
5-313 35.011
5-314 35.012
5-315 35.013
5-316 35.014
5-401 35.060
5-402 35.061
5-403 35.062
5-404 35.063
5-405 35.064
5-501 35.030
5-502 35.031
5-503 35.032
5-504 35.033
5-505 35.034
5-601 35.045
5-701 35.080
5-702 35.081
5-703 35.082
5-704 35.083
5-705 35.084
5-706 35.085
5-707 35.086
5-708 35.087
5-709 35.088
5-710 35.089
5-711 35.090
5-712 35.091
5-713 35.092
5-714 35.093
5-715 35.094
5-716 35.095
5-717 35.096
References to Prior Code 21
Prior Code 2017 Code
5-718 35.097
5-719 35.098
5-720 35.099
5-801 35.110
5-802 35.111
5-803 35.112
5-804 35.113
5-805 35.114
6-101 50.01
6-102 50.02
6-103 50.03
6-201 92.01
6-202 92.02
6-203 92.03
6-204 92.04
6-205 92.05
6-206 92.06
6-207 92.07
6-208 92.08
6-209 92.09
6-210 92.10
6-211 92.11
6-212 92.12
6-213 92.13
6-214 92.14
6-215 92.15
6-216 92.16, 92.99
6-301 93.01
6-302 93.02
6-303 93.03
6-304 93.04
6-305 93.05
6-306 93.06
6-307 93.07
6-308 93.08
6-309 93.09
6-310 93.10
6-311 93.11
6-312 93.12
6-313 93.13
6-314 93.14
22 Swansea - Parallel References
Prior Code 2017 Code
6-315 93.15
6-316 93.16
6-317 93.17
6-318 93.18
6-401 93.30
6-402 93.31
6-403 93.32
6-404 93.33
6-406 93.34
6-407 93.35
6-408 93.36
6-409 93.37
6-410 93.38
6-501 93.50, 93.99
6-502 93.51
6-503 93.52
6-504 93.53
6-505 93.54
6-506 93.55
6-507 93.56
6-508 93.57
6-509 93.58
6-510 93.59
6-511 93.60
6-512 93.61
6-513 93.62
6-514 93.63
6-601 52.001
6-701 52.015
6-702 52.016
6-703 52.017
6-704 52.018
6-705 52.019
6-706 52.020
6-707 52.021
6-708 52.022
6-709 52.023
6-801 52.035
6-802 52.036
6-803 52.037
6-804 52.038
References to Prior Code 23
Prior Code 2017 Code
6-805 52.039
6-806 52.040
6-807 52.041
6-808 52.042
6-809 52.043
6-810 52.044
6-811 52.045
6-812 52.046
6-813 52.047
6-814 52.048
6-901 52.060
6-902 52.061
6-903 52.062
6-904 52.063
6-905 52.064
6-906 52.065
6-907 52.066
6-908 52.067
6-909 52.068
6-910 52.069
6-911 52.070
6-912 52.071
6-913 52.072
6-1003 50.15
6-1101 52.085
6-1102 52.086
6-1103 52.087
6-1104 52.088
6-1105 52.089
6-1106 52.090
6-1107 52.091
6-1108 150.04
6-1109 52.093
6-1110 150.04
6-1301 52.135
6-1302 52.999
6-1303 52.136
7-101 51.01
7-102 51.02
7-103 51.03
7-104 51.04
24 Swansea - Parallel References
Prior Code 2017 Code
7-105 51.05
7-106 51.06
7-107 51.99
7-201 51.20
7-202 51.21
7-203 51.22
7-204 51.23
7-205 51.24
7-206 51.25
7-207 51.26
7-208 51.27
7-209 51.28
7-210 51.29
7-211 51.30
7-301 51.45
7-302 51.46
7-304 51.47
7-305 51.48
7-306 51.49
7-307 51.50
7-308 51.51
7-401 51.65
7-402 51.66
7-403 51.67
7-404 51.68
8-101 36.045
8-102 36.046
8-103 36.047
8-104 36.048
8-105 36.049
8-106 36.050
8-107 36.051
8-108 36.052
8-109 36.053
8-110 36.054
8-111 36.055
8-112 36.056
8-113 36.057
8-114 36.058
8-115 36.059
9-101 115.01
References to Prior Code 25
Prior Code 2017 Code
9-201 115.02
9-202 115.03
9-203 115.04
9-204 115.05
9-205 115.06
9-206 115.07
9-207 115.08
9-208 115.09
9-209 115.10
9-210 115.11
9-211 115.12
9-212 115.13
9-213 115.14
9-301 115.25
9-302 115.26
9-303 115.27
9-304 115.28
9-305 115.29
9-306 115.30
9-307 115.31
9-308 115.32
9-309 115.33
9-310 115.34
9-311 115.35
9-312 115.36
9-313 115.37
9-316 115.38
9-317 115.39
9-318 115.40
9-319 115.41
9-320 115.42
9-321 115.43
9-323 115.45
9-324 115.46
9-325 115.47
9-401 115.60
9-402 115.61
9-403 115.62
10-101 114.01
10-102—10-109 114.02
11-301 Ch. 77, Sch. I
26 Swansea - Parallel References
Prior Code 2017 Code
11-303 Ch. 77, Sch. III
11-304 Ch. 77, Sch. IV
11-305 Ch. 77, Sch. V
11-307 Ch. 77, Sch. VII
11-308 Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
11-309 Ch. 77, Sch. IX
11-311 Ch. 78, Sch. I
11-312 Ch. 78, Sch. I
11-315 Ch. 77, Sch. XI
11-401 71.01
11-402 71.02
11-501 72.01
11-502 72.02
11-503 72.03
11-601 73.01
11-602 73.02
11-603 73.03
11-604 73.04
11-605 73.05
11-606 73.06
11-701 74.01
11-702 74.02
11-703 74.03
11-704 74.04
11-705 74.05
11-706 74.06
11-707 74.07
11-708 74.08
11-709 74.09
11-710 74.10
11-711 74.11
11-712 74.12
11-713 74.13
11-801 75.01
11-802 75.02
11-803 75.03
11-804 75.04
11-901 73.20
11-902 73.21
11-903 73.22
12-101 91.01
References to Prior Code 27
Prior Code 2017 Code
12-102 91.02
12-103 91.03
12-104 91.04
12-201 91.15
12-202 91.16
12-203 91.17
12-204 91.18
12-205 91.19
12-206 91.20
12-207 91.21
12-208 91.22
12-301 91.35
12-302 91.36
12-303 91.37
12-304 91.38
12-305 91.39
12-306 91.40
12-307 91.41
12-308 91.42
13-101 130.01
13-102 130.02
13-201 130.15
13-202 130.16
13-203 130.17
13-204 130.18
13-205 130.19
13-206 130.20
13-207 130.21
13-208 130.22
13-209 130.23
13-210 130.24
13-211 130.25
13-213 130.26
13-214 130.27, 130.99
13-215 130.28
13-216 130.29
13-217 130.30
13-218 94.01
13-219 130.31
13-220 130.32
13-221 130.33, 130.99
28 Swansea - Parallel References
Prior Code 2017 Code
13-223 130.34, 130.99
13-224 130.35
13-225 130.36, 130.99
13-226 130.40
13-301 131.01
13-302 131.02
13-303 131.03
13-304 131.04
13-305 131.05
13-401 132.01
13-402 132.02
13-403 132.03
13-404 132.04
13-405 132.05
13-501 133.01
13-502 133.02
13-503 133.03
13-504 133.04
13-505 133.05
13-506 133.06
13-601 134.01
13-602 134.02
13-603 134.03
13-604 134.04
13-605 134.15
13-606 134.16
13-607 134.17
13-609 134.19
13-610 134.20
13-611 134.21
13-701 135.01
13-702 135.02
13-703 135.03
13-704 135.04
13-705 135.05
13-706 135.06
13-707 135.07
13-708 135.08
13-709 135.09
13-710 135.10
13-711 135.11
References to Prior Code 29
Prior Code 2017 Code
13-712 135.12
13-713 135.13
13-714 135.14
13-715 135.15
13-801 136.01
13-802 136.02
13-901 137.01
13-902 137.02
14-101 90.01
14-102 90.02
14-103 90.03
14-104 90.04
14-105 90.05
14-106 90.06
14-107 90.07
14-108 90.08
14-109 90.09
14-110 90.10
14-112 90.11
14-113 90.12
14-114 90.13
14-117 90.14
14-201 90.30
14-202 90.31
14-203 90.32
14-204 90.33
14-205 90.34
14-206 90.35
14-207 90.36
15-101 150.001
15-102 150.001
15-103 150.001
15-104 150.001
15-105 150.002
15-106 150.003
15-107 150.004
15-108 150.999
15-109 150.005
2018 S-1
30 Swansea - Parallel References
Prior Code 2017 Code
15-201 150.020
15-205 150.024
15-206 150.025
15-207 150.026
15-301 150.040
15-302 150.041
15-303 150.042
15-304 150.043
15-305 150.044
15-306 150.045
15-307 150.046
15-401 150.060
15-402 150.061
15-403 150.062
15-404 150.063
15-405 150.064
15-406 150.065
15-407 150.066
15-501 150.080
15-502 150.081
15-503 150.082
15-504 150.083
15-505 150.084
15-506 150.084
15-507 150.085
15-508 150.086
15-509 150.087
15-510 150.088
15-511 150.089
15-601 150.105
15-602 150.106
15-603 150.999
15-604 150.107
15-605 150.108
16-101 110.01
16-102 110.02
2018 S-1
References to Prior Code 31
Prior Code 2017 Code
16-103 110.03
16-104 110.04
16-105 110.05
16-106 110.99
16-401 112.01
16-402 112.02
16-403 112.03
16-404 112.04
16-405 112.05
16-406 112.06
16-407 112.07
16-408 112.08
16-501 113.01
16-502 113.02
16-503 113.03
16-504 113.04
16-505 113.05
16-506 113.06
16-507 113.07
16-508 113.08
16-509 113.09
17-101 152.01
17-102 152.02
17-103 152.03
17-104 152.04
17-105 152.05
17-106 152.06
17-107 152.07
17-108 152.08
17-109 152.09
17-110 152.10
17-111 152.11
17-112 152.99
17-113 152.12
18-101 151.001
18-102 151.002
18-103 151.003
18-104 151.004
18-105 151.005
18-106 151.006
18-107 151.007
32 Swansea - Parallel References
Prior Code 2017 Code
18-108 151.008
18-109 151.009
18-110 151.010
18-111 151.011
18-112 151.012
18-113 151.013
18-114 151.014
18-201 151.030
18-202 151.031
18-203 151.032
18-204 151.033
18-205 151.034
18-206 151.035
18-207 151.036
18-208 151.037
18-209 151.038
18-210 151.039
18-211 151.040
18-212 151.041
18-301 151.055
18-302 151.056
18-303 151.057
18-304 151.058
18-305 151.059
18-306 151.060
18-307 151.061
18-308 151.062
18-309 151.063
18-310 151.064
18-311 151.065
18-312 151.066
18-313 151.067
18-314 151.068
18-401 151.080
18-402 151.081
18-403 151.082
19-101 153.001
19-102 153.002
19-103 153.003
19-104 153.004
19-105 153.005
References to Prior Code 33
Prior Code 2017 Code
19-106 153.006
19-201 153.008
19-301 153.025
19-302 153.026
19-303 153.027
19-304 153.028
19-305 153.029
19-306 153.030
19-307 153.031
19-308 153.032
19-309 153.033
19-310 153.034
19-311 153.035
19-312 153.036
19-313 153.037
19-314 153.038
19-315 153.039
19-316 153.040
19-317 153.041
19-318 153.042
19-319 153.043
19-320 153.044
19-321 153.045
19-322 153.046
19-323 153.047
19-324 153.048
19-325 153.049
19-326 153.050
19-327 153.051
19-328 153.052
19-329 153.053, 153.999
19-330 153.054
19-331 153.055
19-332 153.056
19-401 153.999
19-402 153.075
19-403 153.076
19-404 153.077
19-405 153.077
19-406 153.077
19-407 153.077
34 Swansea - Parallel References
Prior Code 2017 Code
19-408 153.078
19-409 153.078
19-410 153.078
19-411 153.078
19-412 153.079
19-413 153.079
19-414 153.079
19-415 153.079
19-416 153.080
19-417 153.081
19-418 153.081
19-419 153.081
19-420 153.082
19-421 153.083
19-422 153.084
19-423 153.084
19-424 153.084
19-425 153.084
19-426 153.085
19-427 153.085
19-428 153.085
19-429 153.085
19-430 153.085
19-431 153.085
19-432 153.085
19-433 153.085
19-434 153.085
19-435 153.085
19-436 153.086
19-437 153.086
19-438 153.086
19-439 153.086
19-440 153.086
19-441 153.086
19-442 153.086
19-443 153.086
19-444 153.087
19-445 153.087
19-446 153.087
19-447 153.088
19-448 153.088
References to Prior Code 35
Prior Code 2017 Code
19-449 153.088
20-101 154.001
20-102 154.002
20-103 154.003
20-104 154.004
20-105 154.005
20-106 154.006
20-107 154.007
20-108 154.008
20-109 154.009
20-110 154.010
20-111 154.011
20-112 154.012
20-113 154.013
20-114 154.014
20-115 154.015
20-116 154.016
20-117 154.017
20-201 154.018
20-202 154.018
20-301 154.030
20-302 154.031
20-304 154.033
20-305 154.034
20-306 154.035
20-401 154.050
20-402 154.051
20-403 154.052
20-404 154.053
20-405 154.054
20-406 154.055
20-407 154.056
20-408 154.057
20-409 154.058
20-410 154.059
20-501 154.070
20-502 154.070
20-503 154.070
20-504 154.070
20-505 154.070
20-506 154.070
36 Swansea - Parallel References
Prior Code 2017 Code
20-507 154.070
20-601 154.071
20-602 154.071
20-603 154.071
20-604 154.071
20-605 154.071
20-606 154.071
20-607 154.071
20-608 154.072
20-609 154.072
20-610 154.072
20-611 154.072
20-612 154.072
20-613 154.072
20-614 154.072
20-615 154.072
20-616 154.072
20-617 154.072
20-618 154.072
20-619 154.072
20-620 154.072
20-621 154.072
20-622 154.074
20-623 154.074
20-624 154.074
20-625 154.074
20-626 154.074
20-627 154.074
20-628 154.074
20-701 154.075
20-702 154.075
20-703 154.075
20-704 154.075
20-705 154.075
20-706 154.075
20-707 154.075
20-708 154.075
20-709 154.076
20-710 154.076
20-711 154.076
20-712 154.076
References to Prior Code 37
Prior Code 2017 Code
20-713 154.076
20-714 154.076
20-715 154.076
20-801 154.077
20-802 154.077
20-803 154.077
20-804 154.077
20-805 154.077
20-806 154.077
20-807 154.077
20-808 154.078
20-809 154.078
20-810 154.078
20-811 154.078
20-812 154.078
20-813 154.078
20-814 154.078
20-901 154.079
20-904 154.079
20-905 154.079
20-906 154.079
20-907 154.079
20-908 154.079
20-909 154.080
20-911 154.080
20-912 154.080
20-913 154.080
20-914 154.080
20-1001 154.081
20-1002 154.081
20-1003 154.081
20-1004 154.081
20-1005 154.081
20-1006 154.081
20-1007 154.081
20-1008 154.082
20-1009 154.082
20-1010 154.082
20-1011 154.082
20-1012 154.082
20-1013 154.082
38 Swansea - Parallel References
Prior Code 2017 Code
20-1014 154.082
20-1101 154.083
20-1102 154.083
20-1103 154.083
20-1201 154.095
20-1202 154.096
20-1203 154.097
20-1204 154.098
20-1205 154.099
20-1206 154.100
20-1207 154.101
20-1301 154.115
20-1302 154.116
20-1303 154.117
20-1304 154.118
20-1305 154.119
20-1306 154.120
20-1307 154.121
20-1308 154.122
20-1309 154.123
20-1310 154.124
20-1311 154.125
20-1312 154.126
20-1313 154.127
20-1314 154.128
20-1315 154.129
20-1316 154.130
20-1317 154.131
20-1318 154.132
20-1319 154.133
20-1401 154.145
20-1402 154.146
20-1403 154.147
20-1404 154.148
20-1405 154.149
20-1406 154.150
20-1407 154.151
20-1409 154.153
20-1410 154.154
20-1411 154.155
20-1412 154.156
References to Prior Code 39
Prior Code 2017 Code
20-1413 154.157
20-1414 154.158
20-1501 154.999
20-1502 154.200
20-1503 154.201
20-1504 154.202
20-1505 154.202
20-1506 154.202
20-1507 154.202
20-1508 154.203
20-1509 154.204
20-1510 154.204
20-1511 154.204
20-1512 154.205
20-1513 154.206
20-1514 154.207
20-1515 154.207
20-1516 154.207
20-1517 154.207
20-1518 154.207
20-1519 154.208
20-1520 154.208
20-1521 154.209
20-1522 154.209
20-1523 154.209
20-1524 154.209
20-1525 154.201
20-1526 154.201
20-1527 154.201
20-1528 154.201
20-1529 154.211
20-1530 154.211
20-1531 154.211
20-1532 154.211
20-1533 154.212
20-1534 154.212
20-1535 154.212
20-1536 154.212
20-1537 154.212
20-1538 154.212
20-1539 154.212
40 Swansea - Parallel References
Prior Code 2017 Code
20-1540 154.212
20-1541 154.212
20-1542 154.213
20-1543 154.213
20-1544 154.213
20-1545 154.213
20-1546 154.213
20-1547 154.213
20-1548 154.213
20-1549 154.213
20-1550 154.213
20-1551 154.214
20-1552 154.214
20-1553 154.214
20-1554 154.214
20-1555 154.214
20-1556 154.214
20-1557 154.214
20-1558 154.215
20-1559 154.215
20-1560 154.215
20-1561 154.215
20-1562 154.215
20-1563 154.215
20-1564 154.215
20-1565 154.215
20-1566 154.215
20-1601 154.170
20-1602 154.171
20-1603 154.172
20-1604 154.173
20-1605 154.174
20-1606 154.175
20-1607 154.176
20-1608 154.177
20-1609 154.178
20-1610 154.179
20-1611 154.180
20-1612 154.181
20-1613 154.182
20-1614 154.183
References to Prior Code 41
Prior Code 2017 Code
20-1615 154.184
20-1616 154.185
20-1617 154.186
20-1618 154.187
20-1619 154.188
20-1620 154.189
20-1621 154.999
42 Swansea - Parallel References
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
1-1653 11-16-2009 31.13
43
44 Swansea - Parallel References
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
1365 4-5-2004 150.04
1368 4-19-2004 Ch. 77, Sch. V
1383 8-16-2004 130.40
1384 9-20-2004 Ch. 78, Sch. I
1386 11-1-2004 32.25
1387 11-1-2004 Ch. 78, Sch. I
1388 11-1-2004 Ch. 77, Schs. III, IV
1390 11-15-2004 33.12
1391 11-15-2004 33.13
1392 11-16-2004 130.36, 130.99
1394 12-7-2004 92.01, 92.11
1398 12-7-2004 35.001, 35.005
1402 1-3-2005 115.07
1406 3-7-2005 110.03
1409 4-18-2005 154.212, 154.214
1411 5-2-2005 154.070
1415 6-6-2005 52.087, 52.088, 52.091
1416 6-6-2005 130.36, 130.99
1422 6-20-2005 130.33
1423 7-5-2005 32.02
1424 7-6-2005 Ch. 77, Sch. III, Ch. 78, Sch. I
1433 12-5-2005 33.04
1435 12-5-2005 52.118
1436 1-3-2006 115.07
1438 2-8-2006 154.018, 154.071—154.074
1445 3-20-2006 92.11
1447 4-3-2006 51.20, 51.47
1448 4-3-2006 153.008, 153.049—153.051
1449 4-3-2006 35.099
1450 4-17-2006 153.053
1454 6-5-2006 Ch. 78, Sch. I
1455 6-5-2006 154.080, 154.132
1456 6-19-2006 92.08
1459 7-17-2006 Ch. 77, Schs. III, IV, V
45
46 Swansea - Parallel References
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
1460 7-17-2006 Ch. 77, Schs. III, IV, V
1461 7-17-2006 150.105, 150.106, 150.999
1462 7-17-2006 36.156
1463 8-7-2006 36.156
1464 8-7-2006 154.079
1465 8-21-2006 150.020, 150.024—150.026
1473 11-6-2006 154.018, 154.079, 154.080
1475 11-6-2006 154.080
1478 12-18-2006 Ch. 77, Schs. III, IV, V
1479 1-22-2007 154.158
1480 1-22-2007 31.07
1482 3-5-2007 154.059
1490 5-23-2007 31.05
1493 7-9-2007 110.05
1494 8-7-2007 154.018, 154.170—154.189, 154.999
1498 9-17-2007 91.01, 91.02, 150.089
1499 9-17-2007 31.05
1500 10-15-2007 92.11
1502 10-16-2007 32.27
1503 11-13-2007 32.06
1508 3-3-2008 33.04
1510 3-17-2008 113.01—113.09
1514 5-19-2008 150.041
1520 6-16-2008 52.087, 52.088, 52.091
1521 7-7-2008 92.16
1523 7-21-2008 32.29
1525 7-21-2008 154.018, 154.082
1526 8-4-2008 31.05
1528 8-4-2008 113.06
1529 8-4-2008 31.09
1530 8-18-2008 52.087, 52.088, 52.091
1532 11-3-2008 31.02
1533 11-17-2008 154.018, 154.059
1536 12-1-2008 150.002—150.004, 150.999
1537 12-15-2008 32.06
1539 1-20-2009 92.11
1540 2-2-2009 32.01
1542 3-16-2009 115.07
1545 4-20-2009 154.080
1547 4-27-2009 52.087, 52.088, 52.091
2018 S-1
References to Ordinances 47
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
1548 4-27-2009 52.088
1551 5-18-2009 153.075, 154.200
1552 6-1-2009 154.123
1554 8-3-2009 32.25
1555 10-5-2009 154.123
1557 10-19-2009 31.05
1558 10-19-2009 92.11
1564 2-16-2010 154.149, 154.151, 154.157
1566 3-1-2010 32.26
1567 3-1-2010 150.108
1568 3-1-2010 115.07
1572 5-3-2010 33.13
1573 5-3-2010 35.064
1575 5-17-2010 33.04—33.06
1576 5-17-2010 153.047
1577 5-17-2010 35.083
1578 6-7-2010 154.157
1579 6-7-2010 33.37
1580 6-21-2010 35.001—35.003, 35.005, 35.007, 35.013
1581 6-21-2010 33.02, 33.03
1582 6-21-2010 150.005
1583 6-21-2010 32.25, 153.079
1584 6-21-2010 92.16
1585 7-6-2010 30.04
1586 7-6-2010 35.045
1587 7-6-2010 150.060, 150.061
1589 8-16-2010 150.062, 150.063
1590 9-7-2010 50.03
1591 9-20-2010 92.11
1592 9-20-2010 35.082
1593 9-23-2010 35.004
1596 11-1-2010 92.01
1597 11-1-2010 115.07
1602 1-5-2011 150.040—150.042
1607 4-18-2011 33.06
1608 4-18-2011 33.07
1609 4-18-2011 32.05, 36.032—36.034
1610 4-18-2011 35.088
1613 6-6-2011 150.004, 150.999
1615 6-6-2011 150.005
2018 S-1
48 Swansea - Parallel References
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
1616 6-6-2011 35.113
1619 7-5-2011 154.074
1620 7-18-2011 33.07
1621 8-1-2011 93.09
1622 8-1-2011 153.050
1625 9-6-2011 135.01, 135.16
1626 9-19-2011 92.11
1627 10-3-2011 150.108
1629 11-7-2011 91.15, 91.16
1630 11-7-2011 31.08
1631 12-5-2011 154.151
1634 12-19-2011 93.02—93.05
1635 2-6-2012 130.28, 130.99
1637 3-5-2012 154.147—154.149, 154.157
1638 3-5-2012 115.07
1640 4-2-2012 31.27
1646 5-7-2012 153.053, 153.999
1647 5-21-2012 154.059
1648 5-21-2012 154.154
1651 6-4-2012 115.03
1652 6-18-2012 150.005
1654 7-3-2012 35.063, 35.081, 35.083, 35.084
1660 9-4-2012 154.212
1663 10-1-2012 154.212, 154.214
1665 10-15-2012 Ch. 77, Sch. IV, V
1667 11-5-2012 Ch. 77, Sch. IV
1676 5-6-2013 115.07
1678 6-17-2013 33.06
1679 6-17-2013 90.07
1682 7-15-2013 130.28, 130.99
1683 8-19-2013 31.08
1684 9-16-2013 32.27
1686 11-4-2013 52.095
1687 11-18-2013 115.07
1688 12-2-2013 32.01
1693 2-3-2014 115.07
1696 3-17-2014 93.53
References to Ordinances 49
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
1699 3-17-2014 154.001—154.018, 154.030—154.035,
154.050—154.059, 154.070—154.083,
154.095—154.101, 154.115—154.133,
154.145—154.151, 154.153—154.158,
154.170—154.189, 154.200—154.215,
154.999
1700 3-17-2014 153.001—153.008, 153.025—153.056,
153.075—153.088, 153.999
1701 4-7-2014 Ch. 77, Sch. III
1702 4-7-2014 Ch. 77, Sch. V
1713 12-15-2014 50.04
1714 12-15-2017 Ch. 78, Sch. I
1722 4-20-2015 130.34, 130.99
1723 6-6-2015 134.18
1730 11-23-2015 32.01, 32.06
1714 12-15-2015 Ch. 78, Sch. I
1716 2-17-2015 92.11
1729 10-5-2015 33.07
1745 4-4-2016 92.11
1746 4-4-2016 92.11
1748 4-25-2016 115.07
1749 4-25-2016 154.080
1750 6-6-2016 31.02
1751 6-6-2016 31.14
1754 7-5-2016 31.13
1755 7-5-2016 Ch. 78, Sch. I
1756 7-5-2016 92.11
1757 7-18-2016 31.09
1761 9-6-2016 Ch. 78, Sch. I
1763 10-3-2016 33.01
1764 11-21-2016 52.087, 52.110—52.123
1765 11-21-2016 90.50—90.62, 90.99
1767 12-5-2016 153.085
1769 12-19-2016 153.053
1773 2-6-2017 30.09
1774 2-6-2017 90.51, 90.53
1774 3-6-2017 115.01, 115.44
1777 4-17-2017 33.06
1778 4-17-2017 115.07
1779 4-17-2017 92.08
1790 9-18-2017 150.004
2018 S-1
50 Swansea - Parallel References
Ord No. Date Passed Code Section
1783 6-5-2017 35.063, 35.080, 35.084, 35.085, 35.088,
35.089
1784 7-5-2017 32.06
1785 7-5-2017 30.10
1790 9-18-2017 150.004, 154.200
1791 10-2-2017 115.07
1794 10-16-2017 Adopting Ordinance
1796 10-16-2017 130.38
1798 11-20-2017 90.20—90.22
1801 12-18-2017 30.03
1804 1-16-2018 31.13
1806 2-5-2018 150.120, 150.121, 150.122—150.143,
150.145—150.168
1810 2-20-2018 150.041
1811 2-20-2018 154.151
1812 3-5-2018 154.018, 154.080
1816 4-16-2018 32.27
1817 4-16-2018 154.081
1819 4-16-2018 154.149
1821 4-23-2018 93.64—93.66
1822 5-7-2018 70.080—70.087
1823 5-7-2018 150.006, 150.007, 150.009, 150.999
1824 5-21-2018 35.033
1825 5-21-2018 91.35, 150.136
1826 5-21-2018 10.02, 32.08
1827 6-4-2018 115.07
1828 6-18-2018 150.004, 150.030—150.033
1830 7-2-2018 150.025
1831 7-2-2018 93.67
1833 7-16-2018 110.01
1834 8-6-2018 10.02, 32.08
1835 8-20-2018 31.02
1836 8-20-2018 114.03
2018 S-1
VILLAGE OF SWANSEA, ILLINOIS
ORDINANCE NO. 1794
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE VILLAGE OF
SWANSEA, ILLINOIS, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND
COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES
OF THE VILLAGE OF SWANSEA DEALING WITH SUBJECTS
EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political subdivision are
inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and substance for the complete
preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the
proper conduct of its affairs, and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the State of Illinois empower and authorize the Village of Swansea to
revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not
heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form;
and
WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the Political Subdivision of a general and
permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the municipality and for
the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the municipality
that this ordinance take effect at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND THE BOARD OF
TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF SWANSEA, ILLINOIS:
SECTION 1: The Board of Trustees of the Village of Swansea hereby adopts the recitals in the
preamble of this Ordinance as its findings of fact.
SECTION 2: The general ordinances of the Village of Swansea as revised, amended, restated,
codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall constitute the “Code of
Ordinances of the Village of Swansea, Illinois.”
SECTION 3: Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 2 shalllnitially consist of the following
Titles:
1
2018 S-1
2 Swansea - Adopting Ordinance
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10. Rules of Construction; General Penalty
TITLE IN: ADMINISTRATION
30. General Provisions
31. Mayor and Board of Trustees
32. Officials and Organizations
33. Employee Rules and Regulations
34. Public Safety
35. Police and Fire Departments
36. Finance, Revenue and Taxation
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
50. General Provisions
51. Refuse Collection
52. Sewer Regulations
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70. General Regulations
71. Traffic Control Regulations
72. Parking Regulations
73. Bicycles, Toy Vehicles and Motorcycles
74. Pedestrians
75. Vehicle Conditions, Equipment and Loads
76. Motor Vehicle Offenses
77. Traffic Schedules
78. Parking Schedules
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
90. Animals
91. Nuisances
92. Park Regulations
93. Street Regulations
94. Fireworks
2018 S-1
Adopting Ordinance 3
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110. General Registration
111. Peddlers and Solicitors
112. Junk Yards
113. Tow Yards
114. Games of Chance
115. Liquor Control
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
130. General Provisions
131. Sex Offenses
132. Bodily Harm
133. Offenses Against Property
134. Public Health, Safety and Decency
135. Litter
136. Trespass
137. Parental Responsibility
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150. Building Code; Regulations
151. Manufactured Homes
152. Floodplains
153. Subdivision Code
154. Zoning Code
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[Reserved]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Resolutions
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
INDEX
SECTION 4: All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code of Ordinances shall
be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance except as they are included
and reordained in whole or in part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense
committed
2018 S-1
4 Swansea - Adopting Ordinance
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this ordinance, nor shall
such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or
detaching territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing
public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the
purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of
land to public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such
repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects not
contained in or covered by the Code.
SECTION 5: Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and approval by the
Village of Swansea Board of Trustees and the Village Clerk is hereby authorized and ordered to file
a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Village Clerk.
SECTION 6: Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section 7, and such Code
shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections,
penalties and regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly
signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required
by law have been given.
SECTION 7: This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after passage, approval and publication
in pamphlet form as provided by law.
Passed this 16th day of October, 2017 by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Swansea, St. Clair
County, Illinois.
/s/
LAUREN O’NEILL, VILLAGE CLERK
LANTER McDONALD McGUIRE
NEUMEYER PULLEY WELLS
Approved by the President of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Swansea, St. Clair County,
Illinois, this 16th day of October, 2017.
/s/
MICHAEL W. LEOPOLD, PRESIDENT
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
ATTEST: /s/
LAUREN O’NEILL, VILLAGE CLERK
2018 S-1